07AITTAIPEI2080
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2080/01 2530928
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100928Z SEP 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6734
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7235
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8492UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  As Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies September 
8-10 continued to report on Taiwan's UN referendum and the APEC 
annual meeting in Sydney, Australia, coverage also focused on the 
cross-Strait negotiations over the Olympics torch relay route, and 
on Taiwan film director Ang Lee's winning his second Venice Film 
Festival Golden Lion for best picture for his film, "Lust, Caution." 
 The pro-independence "Liberty Times" ran a banner headline on page 
four September 10 that said "You [Shyi-kun]: Other Countries Have No 
Right to Obstruct Taiwan's Nation Building [Efforts]. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial said the recent statements by U.S. officials on Taiwan's 
UN referendum reminded Taiwan that it needs to work harder to push 
and turn Taiwan into a normal country.  A separate "Liberty Times" 
op-ed said Taiwan's UN referendum has sent a clear signal from the 
23 million Taiwan people to the United States.  An editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" said Bush's timely 
reminder of the value of Taiwan democracy at the APEC meeting "can 
pave the way for better dialogue on key issues concerning 
U.S.-Taiwan ties."  An op-ed in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News," however, said the current situation indicated that Washington 
and Beijing have started to "jointly manage" the Taiwan issue.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "Revelations of APEC Annual Meetings to Democratic Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (9/8): 
 
"... Judged from the United States' perspective, President George W. 
Bush's open and positive attitude toward Taiwan at the APEC annual 
meeting was certainly appropriate and reasonable.  The island's UN 
referendum is the free expression of the Taiwan people's collective 
will, and it is a concrete realization and announcement of democracy 
and human rights.  The United States' attempt to define the 
referendum as tantamount to Taiwan independence, citing the reason 
that it will 'alter the status quo across the Taiwan Strait,' was 
obviously a misinterpretation on its part and a violation of the 
basic principles of democracy and freedom. ... 
 
"The disagreement between Taiwan and the United States over the UN 
referendum this time has enlightened our country in many ways.  This 
matter, which is still under development, has indicated several 
facts:  The Communist regime tramples on the freedom and human 
rights of the Chinese people, and surely it will not allow the Green 
and the Blue political parties in Taiwan to push for referenda. 
Also, since U.S. National Security Council senior director Dennis 
Wilder has declared that neither Taiwan nor the Republic of China is 
a normal country, we have to work harder when it comes to building 
our nation into a normal country.  As for President Bush's attitude 
at the APEC, it highlighted that a big democratic county at least 
will not openly deviate from the principles of universal truth and 
justice. ..." 
 
B) "Send a Clear Signal to the United States" 
 
Cao Changqing, a China-born freelance journalist based in U.S, 
opined in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
720,000] (9/10): 
 
"The referendum on the island's UN bid under the name Taiwan is a 
wise chess move made by President Chen and the DPP, and it has 
achieved three significant results:  First, the UN referendum has 
forced a U.S. official to state that 'the Republic of China is not a 
country,' a move that is akin to nailing the KMT's lie that the ROC 
is still recognized by the world, and an open announcement to the 
international community the death of the ROC. ... 
 
"Second, the referendum has forced the pro-China secretary-general 
of the UN to state that 'Taiwan is part of the People's Republic of 
China' when he rejected Taiwan's application for the UN membership. 
This statement has led the United States to send a formal letter to 
the UN, clearly rejecting the UN secretary-general's view.  Such a 
move indicated that the U.S. position is that 'Taiwan is not part of 
the PRC.' ... 
 
"Third, since the ROC is not a country, and Taiwan is not a part of 
the PRC, the future of Taiwan can only be determined by the Taiwan 
people themselves.  The statements by the U.S. officials were 
tantamount to providing a logical foundation and condition for the 
Taiwan people's efforts in pursuit of 'name change, writing of a new 
constitution, and a normal country.'  Former AIT Chairperson Therese 
Shaheen said during a speech in California in July that the Taiwan 
people should clearly articulate what they are pursuing and that 
they must not send out 'ambiguous messages,' so that the United 
States can better understand Taiwan's future direction.  As a 
democratic country, the United States will not ignore other 
countries' wish 'to cry out loud for freedom.'  The 'referendum on 
the island's UN bid under the name Taiwan' is exactly a clear signal 
 
from the 23 million Taiwan people to 'cry out loud for freedom.' 
..." 
C) "Bush Recalls Value of Democracy" 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (9/10): 
"... Washington has worried about 'misperceptions' and 
'miscalculations' across the Taiwan Strait as any serious attempt to 
realize a 'unilateral change' of the current status of the Taiwan 
Strait has the potential to endanger U.S. interests in the region 
and even drag U.S. soldiers into a 'hot' conflict. ...  However, the 
way in which the Bush administration has dealt with these perceived 
or actual attempts, as manifested in recent statements by high 
ranking U.S. officials, has been controversial. ...  When added to 
the 'uncomfortable, inconvenient and undignified' transit conditions 
given to President Chen on his way to and back from Central America 
last month, such statements created a 'misperception' in Taiwan that 
Washington had virtually become a mouthpiece for Beijing. 
"Moreover, the Bush administration's strategy to separate President 
Chen from the general Taiwan citizenry by criticizing him for 'lack 
of leadership' has neglected the fact that, at least on the question 
of the U.N., Chen's position is supported by the overwhelming 
majority of the Taiwan people.  Hence, the 'Washington card' has not 
seemed to work this time as President Chen, bolstered by clear 
evidence of strong support in opinion polls, is determined to push 
forward the referendum for participating the U.N. together with the 
March 22 presidential election. ...  The fact of overwhelming and 
bipartisan support for Taiwan's entry into the U.N. is the most 
'inconvenient truth' that Washington decision-makers must take into 
account. ... 
"Hence, it was quite a relief to see that Bush declined to dance to 
Beijing's scripted rhythm and instead only restated his own existing 
position about Taiwan and recited Washington's 'concerns' on the 
referendum issue. ...  Bush's remarks indicate that despite 
differences over the question of Taiwan's push to secure its proper 
place in the community of nations as its status as a democratic and 
developed nation merits, the relationship between the U.S. and 
Taiwan remains that of friendship not enmity. ...  Bush's statements 
also stood as an important and timely correction of Washington's 
excessive tilt toward authoritarian China while constantly putting 
pressure on the Taiwan government for its perfectly justifiable 
moves toward democratic consolidation. ... 
"Bush's turnaround was decisive and fortunate as the image of 
Washington and Beijing standing together to obstruct Taiwan's 
democratic rights of self-determination would have intensified 
rising anti-American sentiment and constitute a sad mockery on the 
quality of U.S. global leadership and its commitment to democracy. 
We believe Bush's timely reminder of the value of Taiwan democracy 
can pave the way for better dialogue on key issues concerning 
U.S.-Taiwan ties and urge President Chen and the DPP administration 
to respond positively. We also urge Washington to follow up with 
serious dialogue to help reduce misperceptions in the future and 
also to display greater respect for the will and the wisdom of 
Taiwan's democratic citizenry." 
D) "Understanding the Bush-Hu Meeting?  Stop Bluffing!" 
Journalist Sun Yang-ming opined in the "United Notes" column in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (9/8): 
"... In fact, a week prior to the meeting between U.S. President 
George W. Bush and Chinese President Hu Jintao [at APEC], Washington 
had decided that Bush would not make any open remarks on 
Washington's Taiwan policy during the APEC leaders' meeting.  But 
the Bian administration has failed to obtain such a message, and the 
simplest reason behind this was because the Americans have no more 
interest in talking to the Bian administration. ... 
"As a matter of fact, the Bush administration has set up a 
four-person, cross-departmental task force to address the Taiwan 
[referendum] matter.  In order to be discreet, three of the four 
task force members had met jointly with TECRO Chief Joseph Wu 
earlier and expressed Washington's policy attitude on Chen 
Shui-bian's UN referendum and his transits in the United States in 
August, but unfortunately it was to no avail. 
"The three [U.S.] officials' meeting with Wu was aimed at telling 
Taipei the U.S. policy as comprehensively as possible, in the hope 
that the Bian administration will no longer work through the 
loopholes as it usually does.  But the communication failed to reap 
any desirable results, and the consequence was a mess.  Washington's 
feelings were thus understandable.  Given such circumstances, 
Washington had to turn to Beijing to negotiate and work out a way to 
stabilize the cross-Strait situation.  The current situation is that 
even though Washington is reluctant to admit that it is 'managing' 
the Taiwan issue jointly with Beijing, the truth is more or less 
moving in this direction.  When compared with the previous practice 
whereas Beijing 'accused Taipei' last year and it was Washington 
which 'ruled and implemented' [the decision], the situation now 
appears to be less favorable for Taiwan. ..." 
 
WANG