07AITTAIPEI2606
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2606/01 3472226
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 132226Z DEC 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7590
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7530
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8807UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002606 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage December 13 on an Austrian base jumper who jumped from the 
Taipei 101 skyscraper Tuesday; on the 2008 presidential election and 
the UN referendum; and on the aftermath of the abrupt closing of the 
largest health club chain in Taiwan Monday.  The pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" ran a banner headline on page two that said "Frank 
Hsieh: No Way Bian Will Influence Me after May 20, 2008." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial said the U.S. opposition to Taiwan's UN referendum will 
only aggrieve the Taiwan people but gladden China.  A "Liberty 
Times" commentary slammed AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt's recent 
remarks on Taiwan's UN referendum, saying Washington's worry about 
Taiwan's peaceful change of leadership is the biggest humiliation 
for Taiwan's democracy.  A separate "Liberty Times" analysis said 
Washington is eager to seek commitments from Taiwan's new president. 
 Editorials in the two pro-independence, English-language dailies -- 
"Taipei Times" and "Taiwan News" -- also chimed in by criticizing 
Washington for insulting Taiwan's democracy.  A column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said what President Chen Shui-bian 
has done has resulted in the souring of Washington-Taipei ties.  An 
analysis in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" said the United 
States has already set the tone for Taiwan's future direction.  An 
analysis in the pro-unification "United Daily News" said Washington 
will not allow President Chen to do whatever he pleases.  An 
editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post," however, urged Taiwan to heed the U.S.'s admonition. 
End summary. 
 
A) "The United States' Opposition to [UN] Referendum Will Only 
Aggrieve [the Taiwan] People and Gladden the Enemy" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (12/13): 
 
"... The question is:  Why did the United States have such sensitive 
reactions to Taiwan's UN referendum? ... Why did the United States 
turn a blind eye to China's 'alteration of the status quo' why 
focusing its criticism against Taiwan's UN referendum?  Of course 
the United States has its practical reasons.  Just as Thomas 
Christensen stated, 'the United States believes that the UN 
referendum is a force for tension and instability, and where tension 
and instability leads is difficult to predict,' the answer is that 
the consequences will be 'difficult to predict,' and the 
'hard-to-predict consequences' refers to China's reaction and 
action.  In other words, the national and military strengths of 
China have grown so powerful now that they make it difficult for the 
United States to decide whether it wants' to wage war against China 
at any cost.' ... 
 
"The shrewd and calculating United States is certainly aware of the 
growth and decline in the military and economic powers between China 
and the United States.  But China is no longer as weak as it was 
before, and this is the reason why Washington is afraid that Taiwan 
will create excuses for China to invade the island, and why 
Washington, despite the spirit of freedom and democracy that it 
upheld when the United States was founded, has gone against its 
judgment of right and wrong and insisted on opposing Taiwan's UN 
referendum. ... 
 
"We are clearly aware that it is not because the Americans have 
confused right and wrong or reversed good and evil that they decided 
to oppose Taiwan's UN referendum; they do so because of their 
realistic consideration.  But the United States is, after all, the 
defender of democracy in the world; given that Taiwan is a new 
democratic country, the United States really should not abandon its 
founding ideals of democracy and freedom, tilt toward totalitarian 
China, and take actions that are unfavorable for Taiwan.  In 
addition, Taiwan's security is closely related to the U.S.'s 
interests and peace and stability in the Western Pacific.  This 
newspaper hopes that the United States will seriously consider how 
to support Taiwan's democracy at this critical moment, rather than 
being the reason that causes Taiwan's democracy to move backward." 
 
B) "Pronouncements of Lord Burghardt" 
 
The "Free Talks" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 720,000] wrote (12/13): 
 
"The U.S. approach in opposing the UN referendum seemed to have 
gotten coarser and rasher.  Besides the thoughtless comments 
previously made by U.S. State Department officials, AIT Chairman 
Raymond Burghardt, during his recent visit to Taiwan, also put on 
the airs of an imperial envoy from the metropole by 'lecturing [and] 
admonishing' the incumbent president and two presidential candidates 
of our country, respectively, and drawing a red line for them. ... 
 
"Lord Burghardt also said the UN referendum is unfair to, and will 
restrict, the new president.  Such a remark was truly ridiculous and 
 
inappropriate.  A referendum represents the highest direct public 
opinion.  If the UN referendum fails to pass, surely it will not be 
binding for the new president; but if it passes, the new president 
will have to carry it through, or else he will violate the spirit of 
democracy.  It is unlikely that Burghardt, who comes from an 
advanced democracy, is unaware of such simple common sense of 
democracy.  It is totally unimaginable that he, instead, requested 
that the Taiwan public accept such an undemocratic order from the 
metropole to oppose the UN referendum. 
 
"Lord Burghardt added that the United States wants to assure a 
'peaceful change of leadership.'  Such worries [of the United 
States] are nothing but the biggest humiliation for Taiwan's 
democracy. ...  The only possibility of a non-peaceful change of 
leadership to happen is, without a doubt, the result of China's 
military threats.  It would be more appropriate for Washington to 
worry about China's next step rather than [worry about] Taiwan." 
 
C) "The United States Is Eager to Seek a Commitment from Taiwan's 
New President" 
 
Washington correspondent Nadia Tsao said in an analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] (12/12): 
 
"It is a widely known fact that the United States is opposed to 
Taiwan's holding a UN referendum, but it is also a fact that Taiwan 
has already launched the procedures to hold such a referendum.  The 
real intent behind the United States' recent repeated and open 
declarations on this issue is to ensure that Ma Ying-jeou and Frank 
Hsieh will not use the referendum results to further push for 
writing Taiwan independence into the Constitution or change Taiwan's 
national title in 2008.  In other words, Washington cannot wait to 
seek a commitment from Taiwan's 'new president.' ..." 
 
D) "Does the US Respect Democracy?" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
300,000] editorialized (12/13): 
 
"Taiwan may not have official diplomatic ties with the US, but this 
shouldn't mean that Taiwan's president, or his successor next year, 
should be treated with any less respect by US officials.  A quick 
assessment of American Institute in Taiwan Chairman Raymond 
Burghardt's comments during his visit to Taipei this week 
demonstrates that the US government still has much to learn about 
showing respect to the president of a democracy. ...  After telling 
local reporters on Monday that 'all it [the referendum] does is 
cause trouble,' Burghardt -- in an overtly condescending manner -- 
told Chen that what the latter had said and done with the referendum 
could 'harm the new president's ability to get off on the right 
foot.' He added that the referendum would not only make things 
difficult for the next president but make things even more 
complicated if it passes. 
 
Just because Taiwan lacks official diplomatic ties with the US and 
is not recognized as a state by the UN does not give Burghardt 
license to lecture Chen on what he should and should not do, nor 
draw red lines for the next president on how he should proceed on 
cross-strait policy. ...  Burghardt said the result of the 
referendum would not change Washington's 'one China' policy. That's 
fine, since Taiwan is an independent state with its own territory 
and currency and a government that is answerable only to Taiwanese. 
The referendum is not an attempt to influence US policy.  The US 
government has often complained about Chen springing surprises on 
Washington by making sudden announcements and that the DPP 
administration has failed to understand US policy. Granted, Chen has 
a tendency to make extemporaneous remarks that warrant more care. 
 
"But beyond that, the lack of official diplomatic links -- and the 
calisthenics that this situation has forced Taiwanese diplomats to 
perform just to talk to their US counterparts -- is the principal 
reason why Taipei hasn't been able to 'get' US policy. Give us 
direct access and all that ambiguity, all those misunderstandings, 
will vanish.  Taiwan cherishes and takes very seriously its 
relationship with the US.  But by the same token, the US should 
respect Taiwan and let its elected president do his job -- represent 
Taiwanese and work for their collective good." 
 
E)  "U.S. Must Not Insult Taiwan Democracy" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (12/13): 
 
"... However, Burghardt's remarks had no substantive effect in 
blocking the vote on the initiative, which should take place 
together with the March 22 presidential poll and a competing 
referendum sponsored by the opposition Kuomintang on whether to 
apply for 'readmission' to the U.N. under the name of the Republic 
of China or other feasible names. ...  In combination with 
 
Burghardt's statement that the U.S. will not change its 'one-China 
policy' regardless of the results of the referendum, observers would 
also be justified in wondering whether the U.S. is trying to create 
an atmosphere more congenial to opening of negotiations for 
'unification or whether these statements indicate that Washington 
believes that 'unification' is the 'status quo' and, along with the 
Chinese Communist Party and the KMT, aims to exclude the option of 
"independence" for the Taiwan people. 
 
"After all, if Washington continues to insist on upholding a 
'one-China policy,' there will be little room for Taiwan and the PRC 
to hold discussions about anything else besides how to engage in 
unification.  We therefore believe it is necessary for Washington to 
clarify whether pushing Taiwan to abandon its current status of a 
democratic and independent state and unify with the PRC is now 
official U.S. policy.  We also believe the statements by the AIT 
chairman demanding that President Chen make commitments to ensure 
'peaceful transfer of power' constitute grave insults to President 
Chen, the DPP and all of the Taiwan people who struggled against 38 
years of KMT-imposed martial law for democracy and human rights. 
... 
 
"We acknowledge that the U.S. played an important role in the 
promotion of Taiwan's democratization and continues to make a huge 
contribution to the maintenance of Taiwan's security and the 
stability and security of the Taiwan Strait.  However, we urge 
Washington policy makers to realize that the essence of democracy is 
to allow the people themselves to face and resolve important issues 
that affect their lives, interests and rights, a principle that is 
embodied in the guarantee of the right of self-determination 
contained in the United Nations covenants on civil and political 
rights.  We do not expect the governments of the United States or 
any other nation to take a stand for or against any referendum or 
initiative issue but do expect that a country which styles itself to 
be the leader of the world democratic camp should respect the right 
of the citizens of a fellow democracy to make their own decisions. 
 
"We frankly find the attempts by the U.S. to pressure our government 
to illegally cancel this referendum and its transparent attempts to 
stir up domestic opposition through the use of fear tactics to be 
both hypocritical and unwise, as the result may well be to create 
greater danger to Taiwan's political stability and regional security 
than either of the two U.N. referendums could possibly generate.  We 
urge the U.S. government to follow the example of Nicaraguan 
President Daniel Ortega and respect the democratic and legal right 
of referendum of the Taiwan people and respect the significance of 
the result of the two U.N. related referendums as manifestations of 
the collective will and voice of Taiwan's people." 
 
F) "Elephant in the Living Room" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang noted in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 520,000] (12/12): 
 
"A-bian has changed his previously tough attitude of speaking out 
against the United States and has guaranteed more than once in front 
of the chairman of AIT that his Four Noes and One Without pledge 
remains unchanged.  It is a pity, however, that he has maxed out his 
credibility, and none of his pledges is deemed valid.  The Americans 
have come to regard him as a caretaker president and have placed 
their hope on the next president.  Their biggest request for A-bian 
is that he release his control and give the new president the 
opportunity to deal with cross-Strait relations. 
 
"In fact, the souring of Taipei-Washington relations has done severe 
damage to Taiwan.  All other countries [in the world] look upon and 
follow the lead of the United States.  The White House's mistrust of 
A-bian has directly affected the international community's attitude 
toward Taiwan.  If the United States decides not to support Taiwan, 
no other country will.  From Japan to Europe, from the APEC to other 
various international organizations, when the effect [of no support] 
expands, the damage done to Taiwan will be too great to make up. 
..." 
 
G) "The United States Has Set the Tone for Taiwan Ahead of Time" 
 
Journalist Chiang Hui-chen said in an analysis in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] (12/12): 
 
"Prior to his departure from Taiwan, Raymond Burghardt again slammed 
Bian's playing with the backdoor referendum as 'causing trouble.' 
The United States attempted to draw a line between Bian and the 
Taiwan people to reduce the possible momentum that might be 
generated by the UN referendum.  But what is most important is that 
Burghardt has smoothly secured commitments from both Ma and Hsieh 
that they 'will not seek to interpret or elaborate on the results of 
the referendum in the wake of next year's presidential election!' 
...  The United States' trust in Bian has dropped to the lowest 
point, and it has judged that the UN referendum has already burst 
 
out of the box of the 'Four Noes.'  It therefore dares not look down 
upon Bian's ability to dictate the upcoming campaigns in the next 
six months as well as his influence after he steps down. ..." 
 
H) "The United States Shows Its Bargaining Chips:  Will Not Allow 
Bian to Do Whatever He Pleases" 
 
Journalist Lu De-yun noted in an analysis in the pro-unification 
"United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (12/12): 
 
"AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt has visited Taiwan again [for the 
second time] in less than six months.  Even though his posture as a 
career diplomat remains the same, it was unusual to see that he did 
not even bother to hide his mistrust of Taiwan's ruler.  Not only 
did he openly disclose the key points discussed during his meeting 
with President Chen, but he also directly stated that Bian's UN 
referendum is a violation of the Four Noes pledge.  This was just a 
showdown in words; without any ruthless remarks, the Americans have 
disclosed their bargaining chips:  We will not let you continue to 
do what you please. ... 
 
"Burghardt has always given high compliments to Taiwan's prosperous 
democracy and applauded the peaceful transfer of power in 2000 as a 
valuable achievement.  But the intent of the United States that he 
conveyed during a face-to-face meeting with Bian two days ago was, 
unexpectedly, to ensure a peaceful change of leadership.  This 
indicated that Washington believes that Taiwan's democracy has 
regressed, and it does not trust that President Chen is willing to 
relinquish his power.  Being a big country, the United States would 
not use such words to describe its views toward Chen if it has no 
sufficient proof in its hands." 
 
I) "Admonition from U.S. Shouldn't Go Unheeded" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (12/13): 
 
"... The U.S. government, worried that these measures [i.e. the UN 
referendum] will aggravate tensions across the Taiwan Strait, has 
time and again advised President Chen to think twice. ...  President 
Chen and his men obviously believe that the U.N. referendum will 
influence the upcoming presidential election in favor of the ruling 
party, for this seems to have been the case during the 2004 
presidential poll.  Whether this old trick will work again in the 
upcoming election is anyone's guess.  But one thing is quite 
certain:  Relations between Taiwan and the U.S. have suffered due to 
the DPP government's unyielding attitude on this issue." 
 
YOUNG