07AITTAIPEI851
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID, CHINA-JAPAN RELATIONS,
Mon Apr 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0851/01 1060851
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160851Z APR 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4909
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6643
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7888UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000851 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID, CHINA-JAPAN RELATIONS, 
CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage April 14-16 on the 2008 presidential elections and other 
local issues.  The latest poll conducted by the pro-status quo 
"China Times" Sunday showed that former Premier Frank Hsieh leads 
the four party hopefuls as the favored DPP candidate to run in the 
2008 presidential election.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, a column in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
commented on the U.S. State Department's response to Taiwan's 
attempt to join the World Health Organization (WHO) as a full member 
under the name "Taiwan."  The article said the State Department's 
comment has clearly indicated that Taiwan is not a sovereign state, 
at least not with the national title of a sovereign state, so it 
cannot possibly apply for membership for the WHO using this name. 
With regard to Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao's recent visit to 
Japan, a "China Times" column said Japan has shifted its strategy by 
attaching more importance to Asia than to the United States.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" called Wen's visit a step in the right 
direction.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," on the other 
hand, discussed cross-Strait relations.  The article said "Thinking 
that China would prioritize the success of the Olympics over 
preventing Taiwan's de jure independence comes from a lack of 
understanding of China's motivation."  End summary. 
 
¶2. Taiwan's WHO Bid 
 
"Taiwan Will Encounter the 'Nightmare of [Colin] Powell Again?" 
 
Washington correspondent Vincent Chang noted in the "United Notes" 
column in the pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] (4/15): 
 
"...  The U.S. State Department's response to Taiwan's application 
for membership in the World Health Organization (WHO) was divided 
into two parts.  First, it reiterated the U.S. policy of not 
supporting membership for Taiwan in international organizations 
requiring 'statehood.'  Since there are no diplomatic ties between 
the United States and Taiwan and it does not recognize the Republic 
of China diplomatically, this policy statement, though depressing, 
was not totally unexpected.  But the United States did not thereby 
deny the sovereignty status of the ROC.  The second part of the 
State Department's statement, however, came as a surprise, because 
the State Department criticized that 'Application in the name of 
Taiwan to become a member of an international organization whose 
membership is only open to sovereign states appears to be 
inconsistent with President Chen Shui-bian's commitment on name 
change.' ... 
 
"Since WHO is an international organization which only 'sovereign 
states' are allowed to enter, the second part of the State 
Department statement, if judged from a good perspective, showed that 
Washington was 'implying' that the island's current national title 
is the ROC rather than Taiwan, and that only the 'ROC' is eligible 
for a sovereignty status.  But judged from another perspective, the 
State Department [statement] is akin to 'indicating clearly' that 
Taiwan is not a sovereign state, or at least not the national title 
of a sovereign state.  It is therefore impossible [for Taiwan] to 
apply for membership for WHO using this name.  More importantly, 
such a move has also violated Chen's pledge not to change the 
national title of the ROC. 
 
"Former Secretary of State Colin Powell once said during a 
television interview that 'Taiwan is not a sovereign state,' a 
statement that has aroused grave concerns from Taiwan.  The State 
Department only clarified in private afterwards that it was 'a slip 
of tongue.'  If the Bian administration really intends to apply for 
 
full membership for the WHO and the United Nations under the name 
'Taiwan' so as to highlight Taiwan's 'sovereignty,' it should simply 
go ahead and build Taiwan into an independent country and win the 
international community's recognition, so that it is justified in 
name and in reasoning.  Otherwise, it will be constantly criticized 
by Washington as failing to keep its pledge....  Wouldn't it be 
afraid that Washington will repeat Powell's statement clearly and 
let Taiwan experience the nightmare again?" 
 
¶3. China-Japan Relations 
 
A) "Has Japan Started to Value Asia More Than the United States?" 
 
The "International Outlook" column in the pro-status quo "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] (4/15): 
 
"Wen Jiabao's visit to Japan has suddenly made the world realize 
that China-Japan relations are indeed changing; both sides no longer 
focus on what is happening now and instead have integrated their 
long-term interests into foreign relations.  The change on Japan's 
side can be traced back to a long time ago.  Tokyo first weighed its 
 
interests if it chose to stand by the United States.  It was, of 
course, essential to stand by the U.S. side during the Cold War era, 
but after that, neither Russia nor China will be able to threaten 
Japan in the foreseeable future, so basically there is no need to 
rely on the United States militarily. ... 
 
"Shinzo Abe has figured this out and understood the pathetic 
[nature] of becoming the United States' 'retinue,' so he would 
rather choose to alienate the United States and to befriend Asia. 
This way Japan will not be isolated from the abundant economic 
interests of this region. ...  The reason [behind this] is actually 
quite simple.  The more popular and influential Japan gets in Asia, 
the more the United States will value it.  The more Japan is 
cold-shouldered in Asia, the less importance Washington will attach 
to it.  As a matter of fact, in terms of geopolitical strategy in 
Asia, it is the United States that needs Japan, not vice versa. 
 
"As for China's part, it is very practical.  Beijing forced Japan to 
turn its head using a cold gesture, but as long as Tokyo intends to 
value Asia more than the United States, China's attitude will change 
completely.  For China, it is strategically essential to befriend 
Japan proactively, and Beijing's sudden change of attitude also came 
as a pleasant surprise for Japan. ..." 
 
B) "A Step in the right Direction" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (4/14): 
 
"It goes without saying that mainland Chinese prime minister Wen 
Jiabao's visit to Japan this week is historic, taking place at a 
time when Sino-Japanese relations have been frosty for too long. 
The soft-spoken Chinese leader rightly calls his journey to Japan an 
'ice melting' visit.  While it remains to be seen whether the trip 
will thaw the ice, it is at least a step in the right direction. ... 
 Wen's three-day visit to Japan should be regarded as a calculated 
success, judging from his reception in Japan and his appeal to 
improving relations through friendship and cooperation.  The visit 
could not have come at a better time, when both Tokyo and Beijing 
feel the need to thaw their relationship.  A protracted freeze of 
political relations is apparently not in the interests of either 
side, as their economics have become interdependent.  Mainland China 
has overtaken the United States to become Japan's largest trading 
partner in 2006, with bilateral trade totaling US$200 billion. 
Japan's investment in China since 1978 has exceeded US$56 billion. 
... 
 
"Now, with the joint statement issued after the Wen-Abe summit, the 
political temperature between Beijing and Tokyo is sure to rise, 
slowly at least.  To be sure, there was no breakthrough on key 
issues such as the Yasukuni visit, but a lot of goodwill was shown 
by both sides as their leaders pledged to rebuild ties. ..." 
 
¶4. Cross-Strait Relations 
 
"The Olympics Won't Protect Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (4/15): 
 
"... It goes without saying that a successful, incident-free 
Olympics in Beijing is a top priority for the Chinese government. 
However, it would be naive to assume that Beijing would even 
consider adjusting its policy toward Taiwan -- even temporarily -- 
to improve its image ahead of the games. ...  In light of this, some 
political analysts have suggested that the period immediately 
preceding the 2008 Olympics would be ideal timing for Taiwan to 
declare de jure independence.  They argue that Beijing would not 
dare to invade Taiwan then because such an act would incur the anger 
of the international community and jeopardize the success of their 
dream of wooing the world in Beijing next year.  It would seem this 
thought has crossed others' minds as well.  US Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice last week cautioned Taiwan not to take advantage of 
the Beijing Olympics to declare formal independence. ... 
 
"Regardless, the idea that China would turn a blind eye to de jure 
independence is too optimistic.  That Taiwan should be a province of 
China is just as important to China as wooing the international 
community.  Moreover, Taiwan is important to China for the very same 
reason that the Olympics are important to it -- nationalism, a vivid 
image of a Great China in days gone by. ...  Thinking that China 
would prioritize the success of the Olympics over preventing 
Taiwan's de jure independence comes from a lack of understanding of 
China's motivation." 
 
YOUNG