07AITTAIPEI16
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS PROCUREMENT BILL
Thu Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0016/01 0040714
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040714Z JAN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3601
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6144
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7375UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000016 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS PROCUREMENT BILL 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage January 04 on revisions to the Labor Insurance Statute 
Wednesday by the Legislative Yuan.  Most papers also reported on 
possible locations, Los Angeles or Miami, for President Chen 
Shui-bian's upcoming transit in the U.S.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an editorial in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" said that Taiwan can no longer play a military role for the 
United States in the Western Pacific; and how the U.S. pressure on 
President Chen Shui-bian, a Taiwan independence supporter, for the 
passage of the arms deal, confuses Taiwan people.  The 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" editorialized that 
Washington and Tokyo should look squarely into China's arms buildup 
and initiate a collective regional security system to cope with the 
rise of a military, expansionist China.  End summary. 
 
A) "A Total Reflection of Taiwan-U.S. Relations from the [U.S.] Arms 
Deal" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (01/04) that: 
 
"The [U.S.] Arms Procurement Bill was finally sent to committee for 
review, since leaders of the ruling and opposition parties cannot 
endure the U.S. pressure.  Now is the time to review the bill and 
[Taiwan's] national defense policy; it is also the time to reflect 
on Taiwan-U.S. relations. 
 
"The critical point in the review of the arms deal and Taiwan-U.S. 
relations is that both the Taiwan and U.S. sides should inspect 
again the implicit statement that 'Taiwan is the anti-Communist 
military outpost of the United States in the Western Pacific.' 
 
"The United States surely hopes that Taiwan can still play a certain 
role in countering the PRC regime.  The role that Taiwan can play, 
however, is definitely not of a military kind.  The most 
advantageous strategic target for the United States is definitely 
not the chimera that Taiwan will win after a war breaks out between 
the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, but the goal to eliminate 
fundamentally every possibility for a war between Taiwan and China. 
Hence, the United States should help Taiwan to establish a peaceful 
and stable interactive cross-Strait framework in Taiwan's 
development of democratic politics as well as economic and trade 
exchanges. ... 
 
"... The reason why the U.S. arms deal is in a stalemate is because 
the Taiwan people question the 'legitimacy of governance' of the 
Chen Shui-bian regime; the stalemate also leads to the re-evaluation 
of Taiwan-U.S. relations.  A relevant thought is, do Taiwan-U.S. 
military relations represent a reliable promise of Taiwan's survival 
and development?  And is the amount of arms procurements equal to 
the status of bilateral relations?  Is an arms deal a [form of] 
'political insurance?'  Should there be more comprehensive and 
long-term consideration for Taiwan-U.S. relations other than 
military relations, or beyond military relations? 
 
"As for Taiwan, it cannot use military means to solve cross-Strait 
issues.  Hence, Taiwan must change from a role of 'anti-Communist 
military outpost' to 'platform of economic and trade exchanges' to 
act in the best interests of geo-political and political-economic 
strategies.  Also, because of this, Taiwan's mainstream public 
opinion finds a fundamental paradox in the U.S. push for arms sales 
through the Chen Shui-bian regime, which asserts Taiwan 
independence.  This is because Taiwan independence means war, but 
the purpose of Taiwan's arms procurements is not Taiwan 
independence.  Since the Chen Shui-bian regime has lost the 
'legitimacy of governance,' it has also lost the 'legitimacy of an 
arms deal.'" 
 
B) "PRC Arms Boost Cannot be Ignored" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (01/04): 
 
"... The PRC's annual white paper on "China's National defense in 
2006" released December 29 by the Information office of the PRC 
State Council revealed that the Chinese military budget had risen 
14.6 percent, according to Beijing's own calculations, from the 
previous year. 
 
"Although the PRC government maintained that its military 
expenditure remained lower than other major powers, such as Britain, 
France, Germany and Japan, the U.S. Department of Defense estimates 
that Beijing's real military expenditure was two or three times the 
officially reported figure, or somewhere between US$70 billion and 
US$100 billion. 
 
"The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimated in 
its 2006 yearbook that China's military expenditures in 2005, 
expressed in purchasing power parity in constant 2003 U.S. dollars, 
 
were actually second in the world at a level of US$188.4 billion, 
surpassed only by the United States itself with US$478.2 billion. 
 
"By comparison, Taiwan ranked 15th with US$13.4 billion. ... 
 
"... We hope that leaders of the opposition and former ruling 
Chinese Nationalist Party, including KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou, who 
formerly was a MAC vice-chairman, take a serious look at the new PRC 
position paper and the continued offensive expansion of the PRC 
military. 
 
"We welcome the decision of the KMT to end its boycott of over two 
years of the proposed arms procurement budget tomorrow that will 
finally allow proper legislative review of the package, which we 
should note was first proposed to Washington by the then-KMT 
government itself in the mid 1990s. However, KMT leaders including 
Ma have refrained from commenting on Beijing's new reaffirmation of 
its intention to maintain a rapid pace of military expansion, a 
position which exposes the naivete of his own calls for Taiwan to 
rely for its security on China's goodwill, as manifested in his 
proposal to exchange a verbal commitment by Beijing to promise not 
to attack Taiwan if Taiwan abandons its independence and his 
statement of intent to distance Taiwan from the U.S.-Japan security 
alliance. 
 
"As a presidential hopeful, it is incumbent on the KMT chairman to 
offer our citizens a more forthright policy on how to cope with this 
threat to our own independence and security. 
 
"Indeed, for the sake of regional security and the survival of 
democracy in East Asia, we urge Washington and Tokyo to squarely 
face this challenge and initiate a collective regional security 
system, which we believe should include Taiwan, to cope with the 
rise of a military expansionist China." 
 
WANG