07AITTAIPEI2381
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Tue Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2381 2960745
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230745Z OCT 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7209
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7382
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8662UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
Summary:  News coverage of Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies 
October 23 focused on the indictment of lawmaker Gao Jyh-peng, who 
is considered to be close to President Chen Shui-bian, for allegedly 
accepting bribes; and on state-run financial institutions, which 
were criticized for campaigning for the ruling DPP, including 
providing funds to promote the bid for UN membership.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, an editorial of the pro-independence 
English-language "Taipei Times" said Taiwan is forced to find 
asymmetrical or nonconventional means to counter China's threat, and 
the economy may be China's Achilles' heel.  End summary. 
 
A) "Taiwan Must Fight Like a Flea" 
 
The pro-independence English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (10/23): 
 
"In his classic study of guerrilla warfare 'War of the Flea,' Robert 
Taber compares the small, disadvantaged opponent in an armed 
conflict to a flea, whose small, intractable nature can be turned 
into an advantage against its enemy. 
 
"As the military divide between China and Taiwan widens in China's 
favor -- thanks, in part, to the Chinese Nationalist Party's (KMT) 
efforts to block weapons development and acquisition -- Taiwanese 
who are committed to defending the nation have had little choice but 
to begin considering asymmetrical or nonconventional options. That 
is, they have been forced to look at a potential war with China from 
the flea's perspective. 
 
"While much has been said in recent weeks about Taiwan's development 
of the Hsiung Feng II-E cruise missile and -- for a brief, 
hallucinatory moment -- nuclear weapons, ultimately these remain 
part of an arsenal that, should war break out, stands little chance 
of overwhelming Beijing's massive and widely distributed forces. 
Even if, for a while, Taiwan could inflict punitive damage against 
an invading People's Liberation Army (PLA), past experience shows 
that massive casualties within PLA ranks does not deter Beijing. 
 
"... Two traditional pillars of deterrence -- massive military 
losses or threats against civilian populations (a reprehensible 
option) -- are denied Taiwan. It must therefore find China's 
Achilles' heel elsewhere. 
 
"And that's its economy. 
 
Enter the graphite, or 'blackout' bomb, a non-lethal weapon that can 
knock out an enemy's power grid by short-circuiting it. Taiwan has 
announced it could begin development of that weapon, which can be 
dropped by aircraft or mounted onto cruise missiles such as the 
Hsiung Feng. Whether that device will suffer the same fate as the 
Hsiung Feng at the hands of the KMT remains to be seen, but its 
introduction shows that a paradigm shift has occurred within the 
nation's defense apparatus, which, by sheer virtue of its size and 
the prevailing international context that favors China, is awakening 
to the realization that it cannot hope to compete with China in 
conventional military terms. 
 
"Beyond the graphite bomb, Taiwan must explore other venues where 
its technological advantage could be put to good use and continue to 
identify other weaknesses in China's defenses, such as maritime 
ports, industrial centers and command-and-control nodes. 
 
"Beijing has made no secret of the fact that, aside from the very 
survival of the Chinese Communist Party, the economy is paramount. 
Many of its policies are formulated to ensure that economic growth 
continues unhampered, even at a debilitating social or environmental 
cost. It is therefore not difficult to imagine how Beijing could be 
made to pause should a credible threat to its economy come from 
Taipei. 
 
"Taiwan has all it needs to mount a countervailing strategy based on 
innovative technologies and an asymmetrical mindset to make Beijing 
think twice before it attempts to take on the flea. 
 
"The beauty of it is that Taiwan might not even have to kill people 
to achieve its objectives." 
 
YOUNG