07AITTAIPEI2509
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2509 3240937
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200937Z NOV 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7421
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7452
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8740UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage November 20 on Vice President Annette Lu, who pleaded 
innocent during the first hearing of a corruption trial Monday 
concerning the allegation that she misused her special allowance 
funds; on Taiwan's UN referendum; and on the legislative and 
presidential elections in 2008.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an editorial in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
discussed the annual report published by the U.S.-China Economic and 
Security Review Commission recently.  The editorial called on the 
United States to be vigilant of China's military threats against 
Taiwan.  End summary. 
 
"Be Vigilant of the Threat against Taiwan Posed by China's Military 
Rise" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (11/20): 
 
"... It is by no means sensational to say that the military balance 
across the Taiwan Strait has gradually tipped in favor of China over 
the past few years. ...  Having steadily completed the revamping of 
its new types of warships, the Chinese military is now capable of 
engaging in combat operations in the areas near the first island 
chain, a development that has constituted enormous threats to 
Taiwan's security. 
 
"In fact, the change in the military situation across the Taiwan 
Strait can be attributed to two main factors.  One factor is that 
the war on terrorism is now a top priority for the United States, 
and sustained peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region frees 
the United States of any worries in other theaters, so that it can 
focus all its resources on anti-terrorism.  Given this new 
development, Washington needs Beijing's cooperation in order to 
stabilize the situation in Northeastern Asia.  China, in the wake of 
its rise, also needs the United States' cooperation so as to remove 
any doubts by the international community about its increasing 
military buildup.  The hostility between the two countries is not as 
strong as it was before.  In addition, the nativist campaign in 
Taiwan is in high gear now; activities concerning the island's name 
change, the writing of a new constitution, and Taiwan's UN bid are 
unfolding like a raging fire.  These moves seem to have become an 
irritant to Washington-Beijing ties and thus brought about disputes 
between Washington and Taipei.  The Bush administration, as a 
result, decided to put on hold part of its arms sales to Taiwan, 
such as the F16C/D fighter jets that Taiwan urgently needs.  The 
U.S. government has been sending out signals indicating that it will 
not consider the deal before the island's presidential election next 
year. 
 
"To be honest, we should not blame the Bush administration for 
stalling the arms sales to Taiwan.  The major arms procurement 
package that is essential for Taiwan's military modernization, which 
was long approved by the Bush administration in 2001, had been 
constantly blocked and stalled [in the Legislative Yuan] because of 
intense political infighting and strife over unification or 
independence in Taiwan. ... The U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission is an organization established under the U.S. 
Congress by law.  Its recent assessment and recommendations in terms 
of the cross-Strait situation require close attention by the U.S. 
government.  China's attempts at bellicosity and its Anti-Secession 
Law have all indicated that its threat against Taiwan is neither a 
gesture nor a bluff; instead, China is in the process of attaining 
sufficient capabilities to invade Taiwan. ..." 
 
YOUNG