07AITTAIPEI1730
MEDIA REACTION: DPP PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE FRANK HSIEH'S
Thu Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1730/01 2140904
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020904Z AUG 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6231
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7090
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8338UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001730 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: DPP PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE FRANK HSIEH'S 
U.S. TRIP, TAIWAN'S UN BID 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage August 3 on Taiwan's stock index, which suffered its 
biggest decline in more than three years Wednesday; on rising oil 
and consumer prices; on the DPP's "Normal Country Resolution" draft; 
and on Taiwan's bid to join the United Nations.  The pro-unification 
"United Daily News" ran an exclusive banner headline on page four 
that read "The United States Allows Bian to Transit outside the 
Continental U.S. but Not to Stay Overnight."  The sub-headline 
added:  "[Bian to] Visit Central America on August 20; the United 
States Reportedly Refuses Bian to Transit the Continental U.S. 
Because It Objects to [Chen's] Push for [Taiwan's] UN Bid.  Taiwan 
Does Not Exclude [the Possibility of] Having a 'Breakthrough 
Journey' Again." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, the "Black and White" 
column in the "United Daily News" discussed DPP presidential 
candidate Frank Hsieh's remarks Tuesday that, once he is elected, 
Taiwan's name change and the writing of a new constitution will be 
completed within five years.  In a sarcastic tone the article urged 
the Taiwan people to vote in favor of Hsieh, since he already has a 
timetable for Taiwan independence and has said he will not make 
promises he cannot keep.  A separate "United Daily News" op-ed said 
it would be a tough test for Beijing, since both the KMT and the DPP 
are pushing for Taiwan's UN bid.  End summary. 
 
¶3. DPP Presidential Candidate Frank Hsieh's U.S. Trip 
 
"Frank Hsieh's Timetable for Taiwan Independence" 
 
The "Black and White" column in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] wrote (8/2): 
 
"How on earth did Frank Hsieh get to a state where he is speaking so 
incoherently?  Hsieh said one thing when he was in the United States 
and something totally different after he returned to Taiwan.  Hsieh 
announced his 'Three Nos' in the States -- there is no need for a 
referendum on Taiwan independence, for the Taiwan independence 
movements, and for Taiwan to declare independence.  After he 
returned to Taiwan, when being pressed for an answer by the host of 
a TV news program, he changed his statement and said name change and 
the writing of a new constitution will be realized within five years 
[after he is elected].  Hsieh has finally taken a stand on 
advocating 'ultimate Taiwan independence.'  Even more, he has come 
up with a 'timetable for Taiwan independence,' which will be 
implemented within five years. 
 
"As a matter of fact, it is already a 'status quo' tacitly 
recognized by Washington, Beijing and Taipei whether one claims that 
'Taiwan is an independent sovereign state' or 'the Republic of China 
is an independent sovereign state.'  The only thing that is left to 
determine is whether a move alters the status quo or whether Taiwan 
independence is nothing but a name change and the writing of a new 
constitution.  If [Taiwan] does not 'change its name and write a new 
constitution,' it is not 'sabotaging the status quo'; if it does, it 
is considered [to be a move]'sabotaging the status quo' or toward 
'de jure Taiwan independence.' ... 
 
"Hsieh has repeatedly emphasized that he does not pledge easily, and 
that once he does, he will surely see it through.  In that case, in 
order to rectify Taiwan's name, write Taiwan a new constitution, put 
de jure Taiwan independence into practice, and to 'transfer' the 
sovereignty of the 'Republic of China' to the 'Republic of Taiwan' 
within five years, let us all cast our ballots to Frank Hsieh, the 
new godfather of Taiwan independence!  Hsieh, you'll have to keep 
you five-year promise!" 
 
¶4. Taiwan's UN Bid 
 
"Both Parties Are Pushing for Referenda, a Test for the 
Anti-Secession Law" 
 
Former DPP Legislator Lin Cho-shui opined in the pro-unification 
"United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (8/2): 
 
"Both the DPP and KMT are jointly pushing for the UN referendum.  It 
goes without saying that this is a harsh test for China's 
Anti-Secession Law. ...  Currently, there are two frontlines China 
is engaged in opposing de jure Taiwan independence:  One is to stop 
major countries in the world from establishing diplomatic ties with 
Taiwan and to prevent Taiwan from participating in the international 
organizations for which statehood is a requirement.  China has not 
encountered many problems on this aspect.  The other is to stop the 
national system of Taiwan from becoming independent in a legal form. 
 This will not be such an easy task.  Previously, be it the 
elections for the entire legislative body, the popular vote on the 
president, the writing of referenda into the Constitution, the 
abolishment of the Taiwan provincial government, the name change 
campaign, or the abolition of the National Unification Council, they 
U.S. TRIP, TAIWAN'S UN BID 
 
were all legal moves pushing Taiwan toward independence, and they 
were all severely opposed by Beijing and blocked by the conservative 
force in the KMT.  But such 'illegal' red lines have been crossed 
[by Taiwan] one after another.  Now, even Ma Ying-jeou has softened 
his stance and said he does not exclude the possibility of revising 
or writing a new constitution in the future that meets Taiwan's 
needs.  Ma even jointly pushed for the UN referendum with the DPP, 
and he does not object to a UN bid under the name Taiwan.  All these 
have made it more difficult for China to block Taiwan from moving 
toward legal independence. ..." 
 
YOUNG