07TAIPEI1920
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1920/01 2340917
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220917Z AUG 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6482
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7149
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8404UNCLAS TAIPEI 001920 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage August 22 on the aftermath of the combustion of a China 
Airlines passenger jet in Okinawa Monday; on President Chen 
Shui-bian's transit in Alaska Tuesday morning; on local pig farmers' 
strong protests Tuesday over the Taiwan government's controversial 
decision on the use of ractopamine in pork; on the 2008 presidential 
election; and on the largest cluster infection of dengue fever in 
nearly 10 years in Tainan. The pro-independence "Liberty Times" ran 
a banner headline on page four that said "Transiting the United 
States, Bian Protests by Wearing a 'UN for Taiwan' Sticker."  The 
pro-unification "United Daily News" also ran a banner headline on 
page five that read "The Worst-ever Transit Treatment:  Bian Arrives 
in Alaska and Protests [the United States] by Refusing to Get off 
His Plane." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial said Taiwan's efforts to maintain its independence are 
designed to assist the U.S. policy to promote democracy globally. 
The article urged Washington not to suppress Taiwan's moves to 
maintain its independence and thereby support China's hegemonic 
expansion.  A commentary in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" 
said President Chen's constant abuse of the credibility of "summit 
diplomacy" is the fuse that triggered the United States to humiliate 
Taiwan's leaders with "transit diplomacy."  A "United Daily News" 
analysis commented on President Chen's protest during his transit in 
Alaska and said Taiwan's room for survival in the international 
community will grow smaller and smaller if it does not have strong 
national strength as its backing.  Former U.S. Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State Randall Schriver opined in the pro-independence, 
 
SIPDIS 
English-language "Taipei Times" that Taiwan needs "six new 
assurances" from the United States.  Former AIT Chairman Nat 
Bellocchi also opined in the "Taipei Times" calling for more 
dialogue between the United States and Taiwan.  End summary. 
 
A) "Maintaining Taiwan's Democracy and Independence Is the Joint 
Interests Shared between Taiwan and the United States" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (8/22): 
 
"Chinese President Hu Jintao recently paid a visit to Kyrgyzstan and 
Kazakhstan and attended the summit of the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO).  He also traveled to Russia to observe the joint 
counter-terrorism military drills conducted by the SCO. ...  Central 
Asia has rich oil resources and is an area of strategic importance. 
In the wake of the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the 
United States directed its war on terrorism at Central Asia, and the 
U.S. military deployment in Central Asian countries also aroused 
doubts from China and Russi.  One of the major functions of the SCO 
is to create a platform for China and Russia to join hands with 
Central Asian countries in an attempt to prevent the United States 
from promoting democracy in Central Asia.  Equally importantly, it 
is also aimed at preventing Central Asia from becoming a forward 
base for the United States to restrain China and Russia. ... 
 
"Judging by this strategic landscape, Taiwan, as a democratic 
country, plays a very critical role with regard to the United 
States' policy to promote democracy globally. ... In this vein, 
maintaining independence and self-determination of democratic Taiwan 
so that it can be a driving force to push for democracy globally can 
be regarded as a joint interest shared between the United States and 
Taiwan.  In contrast, if [the United States] adopts an ambiguous 
attitude toward cross-Strait issues, sitting idly by and allowing 
totalitarian China to invade and occupy Taiwan gradually, China's 
aggressiveness will surely expand to covet the Korean Peninsula, 
Japan, the South China Sea, and put the Western Pacific under its 
shadow, once the Taiwan Strait becomes the inland sea of China. 
Should this happen, the serious concern over peace and security of 
the Western Pacific area as specified in the 'Taiwan Relations Act' 
will certainly become empty talk. 
 
"Over the recent years, China has put on a smiling face covered with 
'harmonious world' and 'peaceful rise,' but in reality, it has been 
engaged in flagrant efforts proactively to expand its military 
buildup, with its national defense budget marking double-digit 
growth.  China demonstrated its arbitrariness and showed no 
hesitation to use force when it comes to its various disputes with 
its neighboring countries, particularly Taiwan.  Given such 
circumstances, Taiwan's efforts in maintaining independence and 
self-determination are designed to assist the United States' policy 
to promote democracy all over the world.  If the United States 
regards Taiwan's moves to secure independence as trouble and 
suppress it just to cater to China, it will be akin to supporting 
China's hegemonic expansion and shooting oneself in the foot.  Our 
American friends thus must think about this very clearly." 
 
 
B) "Lee Teng-hui Is Much Braver" 
 
The "Short Commentary" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] wrote (8/22): 
 
"... Having risen to power seven years ago, the treatment Chen 
Shui-bian received when transiting the United States has been 
downgraded very quickly.  It is really sad to see that Chen started 
by being able to receive interviews openly on the streets of New 
York and take a boat tour on the Hudson River with [former AIT 
Chairperson] Therese Shaheen, to this time where he was not even 
allowed to stay overnight and had to protest in such an unusual 
manner. ... 
 
"Frankly speaking, the United States, without a doubt, has no right 
to interfere with the Taiwan people's basic human rights to conduct 
a referendum.  But the Bian administration's constant abuse and 
overspending of the public credibility of 'summit diplomacy' might 
as well be considered as a fuse triggering Washington to humiliate 
Taiwan's head of state with 'transit diplomacy.'  The Americans have 
improperly humiliated Taiwan, but A-Bian has also humiliated 
himself." 
 
C) "Awkward Itinerary, and Limited Leeway in the International 
Community" 
 
Journalist Cheng Jen-wen noted in the "News Perspective" column in 
the pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
(8/22): 
 
"... Affected by the UN referendum, Bian was allowed to stay shortly 
in Alaska.  This is of course a result of diplomatic confrontation, 
also a reflection of the asymmetrical structure of international 
political powers, in particular under the U.S. hegemony. ...  Given 
the extremely imbalanced Taiwan-U.S. relations, for everything it 
does Taiwan has to watch the United States' expression for signs of 
approval.  For the situation between Taiwan and Latin American 
countries, and the situation between Latin American countries and 
the United States, it is a different issue. ... Compared with Latin 
American countries, Taiwan has even [more severely] limited 
bargaining chips.  Unlike those Latin American countries which dare 
to challenge the United States loudly, Taiwan's status in the 
international community is in a very unfavorable situation.  Given 
the pressure of both the United States and China, all Taiwan can do 
is to manage to seek very limited leeway for its survival in the 
international community. 
 
"While visiting other countries to promote Taiwan's foreign 
relations and attempting to protest the U.S. transit treatment with 
dignity, President Chen, with only one year remaining in his term of 
office, should turn around and think about whether the DPP, having 
overturned an authoritarian system, has really strived to enhance 
Taiwan's national strength.  Without strong national strength as its 
support and in the face of squeezing by great powers, Taiwan's room 
for survival in the international community will only grow smaller 
and smaller." 
 
D) "Taiwan Needs 'Six New Assurances'" 
 
Randall Schriver, former U.S. deputy assistant secretary of state 
for East Asian and Pacific affairs and a founding partner of 
Armitage International, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (8/22): 
 
"... The debate over these six assurances is misleading.  In 
actuality, the most important question here is not whether the US 
will publicly repeat the six assurances or not. ...  The more 
important questions relate to why government officials in Taiwan 
feel so insecure and so in need of public reassurance, and what the 
US can say and do to help provide genuine reassurance. ... 
 
"It has been over three years since the last major policy address by 
a Washington-based, senior US official on US-Taiwan Relations.  The 
last such occasion was when then-assistant secretary of state James 
Kelly testified before the House International Relations Committee 
in April 2004 marking the 25th Anniversary of the TRA.  In his 
testimony, Kelly said, 'our position continues to be embodied in the 
so-called 'six assurances' offered to Taiwan by [former] president 
[Ronald] Reagan.'  While his words were reassuring at the time, I 
think over the three years since this testimony, trust between the 
US and Taiwan has weakened.  Thus there is a need today for a 
strong, clear statement from a senior US official that will move us 
toward genuine reassurance.  If the US government does see fit, I 
suggest they not think about reissuing the old six assurances -- 
rather, they should consider delivering 'six new assurances.' 
Crafting a policy message that is appropriate for contemporary 
circumstances, including an acknowledgment of the remarkable changes 
that have taken place in both China and Taiwan can set us on a 
better course. 
 
"The 'six new assurances' might look something like this: 
 
 
"One, the survival and success of democracy in Taiwan is in the 
interest of the US and thus the US government will endorse efforts 
that deepen and strengthen Taiwan's democracy.  Two, the US will 
always honor the TRA, and will continue to pay special attention to 
ensure the US government makes available to Taiwan weapons needed 
for self-defense, and that the US military maintains the capacity to 
resist force in the Taiwan Strait if instructed to do so.  Three, 
the US endorses cross-Strait dialogue and interactions but will not 
pressure Taiwan to enter into negotiations with the People's 
Republic of China (PRC) on terms Taiwan may deem as unfavorable. 
Four, issues related to the sovereignty of Taiwan are for the people 
of the PRC and the people of Taiwan to decide peacefully themselves; 
the US will not formally recognize the PRC's sovereignty over 
Taiwan; the US will not support any outcome achieved through the use 
of force, nor any outcome that does not enjoy the support among the 
majority of the free people of Taiwan. 
 
"Five, the US needs good relations with China to further a broad 
range of security interests. However, under no circumstances will 
the US seek to curry favor with China by making sacrifices in its 
relationship with Taiwan.  The US-Taiwan bilateral relationship is a 
valuable in its own right and worthy of greater investment.  The US 
will not agree to 'co-manage' the issue of Taiwan with the PRC. 
Six, Taiwan as a successful democracy, a thriving economy, and a 
global leader in health and science stands to contribute far greater 
as a good citizen of the world.  The US will seek to promote 
opportunities for Taiwan to participate meaningfully in 
international organizations, and will resist pressure to isolate 
Taiwan from participating and/or benefiting from the cooperative 
work among nations in international organizations." 
 
E) "It's Time for Creativity:  Beyond a Referendum" 
 
Nat Bellocchi, former AIT chairman and now a special adviser to the 
Liberty Times Group, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (8/22): 
 
"Now both sides of the pan-blue pan-green political spectrum support 
including a referendum in the next presidential election.  In 
expressing disapproval of the referendum effort, the US may now have 
helped ignite stronger disapproval from China.  It is clear that 
some means of preventing a serious problem in the Taiwan Strait is 
needed, or -- at the very least -- means of minimizing any harm to 
US interests. ... 
 
"In terms of continuing policies, China clearly continues its policy 
in the same way it always has: Taiwan is a part of China and that's 
it.  Can the US continue its fundamental policies on cross-strait 
issues?  Taiwan inevitably cannot.  The US has a dialogue with 
China, but what is needed is a dialogue between the US and Taiwan 
that would keep problems from getting out of control.  Referendums 
are common in democracies, and having not had one in Taiwan for so 
long and then being told not to is not easy. Taiwanese know they 
have that right and political leaders are not likely to give it up. 
Perhaps the leaders could convince the people that the referendum 
could be put off for the time being if the country -- and the 
people's livelihoods -- could be lifted now. 
 
"One thing that might contribute to that is a Free Trade Agreement 
(FTA).  There has been some talk that the US ought to offer an FTA 
to Taiwan for a variety of reasons, the main one being that it would 
be good for both the US and Taiwan. Perhaps there is some 
possibility in that.  Whatever can be decided between the US and 
Taiwan in that regard would not only contribute to Taiwan's economic 
or security matters at home, but would also strengthen its 
democratic system. It would also likely be helpful in international 
matters -- and for strengthening the US' position in East Asia." 
 
YOUNG