08AITTAIPEI771
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Wed Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0253
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0771/01 1562348
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 042348Z JUN 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9078
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8333
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9572UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000771 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused June 4 
news coverage on the potential appointment of former Minister of 
Finance Wang Chien-shien as the new Control Yuan President; the 
personnel reshuffle at China's Taiwan Affairs Office and Association 
for Relations across the Taiwan Strait; on the damage caused by 
recent heavy rains to Taiwan's agriculture; and on the chaotic 
situation the South Korean government is facing now.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" questioned President Ma Ying-jeou's political 
credibility and said Ma's way of dealing with China will only allow 
Beijing to nibble away at and erode Taiwan's sovereignty.  A 
separate "Liberty Times" column also slammed KMT Chairman Wu 
Poh-hsiung's, saying that Wu's personal feeling that China is 
unlikely to fire missiles at Taiwan is a move of self disparagement 
and disarmament.  An op-ed in the pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times," likewise, expressed concern that the Ma 
administration's approach in handling cross-Strait relations will 
put Taiwan's sovereignty and democracy in grave danger.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "Something Wrong with President Ma's Political Credibility" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (6/4): 
 
"... It is imaginable that Ma and his new administration's way of 
dealing with China will result in the latter's easily nibbling away 
at Taiwan's sovereignty, something that China has not been able to 
do during the past eight years. 
 
"Within a mere two weeks, President Ma and his new administration 
have granted China access to the bargaining chip of Taiwan's 
sovereignty, for which Beijing has been yearning earnestly but not 
been able to obtain during the past eight years.  In this vein, 
Taiwan will likely fall into the dangerous situation of having its 
sovereignty hollowed out over the next four years.  Moreover, [KMT 
Chairman] Wu Poh-hsiung's 'feeling' that Beijing is unlikely to fire 
missiles at Taiwan - an anxious move to rationalize China's 
deployment of missiles aimed at Taiwan - will only make China 
further bent on its strategy to 'use force to facilitate unification 
[with Taiwan].'  We are really worried that four years from now, the 
number (1,400) of China's missiles targeting Taiwan will not only 
diminish but will very likely increase! ...  It is not a matter of 
Wu's personal 'feeling' whether or not China will remove its 
missiles aimed at Taiwan, but an issue concerning President Ma's 
political credibility.  We believe this is not only a touchstone to 
test whether Ma adheres to his pledge but also one to test whether 
he is determined to 'safeguard his country.' ..." 
 
B) "A Synonym for Capitulationism" 
 
The "Free Talks" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 720,000] wrote (6/4): 
 
"... Over the past eight years under the DPP's governance, China has 
used every way it can to suppress and intimidate Taiwan, but it 
never dared to fire missiles at Taiwan.  This was because 
externally, there was an international restriction [imposed] by 
countries like the United States while domestically, China was 
facing internal in-fighting.  Yet Wu himself regarded his 'feeling' 
that China will not fire missiles as a goodwill gesture and a favor 
[for Taiwan].  This is in reality a move of self disparagement and 
disarmament! ... 
 
"Turning cross-Strait [relations] into a domestic issue and turning 
Taiwan into another Hong Kong are strategies to which China 
continues to adhere, and this remains unchanged even after Ma has 
a