08AITTAIPEI1062
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN ARMS SALES
Fri Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1062 2000842
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180842Z JUL 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9543
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8459
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9682UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN ARMS SALES 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage July 18 on U.S. Pacific Commander Admiral Timothy Keating's 
confirmation of the U.S. government's alleged decision to freeze 
arms sales to Taiwan; on the new pension law; and on Tropical Storm 
Kalmaegi's approach.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
op-ed in the pro-unification "United Daily News" talked about 
strategic thinking in China and the United States in light of the 
alleged suspension of U.S.-Taiwan arms sales.  A column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" satirized Taiwan's arms procurement 
from the United States, saying it is like paying protection money. 
The column reminded the Taiwan government to be smart in buying 
weapons and not to waste money.  End summary. 
 
A) "The Reconciliation across the Strait Reveals the U.S. and 
China's Strategic Thinking" 
 
Chen Hsin-chih, an Associate Professor of the Department of 
Political Science at National Cheng Kung University, opined in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (7/18): 
 
"... While the conciliatory atmosphere surrounding cross-Strait 
relations is growing, the picture of the United States and China's 
strategic thinking is clearer.  In the short term, the possibility 
that two hegemonic powers [the United States and China] fight a war 
over Taiwan is decreasing.  As a result, the United States will win 
a period of time to rest and revive.  On the other hand, the Chinese 
Communists can focus on handling various domestic political and 
social conflicts to lay the foundation for the rise of their 
hegemony.  Issues such as trade, human rights and being a 
responsible global stakeholder will be the focus of arguments 
between the United States and China in the future. 
 
"First of all, the easing of tensions across the Strait has 
mitigated the strain between the United States and China.  This 
makes the United States flexible in policies facing China's peaceful 
rise. ... 
 
"Second, the United States' leading status in the world has been 
challenged in recent years.  While the United States uses 
multilateral means to reestablish its leading role, winning mainland 
China's participation will be an indispensable prerequisite.  If the 
United States maneuvers through the international mechanism with 
which it is familiar, mainland China will be a boost, not an 
obstruction, to help the United States revive.  Because of the 
Chinese Communists' positive engagement, the United States was able 
to obtain the diplomatic achievement of North Korea's eventual 
denuclearization.  Because of the Chinese Communists' assistance, 
the window to deal with the Darfur crisis in Sudan was opened. 
Sacrificing future cooperative opportunities between the United 
States and mainland China because of Taiwan is more a loss than a 
gain.  The mitigation of cross-Strait tension reduces the United 
States' political and military costs, which [the United States] 
spends to stabilize global circumstances. 
 
"Third, using military means to prevent Taiwan from changing the 
status-quo might ruin the Chinese Communists' opportunity to have a 
peaceful rise.  Dealing with the Taiwan issue peacefully might draw 
a new roadmap for [China's] hegemonic rise.  The thaw of 
cross-Strait relations reduces the possibility of two powers, China 
and the United States, fighting a war directly on the Taiwan Strait. 
 Mainland China will not sacrifice its achievements of its 
thirty-year economic reform.  Moreover, [mainland China] will 
enhance its international image and win a better opportunity to 
become the next hegemonic power with better timing in the future. 
..." 
 
B) "A Fine Deed" 
 
Yu Ai-tai wrote in the column "Spicy Apple" of the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (7/18): 
 
"... Taiwan's security relies on the United States' protection, 
which is an embarrassing reality that [Taiwan] must face.  Procuring 
weapons that the United States is willing to sell to Taiwan is more 
like paying protection money [to the United States] than preparing 
for war.  Otherwise, how would the United States always pretend that 
it is worried about the imbalance of military posture across the 
Taiwan Strait, while it actually picks outdated arms to sell to 
Taiwan? ..." 
 
WANG