08AITTAIPEI266
MEDIA REACTION: KOSOVO INDEPENDENCE
Tue Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0266 0570811
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260811Z FEB 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8209
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7865
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9126UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000266 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: KOSOVO INDEPENDENCE 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage February 26 on the March presidential poll and the UN 
referenda; on the rise of Taiwan's stock index and the recent 
appreciation of the New Taiwan Dollar; and on the 80th Academy 
Awards held in Los Angeles Sunday.  The pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" front-paged an exclusive news story saying that the U.S. 
military has recommended that Taiwan seek help through the 
U.S.-Taiwan mutual legal assistance agreement (MLAA) in order to 
remain abreast of the ongoing investigation of the Chinese espionage 
case in the United States.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, 
a "Liberty Times" editorial discussed Kosovo's recent declaration of 
independence and said that Kosovo's is a "general case," not a 
special case [as the U.S. and other countries have said], for 
countries and peoples suffering from oppression.  An editorial in 
the conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post," 
however, said "Beijing should learn from Serbia's non-violent 
approach toward Kosovo's independence move."  End summary. 
 
A) "Kosovo Independence Is a General Case, Not a Special One" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (2/26): 
 
"... The most noteworthy case is the United States.  Washington is 
one of the key players that have immediately acknowledged Kosovo's 
nation-founding move; it did so even at the risk of offending 
Russia.  Yet in her statement recognizing Kosovo's independence, 
U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice added superfluously that 
Kosovo is a special case which cannot be seen as a precedent for 
other [similar] situations in the world now.  Rice cited the breakup 
of the former Yugoslavia, the history of ethnic cleansing and 
serious crimes against civilians in Kosovo to emphasize that 
Kosovo's situation is unique.  What Rice did not mention was that, 
when it comes to Kosovo's independence, the United States' major 
concern was that a majority of the Albanians in Kosovo are Muslim, 
so Washington's immediate recognition of Kosovo was a gesture of 
goodwill toward the Islamic world.  What is of equal importance is 
that, since both Russia and China are facing calls for independence 
inside their countries, the United States did not want to irritate 
excessively these two countries that are the strongest opponents of 
Kosovo's independence.  In any case, each country has its unique 
situation.  There is still a chance for other territories seeking 
independence to pave the way toward their goals, as long as they can 
unite their strength against other countries' [opposition], and as 
long as it meets the United States' strategic interests. ...  Based 
on this, Kosovo's internal solidarity and strong will are essential 
factors for Taiwan on the latter's road to resist China's 
annexation.  Kosovo's eventual independence should be viewed as a 
general case, not a special one, for countries and peoples that are 
under oppression." 
 
B) "Kosovo a Lesson for Beijing" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (2/26): 
 
"... Beijing has consistently declared that negotiation and 
dialogue, not unilateral action, is the correct way to resolve the 
Kosovo issue.  China has a panoply of diplomatic, political and 
economic means to peacefully induce the people of Taiwan to embrace 
a relationship with China.  Serbia, in contrast, lacks even a 
fraction of this economic influence over Kosovar Albanians.  Still, 
the Serbian renunciation of violence to retain Kosovo offers lessons 
for Beijing. 
 
"With the possibility that the next president in Taiwan will look 
more favorably on the mainland, it is suggested that Beijing should 
look at new ways to encourage Taipei to reconsider its push for 
independence.  For instance, Beijing could scale back the number of 
flights that its jetfighters regularly make over the Strait, 
announce a freeze in its military buildup across it, and declare a 
freeze on the manufacture of new missiles and on deployment of new 
units to launch them.  In the world today, there are about 2,000 
nationalities in 200 loose states and 20 broadly homogenous 
nation-states.  The emergence of Kosovo as an independent country 
provides an example, which can contribute to a new, peaceful 
paradigm for China and Taiwan.  Dialogue and renunciation of 
violence will better serve China's interests in ensuring a peaceful 
resolution of the Taiwan issue.  Beijing should learn from Serbia's 
non-violence approach toward Kosovo's independence move." 
 
YOUNG