08AITTAIPEI1438
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN,
Sun Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1438/01 2792256
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 052256Z OCT 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0073
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8634
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0082UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001438 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. ARMS SALES TO TAIWAN, 
U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage October 3 on a order by Taiwan's Department of Health 
Thursday to remove from shelves more dairy products from China that 
were found to be contaminated with melamine; on the U.S. Senate's 
approval of a revised US$700 billion bailout bill Thursday; and on 
the probe into the alleged money-laundering case involving former 
President Chen Shui-bian.  The centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" 
in the meantime, ran a banner headline one page thirteen reading 
"U.S. Media:  Arms Sales to Taiwan to Be Sent to Congress Today." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an op-ed in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" said that Washington froze its arms 
sales in order to punish Taiwan for the news leak of the "two noes" 
(remarks that "Liberty Times" said AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt 
made in late August, which the State Department has since refuted), 
which was viewed by Washington as a heinous move to sow discord 
between Washington and Beijing.  An op-ed in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" said that, given the Ma Ying-jeou Administration's 
pro-China practices, it seems natural that Washington would distrust 
Taipei and reject its arms sales to Taiwan.  An op-ed in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," written by a 
Western commentator, called on the new U.S. administration, whether 
it be led by Obama or McCain, to send a clear signal to China 
asserting that "it will help defend Taiwan in case of a Chinese 
threat or attack."  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S. Arms Sales to Taiwan 
 
A) "The United States Freezes Arms Sales to Punish Taiwan for Sowing 
Discord [between China and the United States]" 
 
Dr. Emerson Chang, Director of Nan Hua University's Department of 
International Studies, opined in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 520,000] (10/3): 
 
"... Even though the Ma Administration has conveyed via many 
political VIPs its determination to purchase weapons from the United 
States, what really makes Washington take to heart is perhaps the 
news leak of the 'two noes.'  It is likely that the authorities at 
the State Department felt that they had been betrayed by Taiwan, and 
they believe that it is a heinous crime to sow discord between China 
and the United States, so they decided to retaliate by freezing arms 
deals [to Taiwan].  The Pentagon may not be aware of what was going 
on, so as it stands, the Pentagon is enthusiastic about the arms 
sales, while the State Department has decided to put it on hold. 
 
"Should this be the case, the Ma Administration must justify the 
news leak to the United States if it wants to secure the arms deals 
before President Bush steps down.  Judging from the remarks given by 
high-ranking State Department officials lately, Washington seems to 
be expecting [Taipei's action] and has yet to block entirely the 
possibility of arms sales.  Of course the Ma Administration can 
ignore [Washington's expectations] and quietly wait for the change 
of administration in the United States.  If so, perhaps Taipei 
should no longer keep any hope for the [approval of the] arms 
procurements." 
 
B) "National Security Should Take Priority over Blue and Green" 
 
Yeh Chih-chien, a student at Tamkang University's Graduate Institute 
of International Affairs and Strategic Studies, opined in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 700,000] (10/3): 
 
"Just think that in late 2006 the United States had many times sent 
AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young to lobby Taiwan in the hope to 
facilitate the arms deals between the United States and Taiwan.  But 
what happened lately was that the arms procurements proposal had 
been sent to the White House, and the White House has failed to 
approve it.  Is it really because of the incompetence of the 
[former] DPP administration, as claimed by the Ma Administration, 
which has resulted in the zero mutual trust between Taipei and 
Washington? 
 
"The Ma Administration should ponder whether its own policy and 
practice have seriously violated the mutual and common interests 
between the United States and Taiwan.  Previously, Washington had 
been proactive in providing national defense weapons to Taiwan in an 
attempt to integrate Taiwan into the Pacific line of defense of the 
U.S. military.  But given that the recent practice of the Ma 
Administration seems to demonstrate that it intends to proclaim 
allegiance to China, [Washington might think that] its strategic 
interests will eventually be ruined in the Taiwan Strait if Taiwan 
suddenly decides to cooperate or unify with China.  Washington, as a 
result, will surely distrust Taiwan, and it thus seems reasonable 
for it to reject the arms sales to Taiwan. ..." 
 
¶4. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
"US Must Send China a Clear Signal" 
 
Gerrit van der Wees, editor of Washington-based "Taiwan Communiqu," 
opined in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] (10/3): 
 
"... The Bush administration compounded its mistakes last year and 
this year when it launched a veritable campaign against Taiwan's UN 
referendum - which was held concurrent with the presidential 
election in March - even with people like Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice expressing "opposition" to the referendum.  What 
went wrong? For one thing, the US was preoccupied by Iraq and 
Afghanistan and let itself believe that it needed to accommodate 
China to resolve a number of other fires burning in the world: North 
Korea, Tibet, Burma, Iran, Sudan and Zimbabwe.  China was able to 
capitalize on the US' desire to put out these fires, but at the same 
time kept them burning in order to gain more concessions from the 
US. 
 
"The Bush administration thus let itself be used by China to 
undermine democracy in Taiwan and put the future of the country in 
question. What is needed from a new US administration - whether it 
is led by Obama or his Republican rival John McCain - is a clear 
signal by the US that it will help defend Taiwan in the case of a 
Chinese threat or attack. This is in the spirit of the Taiwan 
Relations Act, and we should stick to it.  We also need to emphasize 
the right of Taiwan to be a full and equal member in the 
international community. Any talk about only support for 
participation in organizations "that do not require statehood" 
undermines Taiwan's position and is not befitting the US - a nation 
that portrays itself as the leader of the democratic world.  Both 
Taiwan and Georgia are examples of countries that have achieved 
democracy against great odds. If the US wants to expand democracy in 
the world, it needs to work harder to get these democracies into the 
mainstream of the international community. At the same time, it 
needs to convince the large - and less-than-democratic - neighbors 
that peace and stability can only be achieved if they let their 
small neighbors next door live and prosper in peace." 
 
YOUNG