09AITTAIPEI122
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0122/01 0361010
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051010Z FEB 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0837
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8904
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0356UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000122 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused 
February 5 news coverage on the island's sagging economy, on the 
ongoing probe into former President Chen Shui-bian's legal cases, 
and on thousands of people in Taiwan paying homage to Dharma Master 
Sheng Yen, who passed away Tuesday.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, a column in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" 
discussed the options that U.S. President Barack Obama has in the 
wake of Pyongyang's recent announcement to annul all its agreements 
signed with Seoul.  An op-ed piece in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times," on the other hand, discussed 
U.S.-China-Taiwan relations and said only that by "maintaining a 
positive and balanced relationship with the U.S. and China" can 
Taiwan ensure that its "best national interests are met."  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. North Korea 
 
"Obama's Options in terms of the [United States'] Korean Policy" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 150,000] wrote (2/4): 
 
"In the wake of an announcement that it would annul all the 
agreements it signed with Seoul, Pyongyang stepped up its rhetoric 
by saying that 'a military conflict and war that is unpreventable 
and inevitable' will likely be triggered between South Korea and the 
North. South Korean President Lee Myung-bak appeared to be quite 
composed [with regard to Pyongyang's statement].  Why?  This is 
because he is awaiting Washington's reaction. ... 
 
"Pyongyang, without a doubt, is clearly aware of the United States' 
position.  Given that the South Korean government has abandoned the 
attempt to reconcile [with Pyongyang] and tensions have escalated 
again on the Korean Peninsula, Pyongyang certainly would not let 
Washington get what it wants.  Instead, it wants to push the tension 
to its extreme and force the United States to show the 'true colors' 
of its [Korean] policy.  Lee's gambling stake, as it turned out, was 
bet on the fact that Washington does not want to see tensions 
[completely] eradicated on the Korean Peninsula.  Japan, of course, 
prefers that the United States remain tough and North Korea and the 
South break off their reconciliation efforts.  As a result, [U.S. 
President Barack] Obama is facing a multiple-choice question:  He 
can either admit the fact that Pyongyang is in possession of nuclear 
weapons and start negotiations on such a basis, or he can disregard 
Pyongyang's warnings and be prepared to cope with increased 
likelihood of military conflicts on the Korean Peninsula.  Whichever 
option he picks, they will both violate [U.S.] strategic principles 
and interest." 
 
¶3. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Balancing Relations with China and the US" 
 
Dr. Alexander Huang, a professor in the Graduate Institute of 
International Affairs and Strategic Studies at Tamkang University, 
opined in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (2/5): 
 
"In a call to Chinese President Hu Jintao 10 days after his 
inauguration, US President Barack Obama promised cooperation between 
the two powerhouses and expressed hopes of building more 
constructive relations. Only by maintaining a positive and balanced 
relationship with the US and China can our government ensure that 
Taiwan's best national interests are met. ...  China plays a 
significant role in the US government's economic and financial 
policies. However, there is a difference in how Obama and Hu protect 
their interests. While Obama stressed the need to correct global 
trade imbalances and stimulate economic growth and restore credit 
markets, Hu opposed trade and investment protectionism as ways of 
solving the crisis. ... 
 
"How the US and China handle their economic and trade relations will 
also indirectly affect the prospects of Taiwanese businesspeople in 
China as well as the nation's economic cooperation agreement with 
China.  Media have reported that Obama and Hu seemed to avoid 
discussing human rights, religion and Taiwan. This might lead 
pessimists to assume that the Obama administration will not pay 
sufficient attention to relations with Taiwan or stand up for US 
founding values, such as democracy and freedom.  But those concerned 
about Taiwan-US relations should keep two key points in mind. First, 
the US and China are big countries with global clout, and 
cross-strait issues are not always the primary concern in their 
complex web of relationships on the global, regional and bilateral 
level. 
 
"Second, Obama's conversation with Hu focused on the most pressing 
issues between the two countries. Having Taiwan as a focal point of 
US-China relations for the past 13 years has not necessarily been a 
blessing for the Taiwanese public or the nation's interests.  There 
is now an opportunity for a thaw in cross-strait relations, and this 
also sets the conditions for restoring mutual trust in Taiwan-US 
relations. Taiwan's government and opposition should prioritize the 
interests and well-being of the public and strive for sustainable 
economic development to create a healthy, win-win-win situation for 
the US, China and Taiwan early in Obama's presidency." 
 
YOUNG