09AITTAIPEI423
MEDIA REACTION: G-20, NORTH KOREA
Wed Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0423/01 0980905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080905Z APR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1345
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9101
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0537UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000423 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: G-20, NORTH KOREA 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused April 8 
news coverage on the ongoing investigations into former President 
Chen Shui-bian and his family's legal cases; on Taiwan's economic 
situation; on developments in cross-Strait relations; and on the 
Pentagon's new defense budget proposal unveiled Monday.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, a column in the pro-unification "United 
Daily News" discussed the recently concluded G-20 summit in London 
and said that China is now the anchor for the world's economic 
stability, a role that no other country can ignore.  A column in the 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" said 
the talk of "G-2, involving only the United States and China, is not 
only premature but also unwise," and it will not sit well with the 
world.  With regard to North Korea, a column in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" called Pyongyang the winner in a four-hand 
card game with Washington, Tokyo and Seoul.  A separate "China 
Times" column, however, said that what will really give U.S. 
President Barack Obama a headache over the next four or eight years 
is Iran's development of nuclear weapons and the turmoil in Pakistan 
and Afghanistan.  End summary. 
 
¶2. G-20 
 
A) "China Is Sitting, with the United States Standing aside" 
 
The "United Notes" column in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
[circulation: 400,000] wrote (4/8): 
 
"... The financial tsunami [swept the world], with the United States 
being the epicenter and the chief culprit.  Now the whole world is 
fixing its eyes on China, hoping that it will be a savior but also 
fearing that it will be the star of calamity.  The economic growth 
of China in 2009 will be essential as to whether the world will be 
able to heave a sigh of relief.  China is the United States' 
greatest creditor nation; [Chinese Premier] Wen Jiabao had twice 
expressed concern over U.S. government bonds before the [G-20] 
summit, and [U.S. President Barack] Obama was forced to step forward 
and respond [to China's concerns].  China took the lead in 
questioning the [role of] the U.S. dollar, sending Washington 
running around with its hair on fire up to now. [Ed. Note: The 
Taiwanese dialect expression says literally "holding onto one's head 
as it burns."]  [Chinese President] Hu Jintao would not allow Hong 
Kong and Macau to be listed on the gray list of tax havens, and 
Obama had to ask the French president to yield, so that China could 
win both face and substance.  China is now the third-largest economy 
in the world; all the more, it is the anchor for economic stability 
of the world now, yet it never forgets to stamp its feet once in a 
while. ... 
 
"China was sitting [in the center of a group photo taken during the 
G-20 summit], while all the capitalist leaders stood to the side. 
For this moment, only economics is hard facts and top priority. 
Should there be a card called 'ideology' on the political 
negotiation table, it is not even qualified to stand on the 
sidelines now." 
 
B) "G-2 May Not Sit Well with the World" 
 
Columnist Frank Ching wrote in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" [circulation: 30,000] (4/8): 
 
"... China no doubt finds the Obama approach refreshing.  While 
Chinese officials personally liked Bush, Obama is different in that 
he has adopted a tone of humility in his foreign policy, insisting 
that the United States should listen rather than dictate.  He is 
also more willing to treat China as an equal.  The hope on both 
sides is that they will build a long-lasting strategic relationship 
that will enable them to cooperate in dealing with global problems, 
from the financial crisis to climate change. ... 
 
"But problems will inevitably crop up.  One example is the continued 
operation of American surveillance vessels in the South China Sea, 
which meet with Beijing's implacable opposition and, at some point, 
may well result in another confrontation.  Arms sales to Taiwan will 
also continue to be a point of friction.  Talk of a G-2, involving 
only the United States and China, is not only premature but also 
unwise.  Such an arrangement will not go down well with the rest of 
the world, especially with America's allies in Asia and elsewhere. 
There is no need to put in place a Sino-American condominium. But it 
is vitally important two countries talk to each other, to understand 
each other and, if possible, to have a common approach on major 
international issues." 
 
¶3. North Korea 
 
A) "A [Four-Hand] Card Game in Which One Wins the Pot" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 150,000] wrote (4/8): 
 
"A spokesman for the U.S. government said, 'with regard to the 
missile test-firing, North Korea is by no means a winner.  It will 
only become more isolated.'  If Pyongyang is not a winner, then who 
is? ...  This is a [four-hand] card game in which one [player] wins 
the pot, and the only winner is naturally North Korea, which has 
bolstered its prestige and power, tested its technology and elevated 
its bargaining chips for talks.  The joint forces of the United 
States, Japan and South Korea could do nothing about it.  What else 
can Pyongyang be, if not the winner? 
 
"Washington said Pyongyang will become more isolated.  Surely 
Pyongyang does not like to be isolated, but in order to survive and 
grow in strength, it still has to stand up straight, even if it is 
isolated.  As a matter of fact, Pyongyang has more fear of 
Washington, Tokyo and Seoul than the three have of him.  The only 
way for Pyongyang to penetrate the isolation and generate confidence 
is to develop nuclear missiles, which are the only assurance that it 
will not be trampled [by other nations]. ..." 
 
B) "The Globe Is Condemning North Korea, but to No Avail" 
 
Columnist Lin Po-wen noted in his column in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 150,000] (4/8): 
 
"... In reality, North Korea is not the country that gives [U.S. 
President Barack] Obama a real headache. ...  What will really cause 
Obama to continue scratching his head for the next four to eight 
years is Iran's development of nuclear weapons and the chaos in 
Pakistan and Afghanistan.  The biggest difference between North 
Korea and Iran is that the former is already a member of the nuclear 
club, whereas Iran is bent on building nuclear weapons. ...  Iran 
will surely develop nuclear weapons, but under international 
pressure and military threat from Israel, it will likely slow down 
its pace and secretly develop nuclear weapons while dealing with 
countries like the United States and Israel in a perfunctory manner. 
...  Whether Obama will be able to fulfill the goal of stopping Iran 
from building nuclear weapons is unpredictable, but [it is] hard to 
be optimistic at the prospects. ..." 
 
YOUNG