02HARARE1871
NEW REPORTS OF FARM EVICTIONS
Fri Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 001871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/S, AF/EX 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR JFRAZER 
LONDON FOR CGURNEY 
PARIS FOR CNEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON PHUM PGOV ZI
SUBJECT: NEW REPORTS OF FARM EVICTIONS 
 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Commercial Farmers Union (CFU) president David 
Hasluck called on Friday, August 16, to confirm several cases 
of farm eviction throughout the country.  While the overall 
situation remains tense but superficially calm, there are 
scattered instances of official response to the farmers' 
refusal to recognize the GOZ's section 8 ultimatums. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In Matebeleland South, six farmers -- including the 
CFU president for that region --  have reportedly received 
summonses to report to the local police station and clarify 
why they have not yet moved out of their homesteads.  Five of 
the farmers are cattle ranchers, and one has a crop in the 
ground.  All of the six farmers have received section 8 
notices of compulsory acquisition, and all six have refused 
to move off their farms.  According to Hasluck, all of the 
farmers were released on bail of Zim $5,000 each (equivalent 
to US $7.25 at the parallel rate) and remanded to September 6 
for further proceedings. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In Mashonaland Central, the police have reportedly 
been told that they are to begin evicting farmers from their 
land, although the police have not yet begun to follow this 
directive.  It is unclear where this directive has originated. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In Kwekwe, one farmer who has a 400 hectare crop of 
barley growing was forcibly evicted on Thursday by settlers 
on the farm.  Although this was a settler-led action, the 
police were reportedly standing by and observing without 
offering assistance to the farmer.  The farmer was allowed to 
return on Friday to tend his crop.  Hasluck is attempting to 
contact the provincial governor, who in response to the food 
shortage had previously given permission for this farmer to 
plant his crop and had orally assured the farmer that he 
would be allowed to harvest.  Hasluck hopes that an audience 
with the governor will rectify the situation, but the 
governor is currently unavailable and his whereabouts are 
unknown. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment:  Hasluck remains mystified, as do most 
other observers, as to what President Mugabe could have meant 
by his previous comments that loyal farmers will be allowed 
to continue farming, and that every farmer who wanted to farm 
would have land.  It is possible that this is empty rhetoric 
along the lines of previous proclamations that no Zimbabwean 
farmer has been forced off his land.  There is still little 
indication of what official GOZ reaction will be forthcoming 
in response to the farmers' refusal to leave their lands. 
What is certain is that an impasse has been reached, and 
unless an acceptable compromise is offered by one side or the 
other, confrontation -- whether violent or not -- is 
inevitable.  End comment. 
SULLIVAN