02HARARE1963
BIOTECH STILL UNDER FIRE IN ZIMBABWE
Tue Aug 27 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 001963 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PD, AF/S, AF/RA, EB 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
EB FOR U/S LARSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: BIOTECH STILL UNDER FIRE IN ZIMBABWE 
 
 
  ¶1.   Under headline "Distinguishing drought from 
      famine" an op-ed by Tajudeen Abdul-Raheem carried in 
      the August 27 edition of the independent daily "The 
      Daily News," accuses the United States of "cynically 
      exploiting the plight of the starving to create an 
      artificial market for its genetically modified foods." 
      Excerpts: 
 
  ¶2.   "There is famine in a number of southern African 
      countries with Zimbabwe, Malawi, Zambia and Angola 
      more affected than the rest. Whatever the reasons for 
      the famine, people are suffering and they need help. 
      But should this be help at all cost and by whatever 
      means?  I do not think so.  The U.S. Government has 
      been quick to offer help in the form of genetically 
      modified (GM) maize.  Zimbabwe rejected it initially 
      and Angola expressed its concern and only last week 
      Zambia also rejected it.  On the surface it looks like 
      these governments are behaving as though beggars can 
      choose.  With Zimbabwe the demonization of President 
      Mugabe internationally made him `the usual suspect,' 
      but I do not think that everything the government of 
      Zimbabwe or Mugabe does is bad.  There are legitimate 
      issues about GM foods which millions of people in the 
      USA and Europe are unwilling to eat.  Why should 
      Africa be the dumping ground or the experimental 
      laboratory? 
 
      "Humanitarian agencies are claiming that GM 
      foods should be accepted because it is better 
      than nothing and because people are starving. 
      A very persuasive argument at the emotional 
      level, but it does not address the scientific 
      health concerns about GM foods.  Also let us 
      change the context of the appeal.  Imagine a 
      predominantly Muslim country is suffering 
      drought, could the people be persuaded to eat 
      pork on the grounds of this is what is 
      available?  Or could Hindus be white-mailed 
      into eating beef even if it is the only food 
      available?  GM foods are not the only available 
      food surplus in the world and even in Africa 
      itself.  The USA is cynically exploiting the 
      plight of the starving to create an artificial 
      market for its GM foods and promote the 
      corporate sharks pushing this food of dubious 
      nutritional and health value." 
 
      ¶3.  Comment:  Mr. Abdul-Raheem usually writes 
      more reasonable, better-informed opinion 
      pieces.  PAO has responded to the fallacies in 
      this piece and has invited Mr. Abdul-Raheem to 
      discuss biotech and food security issues in 
      greater depth.  We will also invite him to 
      attend the August 30 television interactive 
      program with U/S Larson.  End comment. 
 
SULLIVAN