03HARARE453
MEDIA REACTION IRAQ; HARARE
Tue Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 000453 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR AND AF/PDPA DALTON, MITCHELL AND SIMS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION IRAQ; HARARE 
 
 
  ¶1.   The March 2 edition of the independent weekly "The 
      Standard" carried an article by its United States- 
      based stringer, Ken Mafuka, in which he accused the 
      ¶U. S. of creating policies that could give President 
      George W. Bush unilateral powers to "declare war on 
      any country he regards as harboring terrorists." 
      "For instance, Zimbabwe could find itself declared a 
      terrorist state and therefore excluded from 
      participation in the multi-lateral organizations in 
      which the U. S. has a stake," Mafuka wrote in his 
      weekly column "Americannotes."  Excerpts of the 
      article printed under headline "The two sides of 
      terror" follow: 
 
  ¶2.   "The U. S. has designed two weapons for the war 
      against terror.  The first weapon is called the Patriot Act 
      that allowed the U. S. Government to coordinate the 
      activities of twenty-one spy agencies.  Sharing information 
      enables them to take quick action against possible threats. 
      The second weapon is the Bush Doctrine - which is very 
      contentious.  Defense Secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, and 
      security advisor, Sister Condoleeza Rice are its main 
      supporters.  The doctrine would allow the U. S. to attack 
      and destroy any nation, or unit on the world stage, if the 
      ¶U. S. president decided.  It means that one man, without 
      the approval of Congress can declare war on any country he 
      regards as harboring terrorists.  A memo, which was traced 
      to communications between an Israeli think tank and the 
      Bush cabinet, was leaked.  This memo said after Iraqi, `we 
      can go after Syria, Jordan and Saudi Arabia.'  What is 
      important for the Third World is that the U. S. may declare 
      any country a terrorist state.  This can be done for any 
      number of reasons that have nothing to do with terrorism 
      against the U. S.  For instances, Zimbabwe could find 
      itself declared a terrorist state and therefore excluded 
      from participation in the multi-lateral organizations in 
      which the U. S. has a stake. . . ." 
 
 
SULLIVAN