03HARARE2170
VOA'S STUDIO 7 MAKING WAVES IN ZIMBABWE; HARARE
Fri Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 002170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PDPA FOR DALTON, MITCHELL AND SIMS 
AF FOR RAYNOR 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
VOA/IBB FOR OGULNIK, STEWART, MENGESHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: VOA'S STUDIO 7 MAKING WAVES IN ZIMBABWE; HARARE 
 
  ¶1.   At first glance, Negussie Mengesha's - VOA Program 
      Manager, Africa Division - visit to Zimbabwe seemed 
      difficult, if not impossible.  What stood in his way was 
      the hardnosed anti-VOA Studio 7 rhetoric by the government 
      of Zimbabwe's spokesman, Information Minister Jonathan 
      Moyo.  "Studio 7 will die.  It faces death.  They think we 
      are sleeping, we want to see where they are going with 
      Studio 7," Moyo was quoted as saying recently in the local 
      press.  With statements like this, it appears to be yet 
      another hurdle to be jumped, another myth to be conquered. 
      However, unlike the proverbial angry child who runs away 
      from the demands of home, burning bridges and scattering 
      ashes in its wake, Mengesha flew into Zimbabwe on October 
      19, only to be welcomed by Nathan Shamuyarira, ZANU PF 
      Secretary for Information and Publicity, and saluted by the 
      leader of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change 
      (MDC) Morgan Tsvangirai, before hobnobbing with Zimbabwe's 
      most polished journalists, media watchdogs and recording 
      companies. 
 
  ¶2.   To his surprise and eventual pleasure, notwithstanding 
      the sad arrest of Studio 7 stringer Moreblessing Zulu 
      (later released without charge), Mengesha was drenched with 
      positive feedback about the "very informative station." 
      Much like the slow but persistent tortoise that eventually 
      outran the swifter hare in the ancient African fable, 
      Studio 7 - after a few uncomfortable broadcasts - has 
      inched steadily ahead after hitting the airwaves in 
      Zimbabwe eight months ago.  He was informed of modest gains 
      in the number of listeners in both rural and urban 
      settings, especially after the closure of Zimbabwe's only 
      independent daily newspaper "The Daily News" by the 
      government of Zimbabwe on September 12, 2003 following a 
      Supreme Court declaration that the paper was operating 
      outside the law.  The ever-increasing cover cost of 
      mainstream newspapers is also driving bountiful news 
      consumers to listen to Studio 7's "timely, accurate. and 
      balanced" news programs. 
 
  ¶3.   Mr. Mengesha paid a courtesy call on Mr. Sunsleey 
      Chamunorwa, Editor-in-Chief of the independent 
      weekly "The Financial Gazette."  Mr. Chamunorwa fell 
      hook, line and sinker over a proposal by Mr. 
      Mengesha to introduce an Editor's Forum program when 
      the station starts airing programs seven days a 
      week.  Mr. Bornwell Chakaodza, Editor of the 
      independent weekly "The Standard", also backed the 
      idea.   Chakaodza even volunteered to be on the 
      panel without any hesitation.  All editors gave 
      kudos to Studio 7 and encouraged the station to 
      continue striving for excellence and balanced 
      reporting, adding, they are prepared to carry Studio 
      7 adverts in their newspapers.  Mengesha also 
      touched base with officials from the Zimbabwe 
      Chapter of the Media Institute of Southern Africa 
      (MISA) during a luncheon arranged at USAID.  He also 
      met with the editorial team of the Media Monitoring 
      Project at the same venue.  Issues discussed during 
      these meetings covered the welfare of journalists in 
      Zimbabwe, press freedom, and how the controversial 
      Access to Information and Protection of Privacy Act 
      (AIPPA) is affecting journalists, especially those 
      working for the independent press or foreign media. 
      With the Studio 7 music library in mind, Mr. 
      Mengesha also visited two recording companies in 
      Harare  - Zimbabwe Music Corporation and Ngaavongwe 
      Records.  The two recording companies expressed 
      interest in providing Studio 7 with the latest 
      information on the top selling local albums and 
      songs. 
 
  ¶4.   The meeting with opposition Movement for Democratic 
      Change (MDC) leader Morgan Tsvangirai was a 
      brilliant eye opener.  According to Mr. Tsvangirai, 
      people in outlying areas are surprisingly listening 
      to Studio 7.  "One old man at one of my rallies in a 
      remote part of Zimbabwe boldly asked me to grant 
      more interviews to Studio 7," he disclosed to Mr. 
      Mengesha.  Mr. Tsvangirai took his hat off to Studio 
      7 "for its Herculean, successful efforts to spread 
      the news about Zimbabwe, from Zimbabwe, by 
      Zimbabweans to fellow Zimbabweans." 
 
  ¶5.   You don't need an overload of cash to get an overload 
      of performance from stringers.  The VOA training program 
      for the stringers in Johannesburg, South Africa and the 
      visit to the "war zone" by "General" Negussie Mengesha, 
      encouraged and overjoyed the stringers.  In the true spirit 
      of a Marvin Gaye song - Brother, brother, brother. . .You 
      know we've got to find a way to bring some loving here. . 
      .What's going on? - Zimbabweans know that truth is going 
      on, on Studio 7.  And hope.  And a balanced source of news 
      that gives listeners a front row seat on events happening 
      in Zimbabwe. 
 
  ¶6.   So, congratulations and please keep on keeping on. 
      Because without an objective alternative voice, 
      Zimbabweans will cease to be informed, especially in 
      an environment where state-controlled media has a 
      print and electronic monopoly.  Keep it going for 
      Zimbos! 
 
SULLIVAN