03HARARE1133
MEDIA REACTION MASS ACTION IN ZIM; HARARE
Wed Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

041255Z Jun 03UNCLAS HARARE 001133 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PDPA DALTON, MITCHELL AND SIMS AND AF/S RAYNOR 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION MASS ACTION IN ZIM; HARARE 
 
 
  ¶1.   Editorials in the June 4 editions of the two national 
      dailies - the independent  "Daily News" and the government- 
      controlled  "Herald," continue to focus on the on-going 
      nationwide anti-government protests that are expected to 
      end on Friday, June 6.  The demonstrations, organized by 
      the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), have 
      kept the country at a standstill since Monday.  Excerpts: 
 
  ¶2.   Under headline "Crushing protests not the solution" 
      the independent daily "The Daily News" (06/04) comments: 
 
      "In forcefully crushing the street protests of the 
      opposition MDC this week, President Robert Mugabe's 
      government also unwittingly tied a burdensome and 
      tricky knot around its neck.  By authorizing the 
      deployment of thousands of army troops and police to 
      snuff out the protests just as they were being 
      launched, the government could find itself facing a 
      dilemma of when to pull out these forces from the 
      streets, if at all. . .Indeed, can the use of 
      military might alone buy the government more time in 
      power, in the face of overwhelming public discontent 
      with its rule. . .?  Unfortunately, the hardening 
      positions of both the government and the MDC, let 
      alone the poisoned timing, do not favor meaningful 
      inter-party talks that must necessarily focus on 
      governance issues that have triggered Zimbabwe's 
      collapse. . .A harsh military clampdown on protests 
      by concerned citizens certainly does not offer a 
      lasting solution." 
 
  ¶3.   Under headline "Tsvangirai overestimating popularity" 
      the government-controlled daily "The Herald" (06/04) 
      comments: 
 
      "Monday marked the beginning of what MDC leader 
      Morgan Tsvangirai and his Western handlers hoped 
      would be a week of mass demonstrations tailored to 
      topple the democratically elected government of 
      President Robert Mugabe.  Well, that did not happen 
      and once again Tsvangirai was left with egg in the 
      face.  His Western handlers, who we understand 
      poured billions of dollars into the futile exercise, 
      must be particularly red in the face. . .No, 
      Tsvangirai, Zimbabweans don't need your 
      sacrifice. . .We think Tsvangirai is overestimating 
      his popularity and fear that he will get a nasty 
      jolt come presidential polls in 2008.  We join other 
      peace-loving Zimbabweans in congratulating our 
      security forces for rising to the occasion and 
      ensuring that misguided elements do not rampage 
      through our cities, destroying property and looting, 
      as is their wont." 
 
SULLIVAN