04HARARE1210
WORKING WITH WILDLIFE
Thu Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/S 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR JFRAZER 
USDOC FOR AMANDA HILLIGAS 
TREASURY FOR OREN WYCHE-SHAW 
PASS USTR FLORIZELLE LISER 
STATE PASS USAID FOR MARJORIE COPSON 
STATE PASS USDOI/FWS FOR KARL STROMEYER 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID BTIO EINV ECON PGOV ZI
SUBJECT: WORKING WITH WILDLIFE 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  As expected, perspectives of the World 
Wildlife Fund differ from GOZ's National Parks and 
Wildlife Authority on the state of wildlife, 
conservancies, land nationalization, and the proposed 
Trans-Frontier Park. Despite National Parks' positive 
picture, the once exemplary wildlife management regime is 
rapidly degrading due to mismanagement and emigration of 
experienced persons. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) EconOff spoke with Raoul DuToit of the World 
Wildlife Fund and Dr. M.Z. Mtsambiwa, Director General of 
the National Parks and Wildlife Authority, about the 
environmental situation in Zimbabwe. DuToit was generally 
pessimistic and Mtsambiwa optimistic about his agency and 
GOZ's ability to manage wildlife and reluctant to engage 
frankly with the Embassy. 
 
  THE CONSERVANCIES 
  ------------------ 
¶3. (SBU) Settlers have encroached upon large sections of 
Save Valley Conservancy's southern portion while the 
northern section has been spared thus far. Poaching, 
while continuing, is not a big issue as settlers who have 
moved cattle onto the land are no longer putting up 
snares. In addition, wildlife in the settled areas have 
either already been killed or moved. DuToit, who visited 
conservancy areas in May and June 2004, believes Save 
Valley's natural animal replacement levels make up for 
the poaching and settlement losses. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Chiredzi River Conservancy has poaching camps 
in the north and individuals cutting down trees to sell 
as firewood in the south. Poaching of animals in this 
area is exceeding natural replacement levels. There are 
also settlements scattered throughout. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Settlers have taken over virtually the entire 
northern section of Bubiana Conservancy. Within the last 
month, a group of settlers invaded the Ripple Creek area. 
Fortunately, authorities removed them. However, the 
settlers appeared very well organized, wearing identical 
T-shirts with Third Chimurenga (a ZANU-PF war veteran 
motto) on them. 
 
INVESTIGATIONS 
--------------- 
¶6. (SBU) According to the July 16, 2004 Zimbabwe 
Independent, The National Parks and Wildlife Authority's 
Matetsi area Warden, Thomas Chimedza, apparently made a 
$55 million deal with a well-known safari operator and 
certain South African safari companies, including Out of 
Africa, for illegal hunting in Matetsi. 
 
¶7. (SBU) National Parks Director of Operations Vitalis 
Chadenga is also reportedly under investigation regarding 
various deals for moving and hunting sable. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Dr. Mtsambiwa would not comment about on-going 
investigations, except to say that all who violate their 
duties will be prosecuted vigorously. He also mentioned 
that at least one case has been forwarded on to the 
police (although he would not specify which case). 
 
LAND NATIONALIZATION 
--------------------- 
¶9. (SBU) Kenya wants to upgrade all lions to Appendix I 
of the CITES regime based upon a research study done in 
Hwange National Park in Zimbabwe. Lions were shown to be 
over-hunted. DuToit mentioned the ramifications regarding 
hunting trophies should lions receive the extra 
protection and GOZ fail to meet its obligations. Chadenga 
was infuriated and proceeded to rant about how this was a 
plot by the West to get back at Zimbabwe for land reform. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Mtsambiwa contradicted DuToit on the Kenya 
request, stating that lions in southern Africa are faring 
very well and should not be listed on Appendix I. If 
Kenya feels that lions are not doing well in East Africa, 
then only those lions should be added to Appendix I. He 
mentioned nothing about the study in Hwange. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Mtsambiwa also suggested that international 
hunters from the West and South Africa colluded with 
former farmers to destroy wildlife. This, he argued, was 
a means to get back at Zimbabwe for land reform. He also 
expressed concern about subsistence killing of wildlife. 
 
¶12. (SBU) NGOs who were involved in the pre-policy 
discussions over land nationalization are looking to 
publicly protest GOZ's announced position of 99-year and 
25-year leases. DuToit said GOZ is using the NGOs as 
window dressing to support a policy that veers away from 
the principles initially agreed upon. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Mtsambiwa expressed optimism that the 25-year 
lease scheme could work very well. He pointed out that 
hunting safari operators currently operate under 
renewable 5-year concessions and turn profits. He saw no 
problem with using the 25-year leases as collateral for 
capital investments. However, he did acknowledge that the 
National Parks would have to increase patrols and 
watchdog operations to ensure individual lessees do not 
take what they can from the land and leave nothing for 
the next tenants. Mtsambiwa suggested that 10 years was 
enough time to profit from a wildlife safari business. 
 
TRANS-FRONTIER PARK 
--------------------- 
¶14. (SBU) The June 25 Zimbabwe Independent reported on 
the postponement of a national coordinator for the 
Transfrontier National Park. Then, on July 4, 2004, the 
Sunday Mail reported on National Parks' moving ahead with 
infrastructure improvements in Gonarezhou National Park. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Mtsambiwa explained the apparent reversal of 
policy as an administrative matter.  He explained that 
the initial job offer for the coordinator position was 
only advertised within the National Parks offices and 
there were not any qualified applicants. The delay in 
appointment was to allow a wider circulation of the job 
announcement. He assured EconOff that the position has 
now been filled and three deputy regional coordinators 
would seek other trans-frontier parks along the border. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The National Parks have Z$1.2 billion (approx. 
US$226,415) for renovations and improvements at 
Gonarezhou National Park. This money will be evenly 
divided between electrification, road improvements, and 
building of staff houses and tourist camps. Mtsambiwa 
stated the National Parks needed about Z$6 billion 
(approx. US$1,132,075) to complete the renovations. 
 
¶17. (SBU) DuToit raised concerns about GOZ's ability 
to participate equally with South Africa and Mozambique 
to create the large wildlife area. He also mentioned 
issues regarding each country's desire to keep out 
wildlife diseases of the other countries. Mtsambiwa only 
said that a special veterinary committee is looking into 
the problems of cross-spreading diseases. 
 
¶18. (SBU) COMMENT: Zimbabwe's economic future is tied to 
a large extent to wildlife preservation in national parks 
and conservancies. Despite Mtsambiwa's upbeat assessment, 
chaotic land reform and GOZ underfunding have caused a 
significant decline in wildlife. As settlers move onto 
national park and conservancy lands, the space for 
wildlife decreases and the flora and fauna required for 
their survival disappears. Zimbabwe still retains some of 
its previously exemplary wildlife management structures. 
However, this knowledge base is disappearing rapidly 
through infrastructure degradation, emigration, and 
continued haphazard GOZ land acquisition and usage 
policies. 
 
Sullivan