04HARARE1970
HARARE UPDATE ON INTERIM ASSESSMENT FOR SPECIAL
Mon Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
AF/S FOR BNEULING 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR C. COURVELLE, D. TEITELBAUM 
INL/CTR 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KCRM KWMN ZI TIP
SUBJECT: HARARE UPDATE ON INTERIM ASSESSMENT FOR SPECIAL 
WATCHLIST COUNTRIES 
 
REF: HARARE 1878 
 
¶1. (U)  SUMMARY:  The GOZ and Interpol's Subregional Bureau 
for Southern Africa jointly held a Regional Working Meeting 
on Trafficking in Human Beings in Harare on November 29-30. 
The Embassy sent observers to the meeting, at which officials 
articulated GOZ interest in developing anti-TIP legislation, 
public education, and law enforcement efforts.  On December 
2, poloffs met with Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) and MFA 
officials, who elaborated on Zimbabwe's TIP situation.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) The regional working meeting was attended by 
representatives from immigration and police of several 
regional governments, international organizations, and one 
local NGO dealing with child trafficking victims.  GOZ sent 
officials from the immigration department, attorney general's 
office, and Zimbabwe Republic Police.  We learned that GOZ is 
making some progress on anti-TIP efforts, especially in 
efforts to cooperate regionally and internationally. 
 
¶3. (U) At the meeting, ZRP officials presented a list of 
recommendations for the Government, including further 
regional cooperation, bilateral law enforcement 
investigations on cross-border trafficking, anti-TIP 
legislation, and training for law enforcement.  An official 
from the attorney general's office also told us that the 
office is planning an anti-TIP educational program for 
prosecutors and judges to help address TIP-related issues in 
prosecutions under existing law. 
 
¶4. (U) GOZ officials reiterated Zimbabwe's intent to ratify 
the Trafficking Protocol of the United National Transnational 
Organized Crime convention.  Officials also told us that the 
GOZ is collaborating on a Southern African Development 
Community (SADC) effort with the International Organization 
of Migration and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
to develop a regional declaration on trafficking in persons 
and to develop a plan of action.  The plan of action would 
focus first on assessment of the scope of the problem in the 
region, which remains unclear, and then on developing 
anti-TIP legislation. 
 
¶5. (U) Interpol Inspector and program host Sam Fernandos, who 
invited us to send observers, asked poloff to speak at the 
meeting about the June 2004 Trafficking in Persons Report. 
We gave a brief overview of the report, the tier system, and 
the findings on Zimbabwe, and stressed that the USG sought to 
cooperate with other governments on this shared interest. 
Several meeting members asked for a copy of the report. 
 
¶6. (U) On December 2, we attended a meeting with Stephen 
Mutamba, the Commanding Officer of ZRP's Criminal 
Investigative Division (CID), other CID officials, and 
Georgina Kwesha from the Consular Department of MFA.  Mutamba 
said that TIP is a new area of regional cooperation.  He said 
the scope of the problem in Zimbabwe was not known but, to 
the best of his knowledge, Zimbabwe was largely a transit 
country and victims were usually undocumented foreigners who, 
when discovered by law enforcement, were turned over to the 
immigration department for deportation.  Immigration 
officials at the Interpol workshop noted that they had been 
cooperating with regional counterparts to thwart illegal 
trafficking of persons through Zimbabwe from East Africa to 
south Africa.  They emphasized that the GOZ knew little about 
the dimensions of TIP problems within its borders but 
conciousness of the potential problems was growing. 
 
¶7. (U) Andrew Kadungure, another CID official, said that 
information about trafficking was often anecdotal and 
difficult to investigate.  Kadungure offered as an example 
the case of two Pakistani girls who were brought to Zimbabwe 
where, together with two ethnic Indian Zimbabweans, they were 
victimized by a pornography ring.  CID efforts to investigate 
foundered on a conspiracy of silence among the victims' 
parents and the Asian community, who apparently were 
concerned about stigmatization.  The CID officials stressed 
the need for greater intelligence about trafficking and asked 
for any information we could provide that would help CID 
investigate domestically or to cooperate transnationally. 
 
¶8. (U) The CID officials said another TIP concern for 
Zimbabwe related to false job offer scams in Europe and North 
America.  Victims travel from Zimbabwe to the destination 
country where their passports are confiscated and they are 
debt-bonded. Zimbabwean officials only learn of these cases 
when the victims are assisted by citizens in the destination 
countries and eventually return home. The day after our 
meeting, December 3, the official Herald newspaper carried a 
front page story on Zimbabwean women believed dead in Kenya 
after a Kenyan man reportedly confessed that he lured the 
women there, along with other nationals from the region, with 
fraudulent promises of work for a Canadian hotel group.  CID 
officials emphasized the need for action by law enforcement 
authorities in destination countries to thwart such criminal 
enterprises.  They welcomed information from the USG and 
others that could offer the basis for actions against 
malefactors in Zimbabwe. 
 
¶9. (U) Both the CID officials and Kwesha responded 
enthusiastically to the idea of a media awareness campaign. 
Zimbabwean radio, TV, and print media already carry public 
awareness spots on related topics, and the officials felt 
that raising public awareness would lead to greater 
information for law enforcement.  Kwesha suggested that MFA 
would publicize TIP concerns through Zimbabwe's embassies. 
The officials asked for examples of public awareness 
materials used in other countries. 
 
¶10. (SBU) COMMENT and ACTION REQUEST:  The GOZ's TIP 
awareness seems to be increasing.  The CID and MFA officials 
responded to the December 2 meeting enthusiastically, and 
this meeting may serve as a basis for further cooperation 
with law enforcement and MFA.  Based on comments at the 
November 29-30 Interpol workshop and the December 2 meeting, 
GOZ's future efforts seem likely to be focused on regional 
cooperation.  We appreciate and urge Department's continued 
provision of TIP-related materials to share with the GOZ. Any 
TIP publicity materials would be especially useful as we 
follow up with GOZ sources on a possible media campaign.  END 
COMMENT. 
DELL