09BAGHDAD2832
OPERATION IRAQI BASEBALL: TIGRIS TIGERS VISIT EMBASSY
Thu Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2832/01 2950752
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220752Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5183
INFO RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0097
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0005
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0045
RUEHDG/AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO 0010
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0021
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0040
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 2285UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002832 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL CVIS
SUBJECT: OPERATION IRAQI BASEBALL: TIGRIS TIGERS VISIT EMBASSY 
 
REF: STATE 90799 
 
¶1. Summary: In support of Section IV of the Strategic Framework 
Agreement, PAS hosts a number of cultural and social exchanges to 
forge stronger connections between our citizens, with particular 
emphasis on youth.  Baseball and softball are two sports that are 
central to our culture and form the basis for wide ranging social 
and personal exchanges.  To encourage such exchanges in Iraq, PAS is 
engaging with the nascent Iraq Baseball Federation.  Post hopes to 
send Iraqi baseball players and coaches to the U.S. on a Sports 
Visitor program and, eventually, to welcome a baseball Sports 
Envoy. 
 
 
¶2.  The Ambassador hosted members of the Iraq National baseball 
team, the "Tigris Tigers," along with several of the Tigers women's 
softball team members for lunch and some fielding and hitting drills 
on October 10.  Baseball and softball are not widely known in Iraq, 
but with recent support from U.S. donors, the Embassy and Major 
League Baseball, there is a chance that the sports could begin to 
flourish.   End Summary. 
 
Play Ball! 
 
¶3.  The Baghdad-based Tigris Tigers, recently outfitted by the 
generosity of U.S. uniform company Ebbets Field, had no equipment 
until their plight was highlighted this summer in several McClatchy 
articles and their cause was then championed by Rachel Maddow on 
MSNBC.  At an Embassy barbecue on October 10, the young Iraqi men 
and women engaged in spirited conversation with embassy officers 
about our national pastime. Sketches of plays, and rules and 
strategies helped bridge the language gap.  Televised highlights of 
U.S. baseball games also provided entertainment.  After lunch, the 
Iraqi baseball and softball players received practical tips from, 
and practiced with, Embassy staff who share their love of the game. 
Eight baseball players and four softball players were accompanied to 
the two and a half hour event by the Secretary General of the Iraq 
Baseball Federation and their coach. 
 
Universal Language of Beisbol 
 
¶4.  The Ambassador, wearing a signed Daisuke Matsuzaka Red Sox 
jersey, told the Iraqi players that the Japanese pitcher had 
succeeded in the major leagues for three years without speaking 
English, noting that it does not take English to throw the ball 
hard.  He lauded the group's efforts to learn a quintessentially 
American game and encouraged them to continue their efforts.  He 
awarded the women's softball team's catcher with an Embassy coin, 
honoring her as MVP of the barbecue and scrimmage - despite a bloody 
nose from a fast pitch, she was smiling when she left the Embassy. 
 
 
Baseball Across Iraq? 
 
¶5.  The Iraq Baseball Federation's Secretary General Ali Abdul 
Hussein Jassim told emboffs that Baghdad, Basra, Maysan, Mosul, 
Diwaniya, and Kirkuk are each home to men's baseball and women's 
softball teams.  (NOTE: The teams are likely little more than a 
group of interested players who meet occasionally.  END NOTE) 
Assistant Coach Yasir Abdul Hassan Mazyan noted that teams face 
difficult conditions; they lack sponsorship and play games in 
sandlots or on soccer fields and have limited regulation equipment. 
Coach Bashar Salah Jabbar recounted how on August 12, 
representatives of McClatchy News Services delivered mitts, cleats, 
bats, and baseballs donated by a New York sporting goods company to 
his team.  Press reports note that the Tigers are the national team 
by dint of having won a tournament versus the other teams in Iraq 
Qby dint of having won a tournament versus the other teams in Iraq 
and were reconstituted from a team that was disbanded during the 
height of the insurgency.  Coach Bashar told emboff that extremists 
threatened him in emails and telephone calls, accusing him and his 
teammates of playing "an 'Occupation' game." 
 
Bases Loaded: Tigers Fans in the MLB 
 
¶6.  On October 7, the bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs 
told post that Major League Baseball (MLB) responded favorably to 
the request for assistance for the Tigers and the Iraq Baseball 
Federation (IBF).  In addition to rule books, instructional videos 
and equipment, MLB pledged to send equipment for adults as well as 
10-14 year olds.  Emboffs are seeking partners at youth centers 
and/or sports clubs to build Iraq's first Little League baseball 
team.  In addition to equipment, Iraq lacks dedicated fields to play 
on.  Post is working with the Iraq Baseball Federation and relevant 
city officials to help secure land for a field. 
 
Spring Training 
 
¶7.  Per ECA's call in reftel, post has applied to send a group of 
Iraqi players and coaches to the U.S. in March 2010 to attend a 
skills camp and observe MLB spring training as part of a sports 
diplomacy program. 
 
Sport in Iraq 
 
¶8.  Soccer remains the king of team sports in Iraq, followed closely 
by basketball and handball.  As we develop more cultural and growth 
exchanges as per the Strategic Framework Agreement, we will continue 
to expand our sports programming to connect to Iraqi youth.  There 
is interest in baseball and with encouragement and some funding, 
prospects to develop baseball in Iraq are looking up. 
 
FORD