09CASABLANCA200
Disney World, Morocco, and Q-1 Visas
Fri Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0200/01 2961334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231334Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8544
INFO RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 8690
RUEHPNH/NVC PORTSMOUTH 1739
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3907
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 0349UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000200 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP - SSEXTON, CA/VO/F/P, NEA/MAG, 
DEPT FOR CA/VO/KCC FOR FPM 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFRD CVIS CPAS MO
SUBJECT: Disney World, Morocco, and Q-1 Visas 
 
Ref A: 00 Casablanca 465, Ref B: 04 Casablanca 1174, Ref C: 
Casablanca 188, Ref D: Rabat 392 
 
¶1. Summary: Overstays by Q-1 visa holders who serve as cultural 
representatives at Disney's EPCOT Center in Orlando, Florida have 
long been a concern.  Post conducted a validation study of Q-1 
recipients issued visas between September 2006 and June 2008.  The 
results confirmed that the overwhelming majority do not return to 
Morocco.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. Q-1 visas are issued to cultural representatives who work in the 
Moroccan Pavilion at Orlando Florida's EPCOT Center (Refs A and B). 
Post regularly sees non-immigrant visa applications from friends and 
family to visit former Q-1 recipients, indicating that many Q-1 
recipients do not return to Morocco.  Post's IV LE supervisor, a Q-1 
alumnus himself, noted that in his Q-1 class, only three returned to 
Morocco (Ref C). 
 
¶3. In August 2009, the National Benefits Center for the Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) contacted post about its concerns 
regarding the high number of I-485s (Request to Establish Permanent 
Residence or Adjust Status) it receives for Moroccan Q-1 recipients. 
 
 
------------------ 
The Applicant Pool 
------------------ 
 
¶4. Refs A and B noted that post communicated with Disney in 2000 and 
2004 about Q-1 overstay trends.  Disney undertook to select 
applicants who were likely to return to Morocco.  The applicants in 
consular interviews today say they undergo a series of interviews 
with recruiters and Disney representatives by phone and in person. 
All applicants currently have some educational or practical training 
in the tourism or hospitality industry.  They can explain aspects of 
Moroccan culture in English.  However, some applicants struggle more 
than others with English. 
 
¶5. Overcoming 214b is the applicants' biggest hurdle.  All are 
single, often students or interns in the hospitality industry, and 
they rarely have previous foreign travel.  As proof of their intent 
to return to Morocco, the majority of applicants give canned answers 
about how they want to take advantage of the Morocco's efforts to 
develop its tourism industry.  They also have similar vague plans to 
open their own five-star Moroccan restaurants or hotels (See Ref D 
regarding the effects of the world economic crisis on Morocco's 
ambitious plans to increase tourist facilities.)  Not all applicants 
receive their visas; 37 Q-1 applicants were refused under 214b 
during the same sample period. 
 
----------------------------- 
Validation Study: Methodology 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6. Using the CCD, post retrieved the electronic records of 103 Q-1 
visa recipients issued between September 2006 and June 2008.  The 
Fraud Prevention Manager (FPM) then reviewed the recipients' travel 
records in the DHS Arrival and Departure Information System (ADIS) 
database.  ADIS documents arrival and departure records and any 
efforts by an applicant to adjust status in the United States. 
 
------- 
Results 
------- 
 
¶7. ADIS results confirmed that the majority of Q-1 applicants are 
staying in the United States as students, spouses of American 
citizens, or as visa status violators.  Of the 103 issued cases, the 
breakdown is as follows: 
 
a. One person had no record of using his/her Q-1 visa to travel to 
the United States. 
 
b. Twelve (12) returned to Morocco: This includes one person who 
adjusted to F-1 student status (see below) and a 2009 Diversity 
Lottery (DV) winner who returned to Morocco to complete her DV 
application. 
 
c. Fifty (50) adjusted to B-2 (tourist status) or just remained in 
the United States:  Of these, 41 overstayed their Q-1s or adjusted 
to B-2 and overstayed.  Nine were still legally in the United States 
as tourists at the time this cable was drafted.  One person in B-2 
status was waiting for a decision on her application for CR-6 status 
(lawful residence based on marriage to the U.S. citizen in the 
United States). 
 
d. Twenty-seven (27) adjusted status as CR-6s. All arrived as Q-1s. 
However in 26 of out of 27 cases, there are additional entries in 
the arrival records indicating they were actually admitted under the 
visa class Conditionally Resident (CR)-6.  This would seem to 
indicate that the applicant married an American citizen within a 
week of having received a Q-1 visa.  DHS Q-1 marriage fraud 
interviews indicated that many Moroccans search the Internet for an 
American willing to marry them. 
 
e. Twelve (12) adjusted to F-1 status.  Student Exchange Visitors 
Information System (SEVIS) records indicate that only one of these 
returned to Morocco after finishing her studies at Valencia 
Community College.  Of the remaining eleven, nine enrolled at UCEDA, 
an English language school in Florida, one enrolled at the ZONI 
language school in New York, and one enrolled at Everest University. 
 The one enrolled at Everest is registered as "deactivated" in the 
SEVIS system with no records of her departure.  The SEVIS status of 
the three enrolled at UCEDA was noted as "terminated" with no record 
of their departures.  This leaves seven former Q-1s who are actively 
studying in the United States. 
 
------------------------- 
Communicating with Disney 
------------------------- 
¶8. Disney welcomed FPM's contact with their international 
recruitment and visa compliance officers about how they recruit Q-1s 
cultural representatives. In response to questions, Disney reported 
that many applicants come through recommendations from the Moroccan 
Ministry of Tourism.  Disney also uses a procurement ally, 
International Services.  International Services handles all initial 
screening of Disney's European and Moroccan candidates. 
International Services conducts preliminary interviews for Q-1 
applicants to verify that they meet overall requirements for the 
program. 
¶9. Company representatives from both Disney and Marrakesh Restaurant 
(part of the Moroccan Pavilion at the EPCOT Center) meet with 
candidates in Morocco in the fall each year.  The recruitment 
interviews are conducted in English.  Qualified candidates are 
selected by the Marrakesh Restaurant, after deliberation with Disney 
representatives.  The majority of applicants usually have two years 
of education beyond high school, often in the tourism or hospitality 
fields, but others may have only practical experience in the field. 
The process described matched steps Disney planned to take (Refs A 
and B).  Post accepted Disney's invitation to send a consular 
representative to its recruitment meetings in Morocco in November. 
¶10. Post then asked if Disney ever conducted a review of the numbers 
of cultural representatives who return to Morocco.  Disney said they 
did not but rather noted that they partnered with Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (DHS/ICE) in Orlando to report representatives 
who leave the program early.  Disney added it informs cultural 
representatives of the expectation to return to Morocco. 
---------------------- 
Communication with DHS 
---------------------- 
 
¶11. FPM spoke with Special Agent Richard McGahey, Disney's DHS 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) contact.  He confirmed he 
conducts arrival briefings for EPCOT cultural representatives on 
their responsibilities as non-immigrants.  He also keeps track of 
Q-1 recipients who depart early.  However, Q-1 recipients who 
complete their programs have a thirty-day grace period before they 
are required to depart and McGahey does not track this sub-group. 
He participated in two 2007 DHS investigations of the Moroccan 
Pavilion based on Department of State leads.  McGahey said he had 
noted his concerns about marriage fraud with Q-1 recipients to the 
vice president of the Marrakesh restaurant. 
 
¶12.  Post's DHS attach office responded with interest to the 
preliminary results of the Q-1 validation study.  FPM provided a 
copy of the results for DHS to conduct its own review of the legal 
status of the Q-1 recipients.  In addition, DHS plans to use this 
cable as the basis for a DHS Intel report on Q-1 recipients. 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶13. The validation study results demonstrate a need to revise 
questions asked in Q-1 interviews.  To date, post focused on past 
experience or training in the tourism/hospitality industry, ability 
to explain Moroccan culture in English, and general plans for the 
future.  Post will now also ask about online friends and future 
educational plans. 
¶14.  Post looks forward to meeting with Disney and ICE officials in 
November.  Observing the recruitment activities will inform post 
about Disney's selection process.  In its communication with post, 
Disney welcomed suggestions and questions regarding the cultural 
representative program.  In light of this opportunity, post hopes to 
hold side meetings to discuss issues surrounding the Q-1 program at 
the Moroccan Pavilion. 
 
MILLARD