09DAKAR1358
Alex Segura - The Scandal Continues
Fri Oct 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO4732
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1358/01 3031351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301351Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3276
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCPCIM/CIMS NTDB WASHDC
RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 001358 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, AF/EPS DRL AND INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS ECON EFIN SG
SUBJECT: Alex Segura - The Scandal Continues 
 
REF: Dakar 1279 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: After revelations that former IMF Resident 
Representatives, Alex Segura, left Senegal with a Presidential cash 
gift valued in the neighborhood of USD 200,000, local media and 
opposition leaders have continued to slam President Abdoulaye Wade 
for what they call his crass attempt to bribe the IMF and the 
consequent tarnishing of Senegal's image.  In turn, Wade has 
obfuscated, twisted the facts, and blamed others for this incident. 
Finally, in a fit of pique, Wade marched out of a press conference 
when journalists kept haranguing him about his role in what has now 
been dubbed "l'Affaire Segura."  End Summary. 
 
The Story So Far 
---------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On October 9 2009, Senegalese media broke the news that 
Alex Segura was caught in Paris carrying a suitcase filled with, 
which at the time, they claimed exceeded CFA 500 million.  Since 
then, the political and media scene has been ablaze in debate about 
whether or not this was an attempt to bribe or frame Segura or if 
President Wade went overboard in his gift-giving.  The Senegalese 
authorities initially responded through the Minister of 
communication, Mr. Mustafa Guirassy, who contradicted the news 
stories stating that "the government of Senegal had nothing to do 
with this affair." 
But... 
--- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The government began to scramble for answers and excuses 
when, on October 26, the IMF released a communiqu confirming that 
Segura received a substantial sum of money from President Wade at 
the time of his departure from Senegal on September 25, denying his 
arrest in Paris by the French customs officers, and stating that 
Segura had reported everything to the IMF's ethics commission.  The 
communiqu also revealed that the envelope contained EUR 100,000 and 
USD 50,000, a total of CFA 90 million (USD 200,000). 
 
¶4.  (SBU) While the IMF communiqu neither absolved Segura nor 
berated the Senegalese government for anything at all, it directly 
contradicted the government's initial denial that any money had been 
given to Segura, as well as clarifying statements by Prime Minister 
Souleymane Ndene Ndiaye, who on the same day had said that only CFA 
65 million was actually offered.  The PM then dug himself into a 
bigger hole when he tried to blithely dismiss the amount as 
inconsequential, claiming, "It can't even buy you an apartment in 
Paris."  Both Foreign Minister Madick Niang and the Prime Minister 
then attempted to limit the extent of the damage by saying that it 
was an unimportant farewell gift and that gift-giving was "a 
tradition in Africa." 
 
 
Finally the President Speaks 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) After weeks of maneuvering, President Wade has now been 
forced to admit that he did give the money to Segura, but, as was 
expected, he Pontius Pilated himself out of the story by offering 
his Aide De Camp, Colonel Cissokho, as a scapegoat, claiming that 
the Colonel had made a mistake in the amount that was supposed to 
have been gien.  In a statement released Tuesday 27 October, Wde 
said the gift was most definitely not a bribeas "Segura was not a 
friend to Senegal because he never missed an opportunity to 
publically denounce my government."  The pesident explained that 
the money was intended asa recognition of his contribution to 
Senegal, andwas not in any way intended to influence him, "Whe 
someone has remained a long time with us, then t is our tradition 
to offer a gift, either in kind or in a modest sum of money so he 
can buy himself and his family souvenirs."  President Wade confirmed 
that he had told IMF Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn, during a phone 
call, that he had made a monumental error.  He also confirmed that 
the money has been returned to the Senegalese authorities. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In response, some opposition parties are asking that 
President Wade resign, saying that he has irreparably tainted 
Senegal's image, while others are going as far as saying that he 
should be impeached for high treason.  The Socialist Party has asked 
that the United Nations be tasked with carrying out an independent 
investigation. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: This story has legs and it is likely that, despite 
the President having walked out of a press conference in frustration 
at being asked questions about "l'Affaire Segura," the opposition 
will use it to attack him endlessly as another example of the 
endemic corruption of his government.  While it will be difficult to 
work out what really happened, Senegal's image is tainted.  Some 
international donors have already noted that the time may be ripe to 
 
DAKAR 00001358  002 OF 002 
 
 
push a weakened and reeling President Wade to enact some serious 
reforms to curb corruption in his Administration.  End Comment. 
 
BERNICAT