09DUBLIN422
A GREEN THREAT TO THE GOVERNMENT?
Wed Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO4537
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0422/01 2801613
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 071613Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0241
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 1087C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/06/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EFIN ECON EI
SUBJECT: A GREEN THREAT TO THE GOVERNMENT? 
 
REF: A. DUBLIN 417 
     ¶B. DUBLIN 416 
     ¶C. DUBLIN 361 
     ¶D. DUBLIN 360 
     ¶E. DUBLIN 217 
 
DUBLIN 00000422  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: Amb. Daniel M. Rooney.  Reasons 1.4(b/d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The Green Party, the Irish government's 
junior coalition partner, will hold a special convention on 
October 10 to vote on a revised Program for Government and 
draft legislation setting up the National Asset Management 
Agency (NAMA).  John Gormley, Minister for Environment, 
Heritage, and Local Government and leader of the Green Party 
said that if either of these is rejected the Greens, "could 
not continue in government."  A DFA contact told us that if 
the government falls, it is possible the Lisbon Treaty 
ratification could be delayed.  This would delay the 
legislation implementing NAMA as well.  Recently, Gormley 
admitted to the Ambassador that this is a "tough time to be 
in government," with three major political hurdles to 
overcome over the next several months.  In addition to the 
Program and NAMA, the government must introduce a harsh 
budget that will be politically unpopular.  It is unlikely 
that the Greens will leave government even if they do not 
approve the government Program; rather, they will likely 
continue negotiations until they get a deal that party 
members can live with.  However, this would delay the 
beginning of discussions on the budget -- something the 
government would like to avoid.  End Summary. 
 
Will Greens Approve New Government Program? 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) The Green Party is stuck between some of its more 
strident members, who complain that the leadership has 
strayed from the Party's ideals, and the exigencies of 
governing.  In a September 28 meeting with the Ambassador, 
Gormley said that it was "increasingly difficult to govern 
with the opposition constantly criticizing" the government. 
He understood that this is politics but that the opposition 
is "taking it a bit far."  That said, he admitted that the 
Greens (the junior partner to the much larger Fianna Fail 
(FF) party) have a lot to lose by leaving. 
 
¶3. (C) Gormley continued that the government faced three 
serious challenges before the end of the year.  First up are 
negotiations this week over a revised Program for Government. 
 The Greens have laid out an opening position that will be 
difficult for FF to swallow, including a rollback of cuts to 
secondary education, maintaining high social welfare benefits 
and introducing universal health care (Ref A).  If the two 
parties reach agreement, then the Program will be voted on by 
the Green Party membership at a special convention on October 
¶10.  According to party rules, the agreement must receive a 
two-thirds majority in favor in order to pass.  If the 
program is not approved, negotiations will either continue or 
the Greens will leave the coalition, effectively toppling the 
government. 
 
Could Greens Imperil Lisbon Treaty? 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) On October 5, a Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) 
contact told us that officials in his department are worried 
about the Green Party's decision and how it might affect 
Lisbon Treaty ratification (Ref B).  He explained that, if 
the Greens leave government, the Dail (Irish parliament) 
would be dissolved (because Fianna Fail does not have a 
majority of the Dail's members) and ratification of the 
Lisbon Treaty would have to wait for a new government.  Our 
DFA contact said that there are ways of avoiding such a chain 
of events but, "it is a real possibility."  The DFA has sent 
a memo to Minister Gormley "reminding him and his party of 
their responsibilities in this matter." 
 
¶5. (C) On October 5, Poloff spoke to Peadar O Broin of the 
Institute of International and European Affairs (IIEA) who 
explained that because of technicalities in the vote 
certification process, the Parliament will not be able to 
ratify the Lisbon Treaty until some weeks after the October 2 
vote.  If the Greens leave government this weekend and 
Parliament is dissolved pending early elections (which must 
be held within 17 to 25 days of dissolution of Parliament), 
the Lisbon Treaty is unlikely to be ratified until a newly 
constituted parliament can act. 
 
The Greens and NAMA 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) According to Gormley, the second hurdle is the 
legislation setting up the National Asset Management Agency 
 
DUBLIN 00000422  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
(NAMA), meant to take bad property loans off of the books of 
Irish banks in the hope that the banks will begin lending 
more again (Ref C).  The Green Party's rank-and-file, many of 
whom blame bankers and property developers for Ireland's 
financial mess, objected to some of the provisions of the 
legislation and urged the party leadership to seek 
amendments, not all of which Fianna Fail agreed to.  The 
Green Party will vote on whether the party should support the 
NAMA legislation at the October 10 special convention.  In a 
September 18 interview, Gormley said that if either the 
Program or the NAMA bill were rejected at the convention, 
then the Greens "could not continue our participation in 
government." 
 
¶7. (C) On October 6, Econoff spoke with Alan Barrett, senior 
economist at the Economic and Social Research Institute, who 
confirmed what O Broin said regarding the Lisbon Treaty and 
added that the pending NAMA legislation would also be delayed 
if Parliament is dissolved.  Unlike in the case of the Lisbon 
Treaty which is supported by all major political parties, 
however, Barrett said it was not clear that NAMA would 
survive in its current form -- if at all -- under a different 
government.  This would be a severe blow to the moribund 
Irish economy just after receiving welcome news with the 
Lisbon passage. 
 
Most Greens Want to Stay in Power 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C) Econoff spoke to Joe Curtin, a Green Party member and 
senior researcher at the IIEA, who predicted that both the 
Program and NAMA would pass at the convention.  He said that 
most Party members realized that it is better to be inside 
than outside government and that, "the Green Party has a real 
opportunity to affect change."  Curtin admitted that there is 
a bit of brinksmanship going on between Green and FF 
officials, but this is constrained by the fact that both 
parties recognize they need the other to remain in power. 
 
 
Upcoming Austerity Budget 
------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) Gormley told the Ambassador that the final challenge 
will be the government's 2010 budget which will be introduced 
in December.  The government must come up with about USD 6 
billion from increased taxes and decreased spending in 2010 
(Refs D and E).  This will be the first in a series of harsh 
budgets aimed at getting the deficit under three percent of 
GDP by 2013.  The Greens oppose many of the cuts -- in 
particular in education and social welfare payments -- an 
they will be discussed within the Program for Gvernment 
negotiations. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
10 (C) We agree with Curtin that it is very unlikelythat 
the Greens will pull out of government thiswekend.  The 
party would face political oblivio if a general election 
were held today.  However there is a greater chance that a 
revised Programdoes not get the necessary two-thirds of the 
vots at the convention.  This would ikely lead to an 
extension of the negotiations between the Greens and FF, 
which would delay the start of the government's internal 
discussions on the December budget.  This would be 
problematic because government officials need as much time as 
possible to minimize the political fallout from what is 
widely expected to be a draconian budget.  End Comment. 
ROONEY