09FRANKFURT2648
FRAUD SUMMARY - GERMANY - MARCH - AUGUST 2009
Fri Oct 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Frankfurt
VZCZCXRO6753
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFT #2648/01 2821257
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091257Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL FRANKFURT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1982
RUEHPNH/NVC PORTSMOUTH 3387
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 FRANKFURT 002648 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR CA/FPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFRD CVIS CPAS CMGT ASEC GM
SUBJECT: FRAUD SUMMARY - GERMANY - MARCH - AUGUST 2009 
 
Ref:  A) FRANKFURT 1712 B) STATE 57623 C) 08 STATE 74840, 
 
¶A. COUNTRY CONDITIONS:  The Federal Republic of Germany is located 
in the heart of Europe.  It is a member of the European Union, NATO, 
the EU's Schengen Agreement, and has been U.S. Visa Waiver Program 
country since 1986.  Germany is considered a low fraud country and 
host government corruption is not an issue.  However, because the 
embassy and consulates in Mission Germany handle NIV and IV cases 
involving over 160 nationalities, fraud awareness is vital.  Due to 
the large number of third-country nationals residing in Germany and 
transiting the country, consular operations in Mission Germany can 
and do encounter a variety of document fraud.  The international 
airports in Frankfurt, Munich, Berlin, Hamburg, Duesseldorf, 
Hannover, Cologne/Bonn and Stuttgart are also used for illegal 
migration to and through Germany. 
 
Since the 1950s post-war boom, the German economy has been dependent 
on immigrant workers.  Though many so-called "guest workers" 
returned to their home countries in South and Southeast Europe, many 
remained.  This has resulted in Germany gradually changing from a 
country that accommodated guest workers to a country with regulated 
immigration.   Repatriates of German descent, who for generations 
have been living in the states of the former Soviet Union, Romania 
and Poland, are also a major group of immigrants. Since the collapse 
of the communist systems they have been returning to Germany in 
increasing numbers. 
 
There are 6,728,000 foreigners, almost nine percent of the 
population, living in Germany (2008).  An additional 1.5 million 
people are naturalized Germans and 4.5 million are German descent 
repatriates.  Approximately 15 million people in Germany have an 
immigrant background, which the German Statistics Office defines 
among others as naturalized foreigners as well as children with one 
foreign parent.  Among the foreigners, 1.7 million people are of 
Turkish citizenship, followed by Italians (528,000), Poles 
(384,000), Serbs and Montenegrins (330,000), Greeks (295,000), 
Croats, Russians, Austrians, Bosnians, Ukrainians, Portuguese, 
Spanish and others.  Germany also houses over one million refugees. 
 
As a result, citizenship and residence laws have also changed over 
time.  In January 2000, a more liberal German citizenship law went 
into effect.  A child born in Germany now automatically acquires 
German citizenship if one parent has been residing in Germany for at 
least eight years and has a valid "Right to Abode" permit, or has 
been in Germany for a minimum of three years and is in possession of 
an unlimited residence permit.  If the child is eligible for other 
citizenships, at the age of eighteen, s/he must choose whether to 
remain a German citizen. 
 
To become a German citizen, one generally has to be legally residing 
in Germany for 8 years and have fulfilled certain conditions such 
as: a valid "Aufenthaltserlaubnis" or "Aufenthaltsberechtigung"; a 
livelihood-guarantee showing no recourse to social welfare or 
unemployment benefits (exceptions made for people under 23 years of 
age); adequate knowledge of the German language; take an oath to the 
German constitution; give up prior citizenship (although there are 
exceptions).  Since September 2008, foreigners are also required to 
answer 17 of 33 multiple choice exam questions correctly. Spouses 
and children can often be naturalized even if they have not been 
living in Germany for eight years.  For spouses of German citizens, 
the couple must have been married for two years and the spouse 
resident in country for three years before the application can be 
made. 
 
In early 2005, a new Immigration Law (Immigration Act) consolidated 
the previous five types of residency into two - the 
"Aufenthaltsgenehmigung" (limited Residency Permit) and the 
"Niederlassungserlaubnis" (unlimited Right to Abode).  Both German 
and foreign nationals resident in Germany must register with local 
authorities and notify the government if they change residences. 
 
The standard of living in Germany is high.  The average gross 
monthly income in the 4th quarter 2008 of a full-time industry and 
service employee was approximately USD 4300 (EUR 3100).  Wages vary 
by region and hourly wage earners also earn less. 
 
In order to pursue paid employment, all foreigners who are not 
nationals of an EU member state or member of the European Economic 
Area, need a residence permit.  EU citizens are generally exempt 
from this requirement, though citizens of some new EU member states 
may also require additional EU employment documentation.  Non-EU 
nationals of certain countries (Tourist Visa Waiver) do not need a 
residence permit for stays of up to three months, provided they have 
a valid passport. 
Labor migration is governed by the German Residence Act, the 
Ordinance governing residence and the Ordinance on the admission of 
foreigners for the purpose of taking up employment. The Residence 
Act establishes the principle that the employment and 
self-employment of foreigners are to be oriented on Germany's 
 
FRANKFURT 00002648  002 OF 007 
 
 
economic needs, taking into account the labor market situation and 
the need to reduce unemployment.  A ban on recruiting foreign labor 
remains in effect for unskilled and less-skilled workers; even 
skilled workers will be granted work permits only in exceptional 
cases. On the other hand, conditions for highly skilled workers 
(i.e. engineers, software technicians) and their families have now 
been improved under the residence law. Self-employed persons may be 
granted permission to work if exceptional economic interest or 
special regional needs exist, if the planned business is expected to 
have a positive economic effect, if it has secure financing, and if 
it creates employment.  Self-employed persons can be granted a 
settlement permit after three years if their business is successful 
and their livelihood is assured. 
¶B. NIV FRAUD:  Using H&L funding from CA/FPP, Frankfurt hosted a 
Mission Germany fraud conference on September 9-11.  The theme was 
"Beyond Indian IT, New Trends in H&L Fraud."  Four LES and three 
FSOs from Berlin and Munich attended, along with Frankfurt NIV, ACS, 
IV and DHS officers.  CA/FPP and DS/DBFTDF sent speakers and DVCs 
were held with KCC and Chennai.  Invitations were also extended to 
other European posts to attend at their own cost, and Bern, 
Stockholm, London, Kyiv and Paris participated.  See septel. 
 
German posts process nationals of over 160 countries annually.  On 
any given day, visa applicants hail from any continent and 
demonstrate varying degrees of compelling ties to Germany and the 
country of their nationality.  The most common NIV fraud cases 
involve B1/B2 and H and L applications. Typical fraud cases feature 
applicants who provide questionable documentation, such as 
fraudulent employment letters, invitation letters and bank 
statements. 
 
Many of Mission Germany's H visa fraud cases involve Indian 
nationals.  In most questionable H fraud cases we note common 
inconsistencies, such as non-existent U.S. business addresses, an 
unconvincing internet business presence, telephone numbers leading 
to non-personalized voice mailboxes or private individuals, 
businesses not registered with Dun and Bradstreet and Lexis-Nexis 
reports that expose small companies operating from a home 
residence. 
 
In 2006, alleged misuse of SOFA status by military members stationed 
in Germany was investigated by an Army CID Task Force.  The reported 
misuse involved soldiers, many of them originally from West African 
countries, who brought family members to Germany to reside with 
them, even when these same family members lacked adequate 
documentation to establish eligibility for Immigrant Visas.  FPU 
worked with the task force to determine to what extent suspect 
individuals may have sought and received visa, immigration or 
passport benefits they were otherwise not entitled to.  The 
investigation prompted a change in SOFA card issuance procedures in 
country.  Now, all non U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident 
SOFA recipients must have, at a minimum, an I-130 immigrant petition 
approved by USCIS or authorization from the host country government 
to remain in order to receive SOFA status and benefits.  FPU works 
closely with USCIS in evaluating these petitions for possible 
fraud. 
 
Frankfurt's FPU conducts daily random checks of NIV applicants. 
Frankfurt's NIV line officers have all participated in recent 
refresher fraud prevention training and all incoming line officers 
participate in one-on-one FPU training during their first weeks at 
post. 
 
During this reporting period, 18 NIV cases were referred for 
Frankfurt FPU investigations.  Most were employment verification 
cases generated through FPU random checks on the line and by officer 
referral.  Two cases were for H1B petitioners.  The investigation 
provided sufficient evidence to question the bona fides of the 
petitioner for possible petition revocation.  Six "snitch letters" 
reporting intending immigrants seeking NIVs were received and 
evaluated.  Additionally, Frankfurt FPU was informed by its 
counterpart in Tel Aviv about a law firm that is connected to Dead 
Sea Industry Fraud.  Furthermore, Frankfurt FPU enters all relevant 
data into the system for all lost/stolen passports with NIVs and for 
received DHS/CBP I-275s. 
 
Frankfurt participates as a test post for the Fraud Case Management 
System currently in beta testing.  It is a good step in the right 
direction, but we also regularly share our experience with the 
design team. 
 
Frankfurt FPU assisted the NIV Unit in conducting inquiries on 
Iranians in reference to an Iranian Validation study (Frankfurt 
1722).  93.4% of the B1/B2 visa applicants complied with their 
visas.  Of the remaining 6/6% who did not return, two groups emerged 
- travelers over the age of 60 with immediate family members living 
in the U.S. (overstay or adjustment of status) and applicants under 
the age of 35 with promising career potential (asylum claims and 
change of status). 
 
FRANKFURT 00002648  003 OF 007 
 
 
 
Munich FPU routinely performs document checks several times a week 
and examined 16 potential NIV fraud cases in depth.  Three cases 
were referred to Frankfurt for more extensive investigative work. 
 
During the reporting period, Munich evaluated two petitions that it 
will return to KCC for USCIS.  One is a shell L petition, in which 
the beneficiary owns the L company and petitioned for himself; and 
the other is an H1B for a part-time Chilean insurance agent going to 
work for State Farm so he can join the entire family already in the 
United States. 
 
During the summer student rush, Munich also noted a possible trend 
of language schools issuing I-20s for 12 months, when the language 
class program was to last a few weeks.  KAPLAN Aspect was one of the 
schools noted.  Applicants seemed to indicate they might be have 
internships, a J activity, after the language classes ended. 
 
Berlin FPU pulled NIV interview cases randomly during the reporting 
period which resulted in simple 214(b) refusals. Berlin's in-depth 
fraud efforts from March to August continue to center on Indian H1-B 
visa applicants.  Two petitions from SVV Technologies were returned 
to USCIS via KCC for revocation based on petitioner ability to 
provide a qualifying position for the applicants.  The company 
president entered the US on an H1B in 1999 and the headquarters was 
a mortgaged, residential house owned by him and his H4 wife.  Wage 
records showed the president and his director wife received no 
salaries from the company and the company's federal taxes were 
insufficient to pay the salaries of the alleged employees. 
 
¶C. IV FRAUD:  Frankfurt is the only post in Mission Germany that 
processes Immigrant Visas.  Like other posts, Frankfurt encounters 
document fraud that purports to establish family relationships or 
entitlements to labor certification.  Marriage fraud continues to be 
an issue, particularly in conjunction with the large U.S. military 
community in Germany.  The FPU performs regular random checks of IV 
applicants.  During March - August 2009, FPU received four referrals 
from the IV Unit. 
 
In two cases of American citizens trying to obtain immigration 
benefits for family members, post sought the assistance of Lagos and 
Banjul FPU for document verification.  In another case, FPU was able 
to prove that an American military petitioner was never legally 
married to his Philippine wife.  The IV Unit and FPU work closely 
with USCIS Frankfurt since it adjudicates the I-130 petitions that 
constitute 70% of the IV workload. 
 
¶D. DV FRAUD:  During March - August, two DV fraud referrals were 
received by FPU for confirmation of African educational documents. 
Addis Ababa FPU confirmed the Ethiopian certificates were genuine; 
but, Freetown reported the WEAC certificate from Sierra Leone was 
fake. 
 
¶E. ACS AND U.S. PASSPORT FRAUD:  Local police stations, the Federal 
Police and city authorities often ask for assistance in verifying 
suspect U.S. passports and/or U.S. identity documents. Mala fide 
travelers are often intercepted during screening at German borders 
and are either in possession of photo substituted U.S. passports or 
are imposters.  German authorities routinely refer U.S. documents 
such as passports and driver's licenses to the ARSO-I to determine 
if they are possibly fraudulent or are being used by imposters. 
 
Frankfurt's ACS Branch, in conjunction with the ARSO-I, also 
conducts monthly fraud prevention training for passport agents from 
the DOD installations under the supervision of DOD's Integrated 
Management Command (IMCOM) for Europe.  The most recent training 
sessions took place in September.  Attendance at each class is 
between 10-15 military acceptance agents from Germany, Kosovo, 
Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium and Turkey.  These training sessions 
focus on detecting fraudulent documents and observation of 
suspicious behavior of military passport/CRBA applicants. 
 
The ACS Branch and the ARSO-I also participated in document review 
and fraud training at the annual DOD Heidelberg Conference in May, 
which is sponsored by IMCOM and CA/PPT/SIA for the processing of 
official passport applications.  In 2010, the annual conference will 
include a presentation from Children's Issues regarding child 
abduction cases and indicators to look for when processing passport 
applications. 
 
In addition to formalized training, the ACS Branch visits each 
installation during the year to provide guidance to individual 
military acceptance agents and their supervisors.  This informal 
"inspection" ensures that controls are in place and reinforces 
proper procedures for passport application processing. 
 
From March to August 2009, Frankfurt ACS referred 10 suspect 
citizenship/passport applications to the ARSO-I; there are now 20 
cases under active investigation.  Examples of these complex fraud 
 
FRANKFURT 00002648  004 OF 007 
 
 
cases include delayed birth registration by a idwife on the Mexican 
border, paternity claimed by a quadriplegic, and a Middle-Eastern 
applicant with three different dates of birth.  By taking the lead 
on the numerous passport/citizenship fraud referrals and assisting 
with in-depth fraud training of military acceptance agents, the 
ARSO-I has provided the Frankfurt ACS Branch enhanced capability to 
maintain the integrity of passport and nationality adjudications. 
 
 
The Munich FPU assisted its ACS section with some quick document 
checks during the reporting period. 
 
¶F. ADOPTION FRAUD:  The Frankfurt Immigrant Visa Unit issued 5 IR-3 
and no IR-4 cases from March to August 2009. 
 
Germany is a receiving country for international adoption.  The 
number of foreign adoptions by Germans has increased due to a lack 
of children available locally for adoption.  Foreign national 
children automatically acquire German citizenship once adopted by 
German nationals.  There is no centralized court system governing 
adoption cases in Germany.  This means that each Federal State is 
locally responsible for the effectiveness and legality of the 
adoption.  Adoptive parents must be 25 years of age (though one may 
be 21 if part of a couple) and declared "fit" for work.  Adoption 
agencies and the German Youth Welfare Department ("Jugendamt") 
require the following documents at the start of the adoption 
process:  an application for adoption; birth certificates; marriage 
certificate; divorce certificates if applicable; resume/curriculum 
vitae for both parents; police certificates; medical attestations; 
proof of citizenship; earning/bank statements; and character 
references.  After an investigation and interview, the Jugendamt 
issue an initial approval valid for two years.  A one year foster 
period is required prior to full adoption.  The 
paperwork/investigation process generally takes between four and 
nine months.  Germany is a signatory to the Hague Convention on 
Inter Country Adoption, so for international adoptions, prospective 
adoptive parents would have to follow the Hague procedures, 
including using an adoption provider certified under the Hague. 
 
¶G. USE OF DNA TESTING:  Due to the high number of third-country 
applicants, the IV Unit occasionally requests DNA testing for cases 
where identity and birth records are lacking.  USCIS Frankfurt 
reports it is increasingly requesting DNA testing in similar 
circumstances.  In the past six months, ACS has also requested DNA 
testing to establish paternity in two citizenship adjudications. 
There are no operational concerns. 
 
¶H. ASYLULM AND OTHER DHS BENEFIT FRAUD:  Germany has not encountered 
any significant fraud with regard to Visas 92/93 cases or other DHS 
benefit fraud.  The Immigrant Visa Unit had four Visas 92 cases (9 
applicants total) and no Visas 93 cases from March through August 
¶2009. 
 
The Frankfurt FPU works closely with DHS/USCIS and also assists in 
document examination and verification.  During the reporting period, 
Frankfurt FPU assisted four colleagues at DHS/USCIS offices in 
Florida and Philadelphia in verifying German documents (i.e. vital 
documents, school documents) and prior residence status.  The FPU 
also worked with the Frankfurt DHS/CIS office to verify a birth 
certificate from Sierra Leone.   FPU was able to confirm its bona 
fides from Embassy Freetown. 
 
¶I. ALIEN SUMGGLING, TRAFFICKING, ORGANIZED CRIME, TERRORIST TRAVEL: 
 
 
In May 2009, the Federal Minister of the Interior, Wolfgang 
Schaeuble, and the president of the Federal Office for Protection of 
the Constitution, Fromm, presented the Protection of the 
Constitution Report ("Verfassungsschutzbericht") for 2008.  As in 
previous years, the current security situation remains the same. 
The threat of Islamist terrorism continues, although there have been 
no attacks in Germany so far.  The rise of force within right-wing 
extremist groups also continues to be reported as a cause for 
concern. 
Germany ranks as a Tier 1 country on the 2008 Trafficking in Persons 
Report.  Germany is a transit and destination country for men and 
women trafficked for the purposes of commercial sexual exploitation 
and forced labor, including in the construction industry, in 
restaurants and ice cream parlors, and as domestic servants. 
Victims are primarily trafficked from Central and Eastern Europe and 
Nigeria to and through Germany to the United Kingdom and 
Scandinavian countries.  German nationals are also victims of 
commercial sexual exploitation within Germany.  German nationals 
traveled to Thailand, Vietnam, and other countries for the purposes 
of child sex tourism. 
¶J. DS CRIMINAL FRAUD INVESTIGATIONS:  Frankfurt's H/L funded ARSO-I 
Christian Shults works directly with consulate, Washington, U.S. 
military and host government authorities to counter fraud, further 
enhancing both DS's and CA's ability to interdict criminal activity. 
 
FRANKFURT 00002648  005 OF 007 
 
 
 During the reporting period, Christian initiated an on-going 
criminal investigation with the U.S. military on certain citizenship 
cases incorrectly processed by U.S. passport acceptance agents at a 
U.S. base.  The DHS/ICE Visa Security Unit (VSU) officer is also 
active in reviewing NIV and IV cases.  All three visa security 
components in Frankfurt work closely together and with other 
agencies on issues related to border security and fraud.  A new 
USCIS Fraud Detection and National Security (FDNS) analyst, Adonis 
Rubenstein, arrived in September 2009. 
 
¶K. HOST COUNTRY PASSPORT, IDENTITY DOCUMENTS, AND CIVIL REGISTRY: 
 
Passport (ePass): Germany's biometric passport, called "ePass," was 
introduced in November 2005.  The passport stores the bearer's 
identity data, sex, nationality, document serial number, issuing 
country, document type and the date of expiration.  A second 
generation 'ePass' was introduced on November 1, 2007 and also 
includes two fingerprints and a passport number composed of nine 
alphanumeric digits.  As a rule, electronic passports including 
fingerprints are issued to persons aged 12 and older.  However, at 
the parents' request, an ePass may also be issued to children, 
although no fingerprints are taken from children under six years of 
age.  Passports issued to persons aged 24 and older remain valid for 
ten years.  Passports of persons under 24 are valid for six years. 
All pre-ePass passports remain valid until their expiration. 
 
Temporary Passport: Germany's Temporary Passport is machine 
readable and is valid up to one year; however, there are no 
biometric markers.  Passport agencies may require documents such as 
airline tickets as proof of the immediate need.  DHS had determined 
that as of May 1, 2006 German temporary/emergency passports are no 
longer valid for travel to the United States under the Visa Waiver 
Program due to inadequate controls over the passport book stock and 
less-than-timely reporting of lost/stolen temporary passports to a 
central authority that would make the information available to CBP 
Officers at U.S. ports of entry. 
 
Documentary requirements for ePass and Temporary Passports: Passport 
applicants must present a previous passport, children's passport, 
identity card or their birth certificate at the time of 
application. 
 
Children's Passport: Germany's Children's Passports (Kinderpass, 
Kinderreissepasse) are machine readable and contain a digital 
photograph, but they do not have an electronic chip.  The passport 
can be obtained up to the age of 12 and is valid for six years.  As 
of November 1, 2007, children are no longer endorsed in their 
parents' passport.  The Child Passport is not valid for use in the 
Visa Waiver program.  This frequently causes problems for traveling 
families as they try to board flights using visa waiver.  The child 
will have to apply for an NIV or get a regular e-passport. 
 
Documentary Requirements for Children's Passports: In order to 
obtain a Children's passport, parents or guardians must present a 
previous passport, the previously issued Child Travel Document 
(Kinderausweis) or birth certificate, and (declaration of) consent 
of the legal guardian.  In case of only one legal guardian then that 
person must present proof of the right to custody. 
 
Identity Cards:  All persons aged 16 and over can obtain an ID card. 
 Since November 2007, ID cards are also available for all children 
irrespective of their age, for travel within the European Union. ID 
cards issued to persons aged 24 and older are valid for ten years. 
Identity cards issued to person under 24 are valid for six years. 
 
In November 2010, Germany plans to introduce a new electronic 
personal identification card ("Elektronischer Personalausweis") to 
replace the current ID card. The electronic ID card will be the size 
of a credit card and its main feature is an integrated chip storing 
the ID card data.  This will also allow the bearer to securely 
identify him/herself in the internet (e.g., for bank transactions). 
 
 
ID Card Documentary Requirements: An old Child Travel Document 
(Kinderausweis), Children's Passport or birth certificate and 
declaration of consent of the legal guardian; if there is only  one 
legal guardian that person has to present proof of the right to 
custody. 
 
If an identity document (IDs, passports) is lost/stolen in Germany, 
residents should report the loss to the local town hall and police. 
The police then enter the document into a nationwide police lookout 
system (Sachfahndung).  Lost passports and ID cards should also be 
reported to the responsible passport office.  Any ID document 
reported lost, but then found, should also be re-reported as found. 
 
 
¶L. COOPERATION WITH HOST GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES:  The Consular 
Sections in Frankfurt, Berlin, and Munich have established close 
 
FRANKFURT 00002648  006 OF 007 
 
 
working relationships with the German Federal Police, Customs, 
Airport authorities and city officials.  German authorities have 
been very cooperative with document verification requests.  It is 
sometimes difficult to request basic data for Visas Viper purposes 
from German law enforcement authorities due to the German privacy 
laws, but Mission elements work together to get appropriate 
information. 
 
Germany and the United States are moving closer to a bilateral 
agreement on increasing cooperation on fighting serious crime. 
Germany and the U.S. plan to expand their information sharing in 
order to ensure effective prevention and prosecution of serious 
crime, especially terrorism.  The agreement allows suspects' 
personal data to be transmitted in accordance with applicable 
national law, in certain cases even without being requested, if 
there are reasonable grounds to believe that the suspects may commit 
terrorist acts or crimes related to terrorism, or that they are or 
have been engaged in training to carry out terrorist acts.  The 
agreement also creates a basis for the automated exchange of 
fingerprint and DNA data using a hit/no hit procedure modeled on the 
Pruem Treaty which was signed by several European Member States in 
¶2005.  In June 2008, the Federal Cabinet authorized the signing of 
the agreement following a March 2008 meeting between the German 
Federal Justice and Federal Interior Ministers and the U.S. Attorney 
General and Secretary of Homeland Security.  In July 2009, the U.S. 
and Germany discussed implementation arrangements during German 
technical consultations in Washington with DHS and the FBI.  Since 
German law regarding the right to privacy differs from U.S. law, 
both sides are proceeding carefully in order to make the agreement 
workable. 
 
¶M. AREAS OF PARTICULAR CONCERN: 
 
In late 2007, nine countries joined Schengen.  These are 
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, 
Hungary, Slovenia and Malta.  Checks at internal borders (land and 
sea) stopped on December 21, 2007 and checks at international 
airports for flights between these new member states were 
discontinued as of March 30, 2008.  The lifting of border 
formalities between Germany and its neighboring countries has led to 
a slight rise in illegal immigration in Germany. 
 
¶N. STAFFING AND TRAINING:  The Fraud Prevention Unit in Frankfurt 
has coordination responsibilities for all consular posts in Mission 
Germany.  The FPU consists of three full time LES positions. 
Frankfurt's Visa Branch Chief serves as the Fraud Prevention Manager 
(FPM).  The FPM attends the monthly mission-wide Law Enforcement 
Working Group.  Two new LES fraud assistants joined the team in June 
and July 2009 and are in training. 
 
Given Frankfurt's role as a regional training center, the FPU 
regularly works with other training programs.  In March, the senior 
FPU LES worked with the Regional Consular Officers to provide 
fraudulent document training to 28 LES from Africa, Asia and Europe 
attending the annual RCO training workshop in Frankfurt.  The FPU 
and the DHS/CBP-IAP team leader provided fraud training in August to 
Frankfurt airport personnel who conduct checks for U.S. bound 
flights.  These fraud trainings focus on U.S. entry requirements, 
imposter training, detection of altered documents as well passenger 
analysis.  During the reporting period, further training was 
conducted at Duesseldorf airport as well.  In addition, the FPU, the 
DHS/CBP IAP team leader, the Canadian ALO, the UK ALO and 
representative from German Federal Police conduct joint fraud 
trainings to airport personnel upon request. Likewise, LES 
colleagues from other posts continue to visit the FPU while in 
Frankfurt attending courses. Such training visits include an 
overview of FPU's operations, random checks, databases, trends, 
filing systems, archives, and intranet site. 
 
In June, the FPM attended a meeting of the Frankfurt Airline Liaison 
Group. The group consists members from Canada (Immigration 
Counselor), the UK (now ILMs - Immigration Liaison Manager), the 
U.S., New Zealand, Australia, the German Federal Police and DHS/CBP 
as well as the Frankfurt FPU.  The meeting was hosted at the 
Frankfurt airport by the British ILMs and the German Federal Policy. 
 Briefings focused on fraud trends observed at Frankfurt 
International airport.   In early September, the senior LES in 
Frankfurt attended an annual training program with the German CID. 
 
 
Berlin designated two LES to assist with fraud prevention during the 
reporting period.  In addition to attending the Mission Germany H&L 
Visa Fraud prevention conference in September 2009, they completed 
some on-line training and were briefed by the ARSO-I on NIV and ACS 
fraud in August.  Two Munich LES also participated in the H&L 
conference. 
 
The Frankfurt FPU remains in touch with all posts in Mission Germany 
regarding fraud trends.  In addition, all posts have access to 
 
FRANKFURT 00002648  007 OF 007 
 
 
Mission Germany's fraud intranet site, which has up-to-date 
information about country fraud trends, document alerts, travel and 
vital documents. 
 
ALFORD