09HELSINKI400
BLUE LANTERN BROKER INQUIRY - CASE K/2356
Thu Oct 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0400 3020613
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290613Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5231
INFO RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0233UNCLAS HELSINKI 000400 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC UK FI
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN BROKER INQUIRY - CASE K/2356 
 
REF: STATE 94817 
 
¶1. In response to the Department's Blue Lantern 
request, PolEconoff and Econ Assistant conducted a 
visit at Cojot Oy's Espoo headquarters on October 19, 
2009 and met with Managing Director Samu Lentonen to 
talk about Cojot's application for a US defense 
articles/services brokering license. 
 
¶2. Managing Director Samu Lentonen stated that the 
company applied for a U.S. brokering license at the end 
of 2008 at the request of their cooperation partner L-3 
TRL, the UK subsidiary of the US Company L-3 
Communications Group plc. Cojot's partnership with L-3 
TRL is limited to marketing L-3's products within 
Finland.  Cojot does not actually import or otherwise 
handle L-3's products, which it would only physically 
possess samples of products for marketing purposes and 
does not engage in brokering.  L-3 TRL ships all 
products directly to its customers without involving 
Cojot.  Outside of Cojot's relationship with L-3 TRL, 
it is not involved in brokering or otherwise handling 
or storing U.S. defense articles or services. 
 
¶3. Cojot Oy is a well-respected and long established 
Finnish company, designing and developing VHF/UHF/SHF 
wideband antenna equipment for mobile military 
communication and electronic countermeasure 
applications.  All manufacturing is outsourced.  Almost 
all products are designed and manufactured in Finland 
(some manufacturing in Estonia).  Office is located in 
Espoo, Paivankakkarantie 10, 02270 Espoo. 
 
¶4. A small operation, Cojot Oy has annual sales of 2.4 
million euros and employs 11 people.  Cojot is a 
pioneer and leading manufacturer of field-proven mobile 
military wideband antennas and accessories, utilizing 
VHF, UHF and SHF bands, with no competitors in Finland 
and only a few in Europe.  Cojot's product range covers 
antennas for military manpack, man portable and vehicle 
applications as well as highly sophisticated wideband 
and multiband antennas for CIMIC (Civil-Military Co- 
operation) and Public Safety applications in the 20 - 
6000 MHz range. 
 
¶5. Cojot was founded in 1986 in Espoo, Finland by Mr 
Veijo Haapanen, who still is a board member.  The 
company's Managing Director is Mr Samu Sulo Olavi 
Lentonen, Chairman of the Board Mr Erkki Aukusti 
Valkeasuo and board members Mr Markku Tapio Jenu and Mr 
Esko Ilari Vainio.  Due to fierce competition Cojot 
changed its course in 2000, moved away from manufacture 
of civilian antennas and started developing antennas 
for the military.  The Finnish Defense Forces were 
Cojot's first customer and a serving FDF officer sits 
on Cojot's board.  Cojot supplies defense industry and 
military contractors worldwide, together with defense 
forces in crisis management operations and public 
safety authorities.  Cojot's customized products are 
currently in service with several NATO member countries 
(for example in Afghanistan) and armed forces 
worldwide.  Post has no criminal or other derogatory 
background information regarding Cojot, its officers or 
directors.  Lentonen stated that Cojot does not do 
business with state sponsors of terrorism or countries 
under U.S. or international sanctions. 
 
¶6. Mr Eero Aho, Head of Export Control Unit, Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and Ms Sanna Poutiainen, responsible 
for licensing of military items at the Ministry of 
Defense (MOD), stated that the company has requested a 
classification of their main products under Finnish law 
and regulations.  According to the MOD, which is 
responsible for classification of arms, those products 
(antennae) are not classified as defense articles under 
Finnish law. However, if the company is going to act as 
a broker of U.S. origin defense articles (arms) or 
services in the future, it also must apply for a 
brokering license in Finland. 
 
ORECK