09OTTAWA771
S/CIEA Goldwyn visit to Ottawa - Energy security,
Fri Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO0634
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0771/01 2752111
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 022111Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9909
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEBAAA/DOE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OTTAWA 000771 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
S/CIEA for Goldwyn, Hengel and Sullivan 
EB/ESC for McManus and Duggan 
WHA/ESPC for Corneille 
WHA/CAN for Hermann and Fox 
DOE for Deutsch and Lockwood 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET SENV CA
SUBJECT:  S/CIEA Goldwyn visit to Ottawa - Energy security, 
cooperation in Haiti, oil sands messaging, positive coverage and 
lasting impression 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified; cleared by S/CIEA Goldwyn. 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  S/CIEA David Goldwyn's September 17-18 trip to 
Ottawa was immensely successful and has continued to reap positive 
engagement from Canadian interlocutors.  Goldwyn's message of Canada 
as a pillar of U.S. energy security was embraced by the Government 
of Canada and by a Canadian public that, at times, fears the U.S. 
undervalues the important role Canada plays as the USG's primary 
energy provider.   Goldwyn met with a range of Government of Canada 
officials from the PM's office, Department of Foreign Affair and 
International Trade (DFAIT), Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), 
Environment Canada (EC), and the Privy Council Office, as well as 
with the energy industry, i.e., Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers (CAPP), Canadian Gas Association (CGA), and Canadian 
Electricity Association (CEA).   The first high-level visit to 
Ottawa by a State Department official since the POTUS visit, Goldwyn 
received a welcome reception and press coverage of his visit created 
a positive buzz that continues. 
 
¶2. (U) In addition to reassuring Canadians about their valued role 
as a reliable and open market provider of energy, Goldwyn's request 
to cooperate in the spirit of the Energy and Climate Change 
Partnership of the Americas on an energy project in Haiti was met 
with enthusiasm, as was his message for continued Canadian progress 
in lowering the carbon footprint of the oil sands, and better public 
outreach on this topic.  Post-trip interest and engagement remains 
high.  S/CIEA chaired a U.S.-Canada digital video conference (DVC) 
on September 29 to explore possible cooperation in Haiti, and 
numerous interlocutors from Minister Raitt to Senator McCoy of 
Alberta have expressed interest in further discussion on increased 
oil sands sustainability and public engagement.  Groundwork has also 
been laid on the upcoming U.S.-Canada Energy Consultative Mechanism, 
tentatively slated for early December.  End Summary. 
 
-- Energy Security 
 
¶3. (SBU) Goldwyn's primary message that the U.S. views Canada as a 
valued and reliable energy partner fell upon receptive ears.   From 
the PM's office to NRCan, DFAIT and EC, we heard repeatedly that 
S/CEIA's message was welcome, 'music to their ears' and eased 
concerns about polls indicating that Americans are unaware of 
Canada's status as their primary energy supplier.  Goldwyn's visit, 
in conjunction with the recent decision to permit the Alberta 
Clipper, alleviated much Government of Canada and industry anxiety 
about the future of North American energy production and possible 
exclusion of oil sands product from the U.S. market.  Canada is keen 
to invest and focus on clean energy, but appreciated the reassurance 
that the U.S. intends to be a partner in this effort.   From the 
Government of Canada perspective, Goldwyn's public announcement that 
the U.S. relies on Canada for supply and trusts that Canada can be a 
responsible steward of its own climate-change targets, was 
immeasurably helpful. 
 
-- Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas 
 
¶4. (SBU) S/CIEA Goldwyn pitched the idea of collaborating on an 
energy project in Haiti, possibly in partnership with the 
Brazilians.  Deputy Foreign Minister Edwards was particularly taken 
with the idea and instructed his staff to follow-up immediately.  A 
subsequent joint digital video conference was held on September 29, 
Qsubsequent joint digital video conference was held on September 29, 
chaired by Goldwyn. Initial readout from the call was positive and 
discussions will continue at the working level between S/CIEA, 
WHA/EPSC, USAID, Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 
and DFAIT to outline a specific project and determine necessary 
funding. 
 
¶5. (SBU) With NRCan Minister Raitt, Goldwyn also raised the 
possibility of Canada holding an ECPA working group session on the 
oil sands, focusing on new technologies, mitigation of land/water 
effects, and clean fossil fuel extraction.  Minister Raitt was very 
enthusiastic and embraced the idea. 
 
-- Oil Sands Messaging 
 
¶6. (SBU) Both industry and the Government of Canada are clearly 
concerned about the mixed message the oil sands send and difficult 
headlines  Indeed Goldwyn happened to arrive on the heels of a 
well-publicized shut down of Shell's Albian Sands mine by Greenpeace 
activists.  NRCan and CAPP are both spending considerable time 
ruminating over the best approach to advocate on behalf of the oil 
sands.  While CAPP is ready to sell the lifecycle 'wells-to-wheels' 
 
OTTAWA 00000771  002 OF 003 
 
 
story, there is a lot of concern on the part of industry, noting 
this will be an uphill battle, with the NGOs already well ahead and 
companies not necessarily ready to commit the long-term funding 
necessary for a sustained PR initiative.   NRCan recognizes the need 
to find advocates outside of industry and have sponsored a two-year 
Council of Canadian Academies study looking at the technologies 
needed to continue improvements and reduce emissions at the oil 
sands beyond 2030.  NRCan Minister Raitt and Deputy Minister Doyle 
greatly appreciated Goldwyn's suggestions regarding the need for 
additional fact-based, third party research, trends on energy 
efficiency improvements, and increasing visibility and accessibility 
of more positive news stories. NRCan is pursuing a study by IEA and 
will explore other opportunities to engage universities and 
respected international think tanks.  The Government of Canada also 
took on board the message to reach out to the energy 
security/national security audience. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Subsequent to his departure, Senator Elaine McCoy of 
Alberta reached out to ESTH Counselor praising Goldwyn's message and 
seeking to follow-up with a discussion about a possible CODEL and 
other initiatives Alberta could take to get out its message   DFAIT 
also reached out on October 1 to note that their Alberta affairs 
section appreciated the engagement and wanted to follow-up.   All 
parties praised the U.S.' handling of the Alberta Clipper pipeline 
permit issuance and welcomed the 'sophistication' of the U.S. 
message. 
 
-- Energy Consultative Mechanism 
 
¶8. (SBU) DFAIT and NRCan both responded positively to adding an 
energy security focus to the agenda.  In general, the Government of 
Canada expressed a view that Canada hasn't taken an active enough 
role in the international energy security debate, due in large part 
to their more-than-sufficient resources and mindset that this was a 
U.S. concern. They are interested in taking a more active role in 
the future and would consider using Canada's future chair of the G8 
to advance the energy security dialogue.  NRCan informed ESTCouns on 
October 1 that they would like to add engagement at multilateral 
fora as an item to the next ECM agenda.  As for the date of the 
upcoming ECM to be hosted by the Government of Canada in Ottawa, 
NRCan is awaiting its new Assistant Deputy Minister for Energy, 
Christine Donoghue, to assume her position next week before formally 
issuing an invite.  However, both DFAIT and NRCan confirmed 
yesterday that the first week of December looks good.  DFAIT ADM 
Elaine Feldman and NRCan ADM Donoghue will co-chair the meeting. 
 
-- Canadian concerns 
 
¶9. (SBU) The concerns most frequently raised during Goldwyn's visit 
were the implications of possible U.S. legislation and renewable 
energy standards on the sale of Canadian hydroelectricity to U.S. 
markets.  The Government of Canada and the Canadian Electricity 
Association would like to see the possible harmonization of 
differing state regulations vis-`-vis electricity and renewable 
portfolio standards addressed and would welcome a possible 
conference and further dialogue on the issue.  There was also 
notable concern about possible border measures proposed in the 
Waxman-Markey bill, low-carbon fuel standards, and potential 
consequences for future oil sands development. 
Qconsequences for future oil sands development. 
 
-- Comment 
 
¶10. (SBU) S/CIEA Goldwyn's trip to Ottawa clearly struck a 
much-needed chord with the Government of Canada.  His interview with 
Globe and Mail Deputy Ottawa Bureau Chief Campbell Clark, printed in 
the September 23 edition, was hailed by the government and industry, 
spurring further discussion and debate within key energy circles in 
Canada.  Canada clearly appreciates USG recognition of their 
development initiatives in Haiti and seem to view collaboration on 
an energy project in Haiti as a way to further positive U.S.-Canada 
relations. The upcoming Energy Consultative Mechanism meeting in 
December will provide an opportunity to flesh out the energy 
security and oil sands messaging discussions.    The Government of 
Canada extended an open invitation to S/CIEA to visit Alberta and 
clearly hope that his trip was indicative of USG commitment to 
pursue emissions reductions and energy security as shared, and not 
mutually exclusive, goals.   End Comment. 
 
¶11. (SBU) The following is a complete list of the Canadian 
interlocutors with whom S/CIEA Goldwyn met during his trip: 
 
 
OTTAWA 00000771  003 OF 003 
 
 
Prime Minister Office 
-- Adam Blinick, Special Assistant, Office of Strategic initiatives 
and Public Liaison. 
 
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade (DFAIT) 
-- Leonard Edwards, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs; 
-- Sheila Riordon, Director General, Environment, Energy and 
Sustainable Development Bureau; 
-- Gary Pringle, Chief, Energy Secretariat, Environment, Energy and 
Sustainable Development Bureau; 
-- Mark Berman, Director, Climate Change Division, Environment, 
Energy and Sustainable Development Bureau. 
 
Environment Canada (EC) 
-- Ian Shugart, Deputy Minister of Environment 
 
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) 
-- Hon. Lisa Raitt, Minister of Natural Resources; 
-- Robert Klager, Chief of Staff to Minister Raitt; 
-- Cassie Doyle, Deputy Minister of Natural Resources; 
-- Kevin Stringer, Director General, Petroleum Resources Branch; 
 
Privy Council Office (PCO) 
-- Jacques Paquette, Assistant Secretary to Cabinet; Economic and 
Regional Development Policy 
 
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP) (by phone) 
-- David Collyer, President; 
-- Tom Huffaker, Vice President, Environment and Policy. 
 
Canadian Gas Association 
-- Michael Cleland, President & CEO; 
-- Brendan Hawley, Government Relations Consultant to the CGA. 
 
Canadian Electricity Association 
-- Pierre Guimond, President & CEO 
-- Eli Turk,  Vice President; 
-- Elisabeth Majeau, Senior Advisor, Electricity & Economic Policy; 
-- Geoff Smith, Senior Advisor, Government Relations. 
 
Globe and Mail Newspaper 
-- Campbell Clark, Deputy Ottawa Bureau Chief. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The following is a list of the Canadian participants in 
the September 29, 2009 DVC: 
 
PM's Office 
 
Adam Blinick, Special Assistant, Office of the Prime Minister 
 
DFAIT 
 
Andre Dormehl, Senior Policy Analyst, Energy Secretariat 
Denis Robert, Director, Haiti Task Force 
Louis Saint-Arnaud, Deputy Director, Haiti Task Force 
 
CIDA 
 
Keith Fountain, Director of Policy, Office of the Minister of 
International Cooperation 
Elizabeth Cabrera, Office of the Minister of International 
Cooperation 
Isabelle Brard, Director General, Haiti and Dominican Republic 
Chantal Boucher, Program Manager (Economic Development), Haiti 
Program 
Philip Schubert, Energy Specialist 
 
Jacobson