09PANAMA756
MOUNTING OPPOSITION TO MARTINELLI'S LIKELY SUPREME
Wed Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0756/01 2801731
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 071731Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3838
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 0003
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0011
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 0666
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3871
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 2062
RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR 1595
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0461
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 000756 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/02/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: MOUNTING OPPOSITION TO MARTINELLI'S LIKELY SUPREME 
COURT NOMINEES 
 
REF: A. PANAMA 692 
     ¶B. PANAMA 701 
     ¶C. PANAMA 657 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reasons 
1.4 (b) and  (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Rumors that President Martinelli intends to nominate 
Electoral Tribunal Magistrate Gerardo Solis and former drug 
prosecutor Jose Almengor to the Supreme Court this fall have 
been poorly received by Panamanian opinion makers. Several 
leading newspaper editors told the Ambassador and DCM that 
President Martinelli's honeymoon with the local press would 
end if he nominated the two to the Court. Objections to the 
two revolve around Solis' history of corruption, and 
Almengor's possible cover-up of Martinelli's alleged contact 
during the presidential campaign with David Murcia, convicted 
in Colombia of fraud and money laundering. End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
Gloves Coming Off? 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  (C)  The Panamanian Supreme Court consists of nine 
magistrates, sitting in three chambers. The magistrates serve 
for staggered ten year terms, with two magistrates being 
replaced every two years. The president nominates his 
candidates, and the National Assembly confirms the 
appointments with little debate. At lunch with the 
Ambassador, DCM, and PAO September 28, Geraldo Berroa, editor 
of the newspaper La Estrella, said that Martinelli would 
"lose all credibility" if he appointed Gerardo Solis and Jose 
Almengor to the two vacancies in the Supreme Court this fall, 
adding that the decision would "stain his administration." 
Solis and Almengor are widely rumored to be Martinelli's 
choices, despite their checkered pasts. Berroa, together with 
Guido Rodriguez of Panama America and Guillermo Antonio Adams 
of the popular debate program "Debate Libre", argued that 
given Martinelli's campaign promises to clean up Panamanian 
politics and his rhetoric on combating special interests, his 
supporters (including their newspapers and television 
stations) not only expect him to name honest judges instead 
of corrupt ones, they also expect an open nomination process 
with the participation of civil society. Any process that 
seemed to mirror past practices, with the President 
pre-selecting his candidates, and then carrying out a charade 
nomination process, would damage his reformist reputation. 
All three journalists said they would have to re-examine 
their editorial lines towards the Martinelli administration 
if the nomination process were not transparent. They agreed 
that if Solis and Almengor ended up on the Supreme Court, 
they would be forced to directly oppose the government. 
 
-------------------- 
Don't Make Us Do It! 
-------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  Supreme Court justice Adan Arjona told poloffs 
September 16 that Panama's newspaper of record, La Prensa, 
had been reluctant up to now to oppose Martinelli because it 
was very early in his presidency. (Note: Arjona is very close 
to La Prensa Director Fernando Berguido. End Note) He said if 
Martinelli appointed Solis it would force La Prensa into a 
difficult situation because it will "remove Martinelli,s 
mask too soon."  Arjona said Berguido understood perfectly 
well that Martinelli was not really a reformer, but that 
Berguido was afraid that La Prensa could threaten the 
governability of the country if it attacked him too quickly. 
Since so much of Martinelli's power is based on his strong 
public support as a reformer, a sustained campaign of 
opposition by La Prensa would cause his power to dissipate as 
it became clear he was "more of the same." The PRD would then 
become stronger and the country might become ungovernable. 
(Note: La Prensa was founded in 1980 in opposition to the 
military dictatorship from which the PRD was formed. It 
 
maintains a strong anit-militarist, and anti-PRD editorial 
line. End note.) Arjona insisted that Berguido just wanted 
Martinelli to act responsibly so he could hold off on 
attacking him, and keep the PRD in check. However, according 
to Arjona, Berguido has said that La Prensa will not hold 
back from attacking Martinelli at the expense of its 
reputation. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Berguido himself told the Ambassador at lunch on 
August 25 that he had heard that Solis and Almengor would be 
the candidates, and while he was not pleased, he did not seem 
outraged either. He said that there was little that could be 
done to prevent Martinelli from appointing magistrates who 
were loyal to him, without significant regard for their 
professional qualifications and moral authority. He made it 
clear at the time that he would not lead a crusade against 
the nominations. 
 
------------------- 
Those Were the Days 
------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Arjona said that Gerardo Solis was implicated in 
several acts of corruption in the past, including being the 
"bag man" for a $21 million bribe the Colon Free Zone users 
allegedly paid then president Ernesto Perez Balladares in 
1996 to reverse his decision to raise the 8% tax on CFZ users 
to 15%. In the end, the tax rate was lowered to 0%. At the 
time, Solis was the legal counsel for the CFZ. Since then, 
Solis has served as "Electoral Prosecutor" and presently 
serves as Magistrate of the Electoral Tribunal. Closely 
identified with Perez Balladares, of the opposition 
Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), Solis has a declared 
wealth of $11 million, with no known legitimate source. 
Several judicial contacts have expressed confusion as to why 
Martinelli would insist on nominating a figure associated 
with PRD corruption. Arjona told poloffs on August 26 that 
Solis had built up a relationship with Martinelli during the 
campaign, as Solis leaked him information from the Electoral 
Tribunal. 
 
---------------------- 
Oh, That David Murcia! 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Jose Almengor is the Secretary for Security in the 
Ministry of the Presidency, and former lead drug prosecutor. 
He quit his job earlier this year, while investigating the 
actions in Panama of David Murcia, who has been convicted in 
Colombia of fraud and money laundering. Murcia caused a major 
political scandal during the Panamanian presidential campaign 
by accusing the PRD presidential candidate Balbina Herrera 
and the PRD candidate for mayor of Panama City, Roberto 
Velasquez, of accepting $3 million each in campaign 
contributions from him. The story badly damaged their 
campaigns, and both lost. "La Estrella" featured on a recent 
front page accusations that Almengor discovered information 
linking Martinelli to Murcia during his investigations, and 
suppressed it. According to these accusations, Almengor will 
be placed on the Supreme Court as a quid pro quo (septel). 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Martinelli has received remarkably uncritical 
support from all the major media outlets since his election, 
despite a series of appointments and actions that might well 
have sparked outrage under the previous government. 
Unfortunately, the media, including La Prensa, seems to hope 
that the Embassy will prevent disaster by warning Martinelli 
about the appointments, rather then using their power to 
examine the candidates before hand, and organize resistance 
to the nominations. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Post is very concerned about the judicial 
nominations. The two departing magistrates, Esmeralda de 
Troitino and Arjona, are two of the most highly respected 
magistrates on the Court. While it is unclear exactly what 
 
role Almengor might play on the new Court, putting Solis on 
the Court could consolidate the block of corrupt magistrates, 
turning the Court into a focus of corruption and weakening 
the public's faith in democratic institutions.  This will 
perpetuate, or even worsen, the bad image of the judicial 
system, which is, according to global competitiveness 
rankings, the major drag on Panama's aspiration to become a 
first-world country. 
STEPHENSON