09RPODUBAI450
IRAN PRESS/NUCLEAR: FOREIGN MINISTER MOTTAKI'S OCTOBER 20
Wed Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO5465
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHDIR #0450/01 2940818
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 210818Z OCT 09
FM RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0577
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DIA FT BELVOIR
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL
RUEHDIR/RPO DUBAI 0578UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RPO DUBAI 000450 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IR PGOV PREL PARM
SUBJECT: IRAN PRESS/NUCLEAR: FOREIGN MINISTER MOTTAKI'S OCTOBER 20 
COMMENTS ON NUCLEAR ISSUES 
 
DUBAI 00000450  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
(U) The following are nuclear-related comments from IRIG Foreign 
Minister Mottaki's October 20 morning Press conference (rough 
translation follows): 
 
 
 
[On Iran's Nuclear Rights]: Today all country's admit to Iran's 
right for use of nuclear technology for peaceful goals [which he 
contrasts to the prevailing international mood at the 2005 start 
of the Ahmadinejad administration]. 
 
 
 
[On Vienna IAEA Discussions re Fuel for Tehran Research Reactor]: 
 
 
 
- In the talks that have recently taken place in Vienna, the 
sides agreed that IAEA Director General Mohammad Al-Baradei 
would announce the results of the meetings.  The face of the 
meeting for the sides is clear.  The Tehran Research Reactor 
will need new fuel in a while and based on international law and 
regulations we announced this need to the IAEA and some 
countries expressed their willingness to provide fuel, with 
technical talks for carrying out this work starting in Vienna 
yesterday. 
 
 
 
- We had announced that the TRR needed fuel.  Based on the law 
announced this need to the IAEA.  Some countries announced their 
willingness to provide fuel to Iran and technical discussions 
for carrying this out began in Vienna yesterday. 
 
 
 
- We are convinced that continuing this meeting can lead to an 
agreement by the sides to provide the 20 percent enriched fuel 
that Tehran needs. 
 
 
 
 [when asked about guaranteed supply of fuel for the TCC]:  If 
the talk is of guarantees, it is the other side who must provide 
us guarantees concerning providing fuel. 
 
 
 
[question re the Vienna talks and the probability of discussions 
between Iranian and US officials separately on its margins]: The 
negotiations took place based on the agreements that had been 
arrived at previously.  Based on the subject under discussion, 
whether officially and collectively or in the location of 
negotiations with various delegations there  was an agenda that 
existed on which agreement was reached.  As such, there are 
discussions carried out by the whole group at the official 
location and other discussions that are carried out. 
 
 
 
- Iran's proposal to the IAEA for providing fuel for the TRR was 
passed to a number of countries.  The US and Russia agreed to 
cooperate in providing fuel.  It is natural that there must be 
technical discussions between these two countries and these 
discussions are taking place with the presence of the IAEA. The 
amount of fuel we need is not great and therefore there is no 
need for the presence of the French. 
 
 
 
[question: the Western side says that most of the enriched 
uranium will be sent to Russia whereas the Iranian side is 
saying that most of the uranium will stay in Iran: what is 
Iran's decision in this matter?]: Iran has put forward its 
proposal concerning provision of TRR fuel to the IAEA.  The IAEA 
within the framework of the relevant regulations has relayed 
this proposal to some fuel producers and possessors of  fuel and 
two countries agreed to act relative to providing it.  As to by 
what mechanism the fuel will be provided and within what 
framework is the subject of discussions in Vienna.  After these 
discussions are finalized, further details will be provided by 
the discussants or by the MFA. 
 
 
 
 
DUBAI 00000450  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
[question: yesterday Iran announced that France wasn't a 
reliable country for carrying out negotiations, but based on 
reports, France is at the negotiating table today]:  France was 
not one of the countries that expressed its willingness to 
provide fuel to Iran.  For this reason it was natural that this 
meeting be carried out with countries who did express their 
willingness.  Of course naturally there are marginal issues and 
other matters being put forward in the press and by those 
following the issues which can be discussed and dealt with when 
necessary. 
 
 
 
[Freeze for Freeze]: With respect to the very clear agenda in 
Vienna with one round already carried out, such an issue is not 
on the agenda for discussions. 
 
 
 
[Effect of Baluchistan Terrorist Incident on P5+1 Talks]: We 
will give an appropriate answer to any issue at its own [i.e. 
appropriate] time. 
 
 
 
[question:  Al-Baradei has indicated that the road to solving 
the nuclear issue is via transparent discussions between Iran 
and the US, does this viewpoint exist in Iran?]  That which was 
discussed in Geneva with the P5+1 was the package of proposals 
that Iran presented and in that context it is obvious that we 
have announced our willingness for continuing these discussions. 
In our opinion the package proposed by Iran is a comprehensive 
one with various topics and can lead to good decisions and 
agreements concerning nuclear subjects, disarmament, and the 
role of the IAEA and its supervisory system. 
 
 
 
[question: if in the negotiations an agreement is reached 
concerning buying fuel, will these agreements be based on Iran 
changing or suspending its nuclear activities, or will Iran 
continue its nuclear activities as before?]  Iran's nuclear 
activities are within the framework of its NPT rights and its 
observation of its commitments are within the framework of IAEA 
regulations.  The issue of Iran's legal and peaceful nuclear 
activities has been set, towards achieving the rights of the 
Iranian nation to create nuclear energy and electricity from 
nuclear power,  and the Majlis has committed the Administration 
such that 20 thousand Megawatts of electricity be provided by 
nuclear energy, and this is an issue that various sides have 
announced. 
 
 
 
- In response to "if it doesn't happen" questions say that we 
try so that it does happen. We pursue the matter within the 
legal framework.  Based on IAEA agreements, the possessors of 
this fuel are committed to provide this fuel to countries that 
don't have it.  This is an obligation that the NPT and IEAE 
regulations puts on countries possessing fuel.  Our request is 
fully legal and clear.  The IAEA is trying to make it happen. 
We hope that the IAEA is successful in its efforts but if these 
agreements take place they have no relation to the topic of 
Iran's enrichment.  One issue is providing fuel for the Tehran 
Research Reactor and another [i.e. separate] issue is Iran's 
peaceful and legal nuclear activities for providing fuel for its 
electrical power stations, and these two topics are not related 
to each other. 
 
 
 
[Removal of France from Negotiations]: This issue has no 
relation to other issues that we have with France to include the 
potential 50 tons that we had in former agreements with France 
and matters relating to it.  This matter must be examined and 
discussed in its own place. 
EYREAE