09RPODUBAI455
IRAN PRESS/NUCLEAR: INITIAL IRAN PRESS REACTION TO GENEVA
Thu Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO7175
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHDIR #0455/01 2951402
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 221402Z OCT 09
FM RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0579
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DIA FT BELVOIR
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDIR/RPO DUBAI 0580UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RPO DUBAI 000455 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IR PGOV PREL PARM
SUBJECT: IRAN PRESS/NUCLEAR: INITIAL IRAN PRESS REACTION TO GENEVA 
IAEA DISCUSSIONS 
 
DUBAI 00000455  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) The following is a sampling of October 22 Iranian press 
coverage of the October 19-21 Vienna talks.  Initial reporting 
was mostly factual, and coverage uniformly relayed the basic 
points of the draft agreement, in addition to IAEA Director 
General al-Baradei's post-negotiation comments.  Conservative 
press highlighted that no final decision had been reached, 
"nothing had been signed," and that there was no 'Friday 
deadline' agreed to by the parties.  It also highlighted Iran's 
'principled stance' towards France which caused the French to 
apologize for past behavior and promise to reform its ways. 
Reformist press also mentioned October 20 meetings between the 
US and Iranian delegations in IAEA Director General Al-Baradei's 
office.  The only official to speak out against the draft 
agreement was Deputy Majlis Speaker Bahonar, who said that 
providing 3.5 percent enriched fuel in exchange for receiving 20 
percent fuel was "unacceptable." 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) Kayhan (conservative): "Vienna Negotiations End without 
Finalizing of Any Type of Agreement" 
 
 
 
- Diplomats in Tehran say after three days of negotiations, the 
IAEA Director General distributed a draft agreement with 
decisions concerning it deferred to the future, with the Iranian 
negotiating team and the Russian and American delegations having 
moved the final decision to their capitals. 
 
 
 
- Contrary to Western press, no agreement concerning it has been 
reached. 
 
 
 
- Based on the latest reports from Vienna, Russia and the US 
have said that the sides have until Friday to announce their 
final opinion on the draft.  However, informed officials in 
Tehran do not confirm any deadline concerning the agreement on 
the draft and are convinced that this [i.e. the Friday deadline] 
was Al-Baradei expressing his personal opinion. 
 
 
 
- Based on this report, Russia, France and the US requested Iran 
to implement an agreement whereby by the end of the year Tehran 
would provide 1200 kilograms of its own uranium to Russia, which 
would later be sent to France. 
 
 
 
- Al-Baradei didn't say whether Iran had agreed to this key 
point or not.  IRIG IAEA Representative Ali Asghar Soltanieh 
said only that Iran will be in a position to receive the fuel it 
needs for the Tehran Research Reactor (TRR), adding that "all 
details will be revealed on Friday." 
 
 
 
- Talks in Vienna stopped on Tuesday as a result of Iran's 
opposition of French presence at these negotiations and the 
statement of IRIG FM Mottaki that Iran saw no need for France's 
involvement in the provision of its fuel.  But after Iran, 
accompanied by Russia and the US, had a one-hour meeting with 
Al-Baradei in his office to discuss the contents of the 
negotiations. 
 
 
 
- Sources close to Vienna say that France distanced itself from 
its former behavior and its unwillingness to act according to 
its former nuclear obligations with respect to Iran, and 
announced its commitment to correct its past behavior and its 
commitment to its new obligations. 
 
 
 
- An informed source close to the Vienna negotiations emphasized 
"With this act France is seeking to correct its past behavior 
and reform its record of nuclear interaction with Iran so that 
as a consequence Iran will accept Paris as one of the sides of 
the agreement to provide TRR fuel." 
 
 
DUBAI 00000455  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
 
- Iranian officials in Vienna announced their opposition to the 
presence of France in the fuel deal due to its lack of 
commitment to its obligations, to include providing 50 tons of 
UF6 gas to Iran.  In this regard, IAEA officials say that based 
on the proposed agreement Russia will enrich the uranium to the 
necessary levels and France will have a secondary and indirect 
role. Iran's IAEA representative said that at the end of the 
talks Russia was designated as responsible for implementing the 
full agreement for providing TRR fuel. 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) Majlis Deputy Speaker Mohammad Reza Bahonar: "Exchanging 
3.5 percent fuel for 20 percent fuel isn't acceptable to us." 
 
 
 
In a press conference Majlis Deputy Speaker Bahonar was asked 
about the just concluded Vienna talks, to which he replied: 
 
- The issue relates to the Tehran Nuclear Reactor which we have 
had for a long time and which needs 20 percent enriched fuel. 
The IAEA is responsible for providing this fuel, which is about 
to expire, to us.  The AEOI has written a letter to the IAEA in 
this regard to provide this fuel and the IAEA has referred the 
matter to Russia and the US.  IAEA members are responsible to 
provide this fuel. 
 
 
 
-They proposed in the negotiations to give 20 percent fuel in 
exchange for receiving 3.5 percent enriched fuel from us, which 
is not part of the IAEA agreements.  Our official position is 
that they must provide this fuel and we have announced that if 
the international community won't carry this out, we'll provide 
the fuel ourselves and this is part of our firm rights. 
 
 
 
- Now the matter under discussion is that they are saying to us 
give us 3.5 percent fuel so that we give you 20 percent fuel 
which is not acceptable to us, and the Islamic Republic [Majlis] 
Representatives are busy discussing [this issue] to arrive at a 
conclusion. 
 
 
 
¶4. (U) Tabnak: (Conservative/Moderate, affiliated with 
Expediency Council Secretary Mohsen Rezai) 
 
 
 
- Informed sources in Tehran have said that the Vienna 
discussion ended .. with the Western side, despite several 
modifications of its positions, being unable to finalize any 
agreement with Iran. 
 
 
 
- Immediately after the negotiations' end, Western media 
announced Iran's "agreement" to the draft proposal, but informed 
Tehran sources say no agreement took place and Al-Baradei just 
presented the draft agreement to those present. 
 
 
 
- This source says that, "in the Vienna talks Iran was 
successful to get rid of France as one side of the arrangement 
with Iran, despite one day of resistance by the Western sides in 
Vienna.  But finally they were forced to realize that there 
would be no agreement with the presence of France. 
 
 
 
- It is noteworthy that foreign press has quoted Al-Baradei as 
announcing a Friday deadline for the parties to announce their 
views on the draft agreement. Concerning this, informed 
officials in Tehran have said that his statement is inconsistent 
with the content of the discussions and was his own personal 
opinion. 
 
 
 
 
DUBAI 00000455  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
- Based on reports received, in a meeting IRIG IAEA 
representative had with "Daniel Poneman" [sic], a US 
representative, a general plan was put forward for providing 
safety equipment for the Tehran Research Reactor main control 
room, and some other equipment. 
EYREAE