09STATE103665
SUDAN ELECTIONS: UNSC DRAFT PRESS STATEMENT
Mon Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0023
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3665 2782327
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 052308Z OCT 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8023UNCLAS STATE 103665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM SU XA XW
SUBJECT: SUDAN ELECTIONS: UNSC DRAFT PRESS STATEMENT 
 
¶1. Action Request:  Department requests that USUN seek a UN 
Security Council Press Statement regarding preparations for 
elections in Sudan at the earliest opportunity.  USUN should 
refer any substantive changes to the draft press statement in 
paragraph two to the Department prior to adoption. 
 
¶2.  Begin draft statement: 
 
The Security Council welcomes the report of the 
Secretary-General on elections in Sudan (S/2009/391.) 
Elections are a critical milestone in the implementation of 
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).  The Security 
Council emphasizes that the parties to the CPA must take 
ownership of the electoral process and calls on both parties 
and the relevant national authorities to accelerate and 
increase the transparency of elections preparations. 
 
The Security Council notes with concern that the National 
Elections Commission still has not released a complete 
operational plan or budget for the administration and 
organization of elections, which would enable donors and 
observers to fully assist in the electoral process.  The 
Council is deeply concerned that no final political 
resolution related to census results has been reached. 
Expeditious resolution of these issues is an essential part 
of the electoral process, and the Council urges the National 
Congress Party, the Sudan People,s Liberation Movement and 
relevant national authorities immediately to address these 
issues. 
 
The Security Council calls on the parties to the CPA and the 
relevant national authorities to ensure the establishment of 
an electoral environment conducive to free, fair, 
transparent, inclusive and credible elections.  The Council 
is gravely concerned about the decision by the NEC not to put 
in place policies addressing registration of internally 
displaced persons and refugees, which are a critical part of 
enabling the greatest number of persons to exercise their 
right to vote.  The Security Council also emphasizes that 
domestic and international election monitors will be an 
important element of transparent and accountable elections 
and encourages policies facilitating elections observation. 
The Council welcomes the announcement that direct nightly 
censorship of newspapers has ended and urges the government 
to revise all laws that restrict civil liberties. 
 
The Security Council stresses that during the elections 
period, it is essential that there be sufficient security and 
safety to permit the voting population to cast their ballots 
in an environment free of insecurity or retribution, and 
action is needed now to ensure such security exists.  The 
Council calls on government authorities to accelerate 
preparations for providing electoral security. 
 
¶3.  Please report action to IO/UNP action officer Trina Saha 
(SahaTD@state.gov or 202-647-2641.) 
CLINTON