09USUNNEWYORK925
U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONTINUES (SEPTEMBER 28, PM):
Mon Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3636
RR RUEHDT
DE RUCNDT #0925/01 2921538
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191538Z OCT 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7368
INFO RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0420
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 1121
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 1184
RUEHWN/AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN 0209
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY 1488
RUEHDT/AMEMBASSY DILI 1356
RUEHDL/AMEMBASSY DUBLIN 0485
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0305
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 0745
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON 0637
RUEHLU/AMEMBASSY LUANDA 0099
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0074
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA 0395
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 0125
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 0001
RUEHYN/AMEMBASSY SANAA 0014
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 1196
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT 0001
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0172
RUEHYE/AMEMBASSY YEREVAN 0142
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH 0013
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 3882UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 USUN NEW YORK 000925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GUINEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON KPKO UNGA UN AF AM AO BB CD
EC, GM, GV, HO, IC, ID, KN, MR, MY, MZ, NI, PO, ST, TT, UZ, 
YM 
SUBJECT: U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONTINUES (SEPTEMBER 28, PM): 
HONDURAN PRESIDENT SPEAKS FROM BESEIGED CAPITAL, DPRK, 
AFGHANISTAN AND OTHERS 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: The continuation of the U.N. General Debate 
saw an impassioned and unscripted speech by the Honduran 
Foreign Minister calling on the United Nations to restore 
order and democracy in her besieged country. To highlight the 
point, she called Honduran President Zelaya on her cell phone 
while at the podium via speakerphone. He addressed the hall, 
while still holed up in the Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa, 
calling for leaders to take a stand and restore order. The 
Democratic People,s Republic of Korea defended its nuclear 
program as merely a deterrent and blamed the United States 
for raising the stakes. Security Council reform, climate 
change, the financial crisis, non-proliferation, and 
development issues were central themes; the following 
countries spoke: Mauritania, Iceland, Barbados, Chad, St. 
Lucia, Yemen, Uzbekistan, Mozambique, Armenia, and Guinea, 
Ecuador, Angola, Timor-Leste, Malaysia, Afghanistan, Nigeria, 
Honduras, the Democratic People,s Republic of Korea, 
Portugal, and Germany. Full text of statements available on 
at www.un.org/ga/64/generaldebate; video archives are at 
www.un.org/webcast/2009.html.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) MAURITANIA:  Minister of Foreign Affairs Mouknass 
thanked the Presidents of Libya and Senegal for calling for 
peace in Mauritania.  She reiterated her country's commitment 
to uphold stability and the rule of law and then expressed 
solidarity with the Maghreb Union, the Arab League, and the 
African Union.  Mouknass also called for United Nations 
reform, including the Security Council, adding that Africa 
and the Arab world should have permanent seats.  Mauritania 
said that the arrest warrant for the Sudanese President, Omar 
Bashir, hindered peace and was counter to international law. 
 
¶3. (U) IRELAND:  Minister of Foreign Affairs Power supported 
the cooperation of the United States and Russia on their 
post-START policies. He commended the United States Middle 
East Envoy, George Mitchell, for his efforts at achieving 
peace for Israel and Palestine and felt particularly 
fortunate to have the benefit of Mitchell,s skills in 
Ireland.  Power called for Iran to protect basic human 
rights, cease uranium enrichment, and "to answer 
satisfactorily all questions regarding its nuclear 
activities, particularity in light of the latest revelations 
regarding the previously undisclosed nuclear site at Qom." 
 
 
¶4. (U) BARBADOS:  Minister of Foreign Affairs McClean called 
for United Nations and Security Councilreform, adding that 
Barbados would not take part in any effort to marginalize the 
United Nations or join with those questioning its legitimacy. 
 McClean was also concerned about the decision making powers 
of a limited group of countries, stating that "No exclusive 
group of countries, no matter how big, powerful or rich, have 
a monopoly on solutions."  McClean called for the lifting of 
the Cuba embargo and reintegration of Cuba into hemispheric 
affairs, and hoped that U.S.-Cuba relations would be 
normalized. 
 
¶5. (U) CHAD:  Minister of Foreign Affairs Mahamat mentioned 
the trade embargo with Cuba and hoped that the new United 
States Administration would lift it in the near future.  He 
also blamed developed countries for global warming and the 
economic crisis and urged them to "step up their efforts." 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000925  002 OF 005 
 
 
¶6. (U) ECUADOR: The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Trade and 
Integration Fander Falconi Benites stressed the need for 
greater multilateralism, emphasizing the benefits of regional 
collectives such as the Union of South American Nations 
(UNASUR) as helpful to "promote democracy and welfare in a 
collective and consensual manner." Benites criticized the 
United States for its embargo on Cuba and the OAS for 
blocking Cuba's membership. The FM offered his support for 
the ousted government of President Zelaya and declared that 
"The international community has categorically and 
unanimously rejected this attack against democracy."  With 
respect to the financial crisis, the FM noted the need to 
create financial architecture that more adequately addresses 
the needs of the developing world, noting that the recently 
agreed upon "Constitutive Agreement of the Bank of the South" 
will help to "fortify human development in the South." The FM 
also noted the commitment of Ecuador to preventing further 
climate change, protecting refugees, and to the MINUSTAH 
mission. 
 
¶7. (U) ANGOLA: Minister of External Relations Assuncao Afonso 
Dos Anjos stated that food security is a major priority for 
Angola and that it is necessary to develop national and 
integrated strategies to keep food costs in check.  Anjos 
reminded delegates that between 2004 and 2007, Angola had a 
period of explosive growth, nearly doubling the value of its 
GDP, and that the nation has seen a steep rise in its 
GDP/human development ratio.  He called for Security Council 
reform and noted that the institutions of the United Nations 
in general must "adapt to the modern world." The Angolan FM 
spoke out against the continuing embargo against Cuba, 
considering it a violation of the United Nations charter. 
Anjos spoke in favor of greater multilateralism in addressing 
climate change, eradicating poverty, and fighting disease. 
 
¶8. (U) TIMOR-LESTE: Minister for Foreign Affairs Zacaria 
Albano da Costa noted the importance of the United Nations 
continuing mission, UNMIT, in building the security apparatus 
of the country and stated that its role is "still needed for 
ensuring long term peace and stability in our country." The 
FM quoted President Obama,s line "to search for our own 
path" in reference to Timor-Leste,s period of transition. He 
noted his country,s opposition to the economic sanctions 
placed on Cuba by the United States.  The FM stressed the 
importance of Timor-Leste,s relations with Indonesia and 
explained that his country has, "based relations on 
reconciliation." He expressed strong support for efforts to 
combat climate change, even in spite of Timor-Leste not being 
in as imminent danger as some other island nations. He 
offered support for nuclear non-proliferation and for the 
G20,s efforts to revamp the financial system in the wake of 
the crisis. 
 
¶9. (U) MALAYSIA: Foreign Minister Datuk Anifah Aman pushed 
leaders to adopt strong measures in Copenhagen, asking states 
to sacrifice, stating "Let me be absolutely clear on this: 
there will not be a deal in Copenhagen, when some are keen to 
 steal the deal.'" Aman addressed the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict as an area of particular concern and said that he 
"looks to the U.S. to undertake the role of an honest 
broker," but added a cautionary hope that "the reality of the 
action by the U.S. matches its rhetoric." The FM strongly 
supported the latest non-proliferation efforts, Security 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000925  003 OF 005 
 
 
Council enlargement, and a reform and strengthening of the 
Bretton Woods Institutions. The FM reminded the audience of 
Malaysia's long commitment to the United Nations and remarked 
on its placement of troops in United Nations Peacekeeping 
Operations since 1960. 
 
¶10. (U) AFGHANISTAN: Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr. Rangin 
Dadfar Spanta raised regional and global concerns before 
dealing with the challenges within Afghanistan. Spanta noted 
the 40th anniversary of the 57-member Organization of the 
Islamic Conference and said that the Muslim community still 
faces significant challenges, and that Islamophobia is an 
issue that Western nations in particular need to address. 
Spanta spoke optimistically about some of the more 
encouraging signs in his country, including an expansion of 
health care services, education for both girls and boys, 
growth of media, and the holding of provincial and 
presidential elections. Acknowledging the difficulties of the 
recent elections, he warned the audience not to "assess a 
young terrorist-inflicted democracy with the criteria of 
stable, prosperous, and centuries-old democracies." Spanta 
stated that "Afghanistan fully endorses President Obama's new 
strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan as well as the new 
assessment by General McChrystal, particularly the emphasis 
on a comprehensive and long-term strategy." 
 
¶11. (U) NIGERIA: Minister for Foreign Affairs Ojo Maduekwe 
checked poverty, food security, development goals and health 
issues as critical to the work of the United Nations. He 
pointed to ongoing efforts of African countries to tackle 
malaria as the beginning and not the end of the struggle to 
eliminate the disease. The FM gave a nod to the 
non-proliferation process, noting an appreciation for the 
engagement of the United States and Russia on the issue. He 
then diverted the discussion to the more immediate issue of 
small-arms reduction, commenting that these weapons have 
killed far more than have nuclear bombs. The FM called for 
Security Council reform, asking members to consider enlarging 
the body. He noted Nigeria's interest and commitment to 
peace-making in neighboring African countries including Niger 
and Guinea Bissau. 
 
¶12. (U) HONDURAS: Foreign Minister Patricia Rodas engaged the 
audience with an impassioned speech in which she called for 
the international community to take immediate steps to 
restore the rule of President Zelaya. She revealed a cell 
phone to the audience with an open line to Zelaya, holed up 
inside the Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa. The announcement 
was greeted by a standing ovation by several delegations. 
President Zelaya told the audience that a dictatorship was 
now in place and the rights of the Honduran people were being 
suppressed. "Today Channel 36, the only media opposed to the 
government (the coup) had their transmissions cut, this is a 
serious crime when people are silenced. I call on the United 
Nations to restore the rule of law, to provide freedom, to 
provide support, to provide a firm position against 
barbarity." The Foreign Minister continued by describing 
offenses of the new government including sending people to 
concentration camps. She feared that many people including 
the President himself - despite the protection that ought to 
be in place from the diplomatic position of the Brazilian 
embassy - may suffer violence at the hands of the military 
forces. Rodas called on the United Nations to take several 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000925  004 OF 005 
 
 
actions, first suggesting that the General Assembly convene a 
special session since it has "the means to respond in 
emergency situations, to calm fears, and to take necessary 
actions" (she did not/not mention the role of the Security 
Council here, only the General Assembly).  Second she called 
for a United Nations diplomatic mission to Honduras to assess 
the situation on the ground and to search for solutions. 
Third, she asked that the United Nations focus on the day to 
day crisis, particularly with respect to violence and Geneva 
Convention issues as they pertain to the matter of the 
encroachment on the Brazilian embassy where Zelaya was 
camped. Rodas continued with strong words warning of the 
dangers of doing nothing, calling on leaders to embrace 
democracy, and finally begging the audience "to ensure never 
again this sad story be perpetuated."  The President of the 
General Assembly thanked her for her "moving words." 
 
¶13. (U) DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA (DPRK): Pak Kil 
Yon, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs said that his is "a 
country in which national power is strong, everything is 
thriving and the people are living happily with nothing to 
envy in the world." He defended his country's nuclear 
capacity as being merely for the purpose of deterrence and 
said that any potential denuclearization "depends on whether 
or not the United States changes its nuclear policy towards 
Korea...the United States administration must discard the old 
concept of confrontation and show the 'change' in practice, 
as it recently stated on several occasions."  Yon promised 
that the DPRK will continue its nuclear force as necessary 
and that "deterrence will be directly proportional to the 
threat on the Korean Peninsula, as in Europe and elsewhere." 
He called sanctions unfair and unequal. He went on to blast 
the Security Council as "the most anachronistic organ in the 
United Nations" and recommended urgent reforms to ensure that 
the body was more democratic and representative. He suggested 
that human rights matters must be focused more on "big 
countries, the west and European countries." 
 
¶14. (U) PORTUGAL:  Minister for Foreign Affairs Joao Gomes 
Cravinho focused on climate change and noted that "Portugal 
is strongly committed to renewable energy." On Honduras, 
Cravinho called for restoration of the Zelaya government, and 
for proper diplomatic immunity to be respected regarding the 
embassy of Brazil. The Foreign Minister also called for 
Security Council reforms, noting that the institution cannot 
be seen as fully representative if countries such as Brazil 
and India, along with all of Africa, have no permanent seat. 
The Foreign Minister also praised Guinea-Bissau and 
Timor-Leste as Portuguese speaking communities showing social 
and economic development. 
 
¶15. (U) GERMANY: Ambassador Thomas Matussek raised concerns 
over the Iranian nuclear program, noting that "the belated 
admittance by Iran concerning the construction of a second 
enrichment plant underlines that our concerns are more than 
justified." Matussek urged Iran to comply with IAEA 
requirements and to "become an anchor of stability in its 
region." He advocated strongly in favor of meaningful 
Security Council reform; he offered a grim hypothetical that 
alternative bodies might be created to circumvent the 
Council, noting that, "such a rivalry would be detrimental to 
us all."  He reiterated his country's commitment to climate 
change, development assistance, the non-proliferation 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000925  005 OF 005 
 
 
process, stabilization of Afghanistan, and engagement in 
Africa.  With respect to the Middle East peace process, 
Matussek remarked that, "Germany strongly supports President 
Obama's intensive commitment and regional approach." 
 
¶16. (U) OTHER INTERVENTIONS: St. Lucia, Yemen, Uzbekistan, 
Mozambique, Armenia, and Guinea addressed the debate's 
favorite topics: climate change, the economic and financial 
crisis, security and peace, the Millennium Development Goals, 
and United Nations and Security Council reform.  They 
reiterated that the international community needs to work 
together to solve these issues.  Saint Lucia was appreciative 
of development assistance from the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Canada, and others, but also stressed the importance 
of South-South cooperation as an effective development tool. 
Yemen noted that the blockade on Gaza disregarded the rights 
of the Palestinian people.  Uzbekistan said that the largest 
countries were aggravating the economic crisis by pursuing 
protectionist and restrictive policies.  Mozambique expressed 
concern over efforts to undermine the Maputo agreement and 
called for full implementation by political stakeholders. 
Armenia stated that "Azerbaijan consistently misrepresents 
the essence of the Nagorno Karabagh problem" and engages in 
violence against the people of Nagorno-Karabagh.  Guinea said 
it was trying to recover from political and economic 
corruption and poor governance, having narrowly avoided 
social implosion upon the death of the former president. 
Wolff