05ANKARA2491
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, April 15-
Mon May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 ANKARA 002491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, April 15- 
30, 2005 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published on Wednesday, April 20 in The Messenger, 
http://www.messenger.com.ge; 
     TITLE: Georgians Still Seek Jobs Abroad 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The detention of a bus full of Georgian 
     women on the Russian-Finnish border in March reiterated 
     the desperation of a large part of the Georgian 
     population to find, albeit menial, work. 
     While investigations indicate they were not heading to 
     Europe as part of sex-trafficking, they were still 
     examples of human trafficking - most lacked even basic 
     cash, few had any idea of the specific route of the 
     trip and all had received visas for their trip from the 
     same consular official in Moscow. 
     This week President Mikheil Saakashvili declared that 
     Georgia will cancel its visa regime unilaterally with 
     numerous developed countries. He argues the move will 
     boost tourism and investments. At the same time, it may 
     be a preliminary bid to get improved visa rights for 
     Georgians seeking to travel abroad. However, until 
     Georgia's economy improves and the problem of 
     unemployment diminishes, it is unlikely these countries 
     will be willing to lower requirements. 
     Ten years ago the Shevardnadze-administration promised 
     to create one million new jobs in the country but it is 
     clear that they fell short of this mark. The Citizens 
     Union, the ruling party at the time, claimed that it 
     had in fact created many new opportunities and cited as 
     an example efforts to give state owned lands to rural 
     inhabitants. 
     Agricultural work, however small scale, is an important 
     factor in determining the country's employment rates, 
     particularly since government statistics count a person 
     as fully employed if they eke out a living from family 
     farm plots. 
     This statistical procedure means the number of 
     officially unemployed registered in Georgia is much 
     lower than the number of people who have lost former 
     jobs. According to the government's 2004 statistical 
     data, the number of unemployed people totaled 224,000 
     last year, including 203,300 in urban centers and 
     41,400 in the villages. The bulk of the unemployed are 
     registered in Tbilisi, approximately 104,200 persons, 
     as reports Rezonansi. 
     Migration is a major reason for the low levels of 
     unemployment. In 2004, the an estimated 4.7 people for 
     every 1,000 left the country. By comparison, Romania 
     has a migration loss of only 0.13 migrants per 1,000 
     residents. Some of the emigrants take their families 
     with them while others send money back home to Georgia. 
     Working legally in a foreign country is an elusive 
     dream for most Georgian s and instead they look for 
     jobs in informal sectors, such as construction, 
     homecare, cleaning and the sex industry. 
     Current statistics show a majority of Georgian migrants 
     are in western countries, particularly Turkey, Greece, 
     Spain, Holland and Belgium. Whereas in Turkey and 
     Greece an entire family may look for work, in Spain it 
     is only men who seek jobs, mostly in the construction 
     industry, reports Rezonansi. 
    In a recent report on Georgians working abroad, the 
    paper states salaries in Greece range from EURO 350-800 
    per month, depending on a person's language skills. In 
    Spain salaries are higher, with women earning an 
    average EURO 700 per month. Men working on construction 
    sites are paid by the hour - EURO 4-8 for unqualified 
    illegal workers and for EURO 8-10 qualified workers. 
    Holland is one of the best places for emigrant workers, 
    the paper states, because they can receive an average 
    pay of EURO 10 per hour, only slightly less than the 
    current monthly pension in Georgia. END TEXT. 
¶3. (U) Reported by the Sofia News Agency on Wednesday, April 
20, http://www.novinite.com/newsletter/: 
 
     TITLE:  Sofia Lines FBI to Bust Criminal Ring 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Bulgarian policemen have lined FBI agents 
     to bust a major channel for human trafficking and 
     forged identity papers manufacture. 
 
     The criminal ring has been under watch on the 
     territories of Greece, Turkey and Bulgaria for six 
     months, Bulgarian police announced. 
 
     Twelve masterminds of the channel have been arrested, 
     along with an illegal immigrant, and another nine 
     members of the criminal ring are sought for. 
 
     In Bulgaria, the network has spread in Sofia, Pernik, 
     Kardzhali and Haskovo, Interior Ministry's Secretary 
     Lieutenant-General Boyko Borissov announced on 
     Wednesday. 
 
     Under the illegal scam, forged documents were made up 
     in Bulgaria for individuals who had crossed Bulgarian- 
     Turkish border illegally and sought to further towards 
     countries of Western Europe, through either Turkey, or 
     Greece. 
 
     Besides identity documents, the criminals have 
     falsified also driving licenses, visas and euro, 
     Bulgarian police said. END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Reported by the Anadolu Ajansi on Thursday, April 21: 
 
     TITLE:  In an Operation Two Hotels Were Raided 
     and 41 People were Detained, including 37 Women 
     Allegedly involved in Prostitution 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Istanbul (AA) In an operation two hotels 
     were raided in Silivri and 41 people, including 37 
     women, who allegedly were involved in prostitution were 
     detained. 
 
     Units from the Istanbul Police Law and Order and 
     Foreigners Departments after receiving information 
     from abroad (on the hotels) put under surveillance the 
     two hotels in Silivri. 
 
     The police discovered that one of the hotels was used 
     for accommodation and the other for prostitution. 
     They raided both at the same time. 
 
     In the operation 37 foreign women who were involved in 
     prostitution, as well as two responsible directors of 
     the hotels and two others who were mediating in 
     prostitution were detained. 
 
     The women in their testimony to the police said that 
     they voluntarily came to Turkey and (willingly) got 
     involved in prostitution.  They were taken to the 
     Foreigners Department for deportation. 
 
     The other four people were sent to the prosecutor for 
     legal action. END TEXT. 
¶5. (U) Published in Southeast European Times, Thursday, 
April 21, http://www.setimes.com: 
     TITLE:  Bulgarian Police, Western Services Smash Human 
     Trafficking Channel 
     BEGIN TEXT:  SOFIA, Bulgaria -- The interior ministry 
     announced on Wednesday (20 April) that the National 
     Service for Fighting Against Organised Crime has broken 
     a human trafficking channel, with the assistance of the 
     FBI office in Sofia, as well as German and French 
     services. The channel, which trafficked illegal 
     immigrants to EU member states using forged documents, 
     was under watch for six months in Bulgaria, Greece and 
     Turkey. 
     In other news, official statistics suggest employment 
     in Bulgaria's informal or grey economy was cut almost 
     twofold in the past two years. It is estimated that 
     around 14 per cent of all workers are currently engaged 
     in the grey economy. END TEXT. 
¶6.  (U) Published in the Turkish Daily News, Thursday, April 
21, 2005: 
     TITLE:  Brutal human traffickers in the Balkans 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Belgrade - The Associated Press - Human 
     traffickers are growing every more brutal, increasingly 
     targeting children over the internet, in schools and 
     youth groups, international officials said as they 
     presented an annual report on Wednesday on human 
     trafficking in southeastern Europe.  "It's an extremely 
     sophisticated crime network; the faster you respond, 
     the faster they change trends," said Mary E. Black, a 
     UNICEF anti-trafficking coordinator and one of the 
     presenters who launched the report in Belgrade.  END 
     TEXT. 
¶7.  (U) Reported by the Macedonian Press Agency on Saturday, 
April 23, http://www.mpa.gr: 
     TITLE: Komoutsakos on the Turkish Ambassador Visit to 
     Thrace 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Athens, 22 April 2005.  Greece has nothing 
     to comment.  It has nothing to say and nothing to hide. 
     Equality before the law is a reality in Thrace and in 
     accordance with the European standards, principles and 
     values.  Greece is a European country and law is 
     applied equally on all Greek citizens, stated Foreign 
     Ministry spokesman Giorgos Koumoutsakos on the occasion 
     of the visit of the Turkish ambassador to Athens to the 
     Muslim villages in Thrace, northeastern Greece. 
     Referring to the 12th Black Sea Economic Cooperation 
     Foreign Ministers' Council meeting to take place 
     tomorrow, he said that this is the last ministerial 
     meeting under Greek Presidency.  In the meeting the 
     BSEC ministers will adopt the Komontini Agreement on 
     actions concerning the sectors of energy, tourism, good 
     governance, measures against organized crime and 
     illegal human trafficking, transportation, market 
     economic cooperation and specifically, small-medium 
     sized businesses. 
     He also underlined the BSEC Greek Presidency was marked 
     in a way by the signing of the cooperation memorandum 
     on the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline.  END TEXT. 
¶8. (U) Published by Sofia BTA on Thursday, April 21: 
     TITLE:  Bulgaria:  Further Arrests in Human 
     Trafficking, ID Counterfeiting Case Announced 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSCRIBED TEXT:  Khaskovo, April 21 
     (BTA)-Four more organizers of a ring trafficking people 
     from Turkey through Bulgaria to the countries of the EU 
     and counterfeiting IDs have been arrested, Interior 
     Ministry Chief Secretary General Boyko Borisov said. 
     He added that the four were arrested in the Pernik- 
     Sofia region. 
     The police confiscated computer configurations, hard 
     discs, passports, driving licenses, including a 
     passport of a Romanian national. 
     The operation called "Spectrum" is continuing, General 
     Borisov said.  Some 100 policemen are combing Kurdzhali 
     region for the three remaining immigrants, Gen. Borisov 
     said. 
     General Borisov said in Khaskovo Wednesday (20 April) 
     that twelve organizers of the ring had been arrested in 
     a specialized operation of the National Service for 
     Combating organized Crime and the Regional Directorates 
     of the Interior in Khashovo, Pernik, Sofia and 
     Kurdzhzali.  The operation is conducted with the 
     assistance of FBI offices.  END TEXT. 
¶9.  (U)  Published by Reuters News on Sunday, April 24: 
     TITLE:  Migrant women trapped in Europe's sex industry 
     BEGIN TEXT:  LONDON, April 24 (Reuters) - The money 
     Rosa was earning in a Turkish shoe factory was not 
     enough to support the three children she had left 
     behind in Ukraine. 
     Then her new friend in Turkey, Katerina, told her she 
     could earn $700 a month as a casino waitress in Bosnia 
     and convinced Rosa to come home with her to Moldova and 
     then make their way to Bosnia. 
     "I began to think of all the things I could do to 
     change my life to help my children, my family." 
     As the time came to leave Moldova, Katerina said she 
     had a problem with her passport and would join Rosa in 
     Bosnia a week later. At the station, she introduced 
     Rosa to a Romanian man who would accompany her. 
     Rosa felt something was wrong when she said goodbye and 
     Katerina just turned away. 
     "I pushed my feelings aside," said Rosa, who declined 
     to give her real name. "I don't usually trust anyone, 
     but I told myself that sometimes you have to have 
     faith." 
     Rosa paid Katerina $300 to get her a job but a criminal 
     gang had already paid Katerina $700 to make Rosa their 
     slave. 
     She was smuggled across Europe in cars and once in a 
     fold-away bed on a train, was sold and resold, beaten, 
     raped and forced to work in brothels. 
     She was afraid to escape because her captors had kept 
     her passport, home address and photos of her children. 
     Rosa was freed months later in Britain when police 
     raided a sauna she was working in. But her captors are 
     still at large. 
     Poverty, war, open borders and domestic violence are 
     prompting increasing numbers of people from eastern 
     Europe and beyond to seek work in the wealthy West. 
     With governments tightening limits on immigration, 
     women desperate for work in bars, shops and hotels have 
     come to rely on crooks to spirit them across borders 
     using false identities. 
     "The profits are huge and the money the traffickers 
     wave in potential victims' faces would certainly 
     outweigh the salaries they can expect by staying at 
     home," said Richard Danziger, head of the counter- 
     trafficking unit of the International Organization for 
     Migration in Geneva. 
     On the wrong side of the law in a foreign land, some 
     of the women find themselves forced into prostitution. 
     They are powerless to resist their captors. Many have 
     sex with up to 30 men a day for months on end. 
     OUT OF SIGHT 
     The trade in people for forced sex has mushroomed into 
     a $12 billion industry to rival drug trafficking and 
     gun-running. Because the victims are locked in rooms or 
     moved around in secret, it is almost impossible to 
     trace them. 
     It also makes quantifying the problem virtually 
     impossible. Five years ago, the British government 
     estimated that as few as 140 or as many as 1,400 women 
     had been smuggled into the country and forced to work 
     as prostitutes. 
     Social workers say the problem has grown alongside 
     lurid Internet sites and flyers plastered on the walls 
     of phone booths fuelling a demand for unprotected and 
     risky sex that few women would willingly supply. 
     "There is definitely too much work to deal with," said 
     Anna Johansson of the London-based Poppy Project, which 
     helps women trying to leave prostitution. "We're 
     getting referrals from Birmingham, Sheffield, 
     Liverpool, from all across the country." 
     Many women contract chlamydia, syphilis and sometimes 
     HIV because they are forced to have unprotected sex. 
     They are often left with painful scars and some become 
     sterile. Most suffer from post-traumatic stress 
     disorder. 
     "Almost all those we work with have flashbacks and 
     nightmares and cannot sleep," said Johannson. "They can 
     be extremely frightened of strangers and find it hard 
     to go out alone." 
     She said one woman had approached the Poppy Project 
     after leaping to freedom from a second-storey window, 
     breaking bones in her foot. 
     Another's hopes were raised when a client promised to 
     help her and bought her from her captor, then locked 
     her away in an apartment and visited her at night twice 
     a week on the way home to his wife. 
     FROM SOHO TO SUBURBIA 
     Last month, three east European men were jailed for up 
     to 18 years under new British trafficking laws after 
     they lured a 15-year-old Lithuanian girl to Britain on 
     the promise of a summer job, then sold her for 4,000 
     pounds ($7,586). 
     Three months later she turned up barefoot at a northern 
     England police station after eluding her "owner" in a 
     nightclub. 
     But renewed efforts to stamp out the trade may be 
     pushing it further underground, from red-light 
     districts such as London's Soho to houses and 
     apartments in the suburbs, many of which are unknown to 
     the police. 
     "Women here are not advertised. Access is gained by 
     word of mouth," said Johansson. "That's quite dangerous 
     as the authorities are not that likely to come across 
     them." 
     Campaigners say anti-immigration policies could be 
     making things worse. Sending victims straight home 
     means they cannot testify against their owners in 
     court, and can expose them to more danger by landing 
     them back where they were kidnapped. 
     "You can't break the problem of trafficking by sending 
     people back to where they were trafficked from," said 
     Mary Cunneen, director of Anti-Slavery International. 
     Last year a woman helped put her captors behind bars 
     for nine years. Fearing reprisals if she returned to 
     her small village in Moldova, she applied for asylum in 
     Britain. 
     "She applied in February last year but there has still 
     been no response," said Johansson. "The chance of her 
     being re-trafficked is high, but this has not been 
     recognised." END TEXT. 
¶10.  (U) Reported by the Anadolu Ajansi on Monday, April 25: 
     TITLE:  29 Illegal Immigrants Captured Near Samos, One 
     Turk Arrested 
     BEGIN TEXT:  AA reporting from Athens.  The 
     Greek Coast Guard captured 29 illegal immigrants near 
     Samos island and detained a Turk for trafficking these 
     people. 
 
     The Greek Maritime Commerce Ministry noted that the 
     illegal immigrants were from Afghanistan and Iraq and 
     the Turk who brought them to the island and who tried 
     to flee was Mehmet Ulu (37). 
 
     Ulu will be sent to the prosecutor.   END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  (U) Reported by the Anadolu Ajansi on Tuesday, April 
26: 
     TITLE:  Prostitution Operation in Istanbul 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  During an operation in some hotels, bars, 
     discothques and night clubs, 132 foreign women who 
     are allegedly involved in prostitution and four people 
     who were serving as mediator were captured 
 
     In an operation against some hotels, bars, 
     discothques and nigh clubs in various sub-provinces 
     of Istanbul in the past one week, 132 foreign women who 
     allegedly were involved in prostitution and four people 
     who were mediating for prostitution were captured. 
 
     According to information gathered by the AA 
     correspondent, Istanbul Foreigners Police and Public 
c 
     Order Police Morals Department conducted operations in 
     the hotels, bars, discothques and nigh clubs in 
     Silivri, Bakirkoy, Beyoglu and Besiktas. 
 
     During these operations 132 foreign women from Russia, 
     the Ukraine, Moldavia and Kyrgyzstan who were 
     allegedly involved in prostitution were captured and 
     four Turks were detained for mediating for 
     prostitution. 
 
     While the women were sent to the Foreigners' Department 
     for necessary (paper) work for their deportation the 
     four (Turks) who were sent to the prosecutor were 
     arrested and put in jail. END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  (U)  Published by CBC News Viewpoint on Wednesday, 
April, 27: 
 
     TITLE:  False Hope and Shattered Dreams 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Lured by the promise of better prospects 
     and quality of life, thousands of Ukrainian women have 
     left their homes and families only to become victims 
     of human trafficking. 
 
     While they're often promised work as waitresses, in 
     stores, or as domestic workers, many young women are 
     forced into sexual exploitation, usually to pay off the 
     cost of their "migration." Stripped of their passports, 
     threatened and abused, these women become trapped. 
 
     According to the International Organization for 
     Migration (IOM), Ukraine is one of the main European 
     countries of origin for human trafficking for the 
     purpose of forced prostitution. Although the exact 
     number of victims is unclear, estimates indicate that 
     since Ukraine's independence in 1991, as many as 11 
     million Ukrainian citizens have crossed the border to 
     work abroad, usually irregularly. Thousands of these 
     people became victims of trafficking. 
 
     While men are also trafficked into forced labour 
     situations and make up about two-thirds of migrants, 
     women make up the overwhelming majority of those 
     returning as victims of trafficking. 
 
     IOM assisted nearly 1,800 trafficked people between 
     2000 and the end of 2004, including 625 people last 
     year alone. The number of people assisted increases 
     each year. IOM statistics show that 289 trafficking 
     cases were filed by the Anti-Trafficking Unit of the 
     Ministry of Internal Affairs in 2003 and 169 cases were 
     filed in 2002. 
 
     Also in 2002, Interpol Ukraine received 742 notices 
     from 30 countries concerning trafficking involving 
     Ukrainian victims. 
 
     With declining standards of living, low wages, and 
     generally few employment prospects in Ukraine, many 
     view work abroad as the best option available to them. 
     The thought of sending money home to their families 
     also gives them the extra push they need. 
 
     For women, the motivation to leave is even greater as 
     many are looking to flee situations at home involving 
     moral, verbal, sexual or physical assault. According to 
     the IOM assessment, the collapse of the social 
     infrastructure following the breakup of the Soviet 
     Union has created an extra burden for many Ukrainian 
     women, particularly in rural areas where they do all 
     housework with no electricity or running water. 
 
     Consequently, more women are pressured to seek 
     unskilled, low wage employment abroad such as waiting 
     on tables, housekeeping, personal care or dancing. 
     Although a few women know they are going abroad to be 
     prostitutes, many learn their fate upon arrival in the 
     destination country. 
 
     Victims are usually recruited through a combination of 
     acquaintances and intermediaries at nightclubs, student 
     gatherings, on public transportation, or at train 
     stations in regional city centres. Women - often mother 
     and daughter teams - are the primary recruiters in 
     Ukraine while men control recruitment abroad. 
     Trafficking victims also act as recruiters - either 
     forcibly or on their own upon their return to Ukraine, 
     knowing the profit that can be made. 
 
     So where do victims end up? IOM has assisted Ukrainian 
     trafficking victims from more than 40 countries 
     including South Korea, Nigeria and Yemen. But more than 
     two-thirds of IOM's caseload returned from Italy, 
     Greece, Poland, Macedonia, Russia and Turkey. Victims 
     of trafficking are also found in the United Arab 
     Emirates, Germany, Portugal, Spain, the former 
     Yugoslavia, Cyprus, Israel, Syria, Lebanon, Hungary, 
     the Czech Republic and Romania. 
 
     Counter-trafficking initiatives are high on the list of 
     priorities for many non-governmental organizations 
     (NGOs) in Ukraine. A great deal of effort is spent on 
     prevention - specifically through awareness campaigns - 
     and legislation has been made to combat trafficking. 
     Anti-trafficking hotlines have been set up and a 
     network of NGOs across Ukraine has been established to 
     co-ordinate victim assistance and prevention 
     initiatives. 
 
     Organizations such as the IOM, Revival of the Nation, 
     La Strada International Women's Rights Centre and 
     Faith, Love, Hope assist returning victims with 
     reintegration, travel assistance, accommodation, legal 
     assistance, medical care, counselling, and vocational 
     training. 
 
     On an international level, all embassies of the 
     Schengen countries (a bloc of 15 European nations) in 
     Kiev meet monthly to share information on the topic and 
     have created a blacklist of tourist agencies with whom 
     they will no longer co-operate because of the agencies' 
     involvement in trafficking. As a result, visas will not 
     be issued to individuals who use these agencies as 
     intermediaries. 
 
     However, prevention of trafficking is made difficult 
     for Ukrainian authorities and international 
     organizations because of the irregularity of the 
     migration process, even for successful migrants. 
 
     Many successful migrants get around work permit 
     regulations by travelling to the country of destination 
     independently as tourists and staying there, working 
     illegally. Successful migrants usually have a higher 
     education, contacts in the country of destination, and 
     money to pay for the travel abroad. 
 
     Many female victims, ashamed of what they did when 
     abroad, never tell their families or friends about 
     their experience because they are afraid to come 
     forward lest they be stigmatized. Others, many of whom 
     are men, are not aware they were victims of 
     trafficking. 
 
     All of this makes collecting information useful for 
     prevention and prosecuting traffickers a bigger 
     challenge than it already is, allowing the situation to 
     go on indefinitely. END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  (U) Published by Armenialiberty, www.armenialiberty.org 
on Wednesday, April 27: 
 
     TITLE:  Journalist Inquiry Implicates Armenian 
     Officials in Dubai Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Armenian authorities have done little 
     to combat illegal trafficking of hundreds and possibly 
     thousands of Armenian women abroad for sexual 
     exploitation despite their persistent claims to the 
     contrary, according to the findings of a nearly year- 
long journalistic investigation. 
 
Edik Baghdasarian, a prominent investigative reporter, 
and Ara Manoogian, an Armenian-American activist, have 
suggested that senior law-enforcement officials in 
Yerevan are maintaining close ties with Armenian 
prostitution rings in the United Arab Emirates for 
personal gain. They allege in particular that some of 
those officials regularly visit Dubai to collect bribes 
from the local Armenian pimps and women trafficked by 
them. 
 
"We have compelling evidence we collected there that 
suggests individuals within the Armenian government and 
in high-ranking positions are directly involved with 
this ring," says Manoogian. 
 
The two men have repeatedly visited the Gulf Arab 
nation over the past year, interviewing scores of 
Armenian prostitutes and secretly videotaping glitzy 
night clubs where they usually find clients. Their 
detailed accounts of the Dubai sex business were 
presented in a series of reports that appeared recently 
in the Hetq.am online publication of Baghdasarian's 
Association of Investigative Journalists. Baghdasarian 
has promised to make more scandalous revelations in a 
separate documentary which is expected to be aired by 
an Armenian TV channel next month. 
 
The Hetq.am reports suggest that there could be as many 
as 2,000 Armenian prostitutes working in the UAE and 
other Gulf states at present. Virtually all of them are 
said to have traveled there with fake Russian passports 
provided by their traffickers in Moscow. UAE law 
forbids foreign single women below the age of 31 from 
entering the country. The documents overstating the 
women's age thus allow prostitution ringleaders to 
easily flout this restriction. 
 
Baghdasarian and Manoogian claim that the UAE 
authorities are well aware of that but turn a blind eye 
because they too have a share in the business involving 
tends of thousands of women from across the former 
Soviet Union. "This is a well-organized business with a 
rigid chain of command," says Baghdasarian. 
 
Most of the trafficked women come from poor families 
and were lured into prostitution with a promise of 
quick money. "I couldn't find a job [in Armenia]," one 
of them, a divorced woman from a village in southern 
Armenia, is quoted as saying in a Hetq article. 
"Wherever I went, they asked me to sleep with them 
before they would offer me a job. We Armenians are like 
that - if you're divorced, then that's it, they can 
think anything about you." 
 
The prostitutes reportedly have to give the Armenian 
pimps in Dubai a large part of their income. According 
to the authors of the inquiry, many of them are forced 
to have sex 10 or even more clients a day in order to 
secure the minimum daily sum required by their 
"employers." They say that the Armenian pimps are in 
turn subordinated to a Syrian-born Arab known as Assad. 
He is said to have strong connections with officials at 
the UAE's police and immigration departments. 
 
Scores of Armenian women are also thought to have been 
trafficked to other parts of the Middle East, notably 
Turkey. The phenomenon dating back to the mid-1990s 
came under public spotlight in 2002 when the U.S. State 
Department placed Armenia in the so-called "Tier3" 
group of states which Washington believes are doing 
little to tackle illegal cross-border transport of 
human beings. 
 
The embarrassing criticism led the Armenian authorities 
to take what the State Department later described as 
"significant efforts" to reduce the scale of human 
trafficking. They set up a special inter-ministerial 
commission tasked with tackling the problem. It also 
began to be publicly discussed by government officials 
and non-governmental organizations. 
 
Armenia was removed from the U.S. blacklist and 
upgraded to the "Tier 2" category in 2003. "The 
Government of Armenia does not fully comply with the 
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking; 
however, it is making significant efforts to do so," 
the State Department said in a report last year. 
 
Baghdasarian disagrees. "The prosecutors say they are 
combating the problem, but I don't see any action," he 
says. 
 
Armenia's Office Prosecutor-General rarely launch 
criminal investigations into suspected instances of 
human trafficking. Only two such cases were reported 
last year. Although Armenia's new Criminal Code enacted 
in 2003 raised the maximum jail term for trafficking 
from two to eight years, court rulings against 
individuals convicted of related charges have remained 
lenient. 
 
One such person, Amalia "Nano" Mnatsakanian, was 
arrested in the UAE on an Interpol warrant and 
extradited to Armenia in March 2004. She was sentenced 
to two years' imprisonment by a Yerevan court last 
August only to be released less than two months later. 
Another reputed pimp, Marietta Musaelian, is expected 
to released soon, well before completing her two-year 
sentence. 
 
Baghdasarian says most of their "colleagues" remain at 
large and have little to worry about. As recently as 
last February he sent a young female journalist posing 
as a prospective prostitute to two women known to be 
involved in a Dubai prostitution ring. Their 
conversation in a Yerevan apartment was secretly 
recorded. 
 
"I've sent more than a hundred people to the Emirates," 
one of the women called Sirush told the undercover 
journalist. "They were from 16 to 27. I don't take 
anyone older." 
 
"It'll cost me $3,000-$4,000 to get you to Dubai. 
You'll be met in Moscow and they'll get you a new 
passport. After that you'll go to Dubai," she added. 
 
"If you go there, you won't want to come back," said 
the other pimp, Nelli. 
 
Andranik Mirzoyan, head of the investigations 
department at the Prosecutor-General's Office, claimed 
on March 16 that most traffickers remain unpunished 
because they enjoy government protection in the UAE. 
"There [in Dubai] a pimp is protected by the police and 
by the 'authorities' [criminal gangs]. They have their 
own laws, and there are some problems," he complained 
after a meeting of senior prosecutors that discussed 
the problem. 
 
Mirzoyan also told reporters that a team of Armenian 
investigators traveled to Dubai in February to try to 
"persuade" Armenian prostitutes to return home. But 
Baghdasarian insists that the officials' actions were 
less than altruistic. 
 
"We have recordings of girls in Dubai saying that they 
gave thousands of dollars to a particular employee of 
the prosecutor's office. We know their names, where and 
when they met." he says, adding that such visits from 
Yerevan have been regular. 
 
Citing unnamed Dubai prostitutes, Baghdasarian wrote 
last month that one of those officials, Aristakes 
Yeremian, cut a deal with at least one Armenian pimp. 
The Prosecutor-General's Office has still not reacted 
to the allegation. 
 
But Yeremian, who is a senior investigator at the law- 
enforcement agency, rejected the charges on Wednesday. 
"Such a thing is impossible," he told RFE/RL. Yeremian 
admitted meeting several Armenian pimps in Dubai "for 
questioning" but denied extorting any money from them 
through blackmail and arrest threats. 
 
     Visiting Yerevan last July, Russian Interior Minister 
     Rashid Nurgaliev announced the arrest a "criminal 
     group" of Armenians in Moscow who allegedly transported 
     young women from Armenia to the UAE via Russia. The 
     suspects were immediately extradited to the Armenian 
     authorities to face prosecution, he said. 
 
     "They were flown to Yerevan and set free a month 
     later," says Baghdasarian. "I asked one law-enforcement 
     official why they were released. He said they probably 
     paid a lot of money." 
 
     That there is lots of money involved is obvious from 
     figures provided to Hetq by the Armenian Central Bank. 
     They show that the total amount of cash remittances 
     wired to Armenia from the UAE totaled almost $8.8 
     million last year, up from just $1.6 million registered 
     in 2001. With Armenian imports from the UAE by far 
     exceeding exports in 2004, a large part of that money 
     may well have been generated by the prostitution 
     networks. 
 
     Manoogian, who runs a charity and small businesses in 
     Nagorno-Karabakh, believes that many of the trafficking 
     victims can be repatriated and reintegrated into 
     Armenian society. He is currently lobbying 
     international and Diaspora organizations to finance a 
     special rehabilitation center for them. "Right now we 
     are in the process of putting together a rehabilitation 
     program," he says. 
 
     But Baghdasarian is skeptical about the effort: "Ninety 
     percent of those women knew what awaits them in Dubai 
     and are earning much more than they could do here." 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶14. (U) Published by Anadolu Ajansi, Friday, April 29: 
 
     TITLE: SECURITY FORCES INTERCEPT 25 ILLEGAL MIGRANTS 
     IN ISTANBUL 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: ISTANBUL (A.A) - 29.04.2005 - Turkish 
     security forces intercepted 25 migrants in Istanbul 
     who had entered Turkey illegally, sources told the A.A 
     on Friday. 
     The migrants of Pakistani origin who did not have 
     passports and ID cards, will be deported once the legal 
     proceedings are completed. 
     Meanwhile, 2 Iraqi and 3 Pakistani were detained for 
     human trafficking. END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN