05ANKARA2782
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, May 1-15,
Mon May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 ANKARA 002782 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, May 1-15, 
2005 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published in Hurriyet on Tuesday, May 3: 
 
     TITLE: SHE CAME TO SERVE AS A NANNY, BECAME A SEX 
     SLAVE 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Twenty-two years were demanded for the 
     six members of a gang that forced Kyrgyz women, who 
     were brought as nannies, into prostitution.  The women, 
     who complained about the gang, which involved policemen 
     as well, told what they experienced. 
 
     The prosecution of a 6-person gang, including two 
     policemen, that allegedly forced into prostitution 
     Kyrgyz women who were brought to Turkey to serve as 
     nannies, began.  The Istanbul Heavy Penal Court Number 
 
     4 began the trial.  Suspects Ali Toprak (policeman), 
     Kyrgyz citizens Gulanda Sasykbaeva and Dina Joroeva, 
     who are under arrest, attended the court session. 
     Suspects Ali Satirli (policeman), Burhan Topuz and 
     Fahriye Bilice are at large but there is an arrest 
     warrant on them.  The Court demanded heavy imprisonment 
     terms from two to 22 years for the suspects. 
 
     In his testimony suspect Ali Toprak said, "My 
     colleague Ali Satirli called me and requested help for 
     obtaining visa for his girl friend Yelda's friend.  I 
     took them to the Foreigners Department.  I'm 
     innocent." 
 
     Dinara Amankulova, who filed a complained against the 
     suspects, said that she came to Turkey to serve as a 
     nanny.  She noted that the suspects beat her and 
     forced her into prostitution.  She said that they 
     turned her into a sex slave. 
 
     Nazgul Tokonbaeva said that Dina Joroeva first sold 
     her to a woman called Yelda who sold her along with 
     four people to men. 
 
     Victim Zinagul Taichieva, too, testified at the court. 
 
     After studying the evidence, the court released Ali 
     Toprak. 
 
     The court was adjourned in order to listen to victim 
     Roza Raeva. END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  (U) Published in Cumhuriyet on Tuesday, May 3: 
 
     TITLE:  Prostitution Operation in Istanbul 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Necdet D., and Zekeriya K. in Istanbul 
     and Okan G., in Sanliurfa were detained for allegedly 
     forcing foreign women into prostitution. 
 
     Necdet D., and Zekeriya K., were arrested by the 
     court. 
 
     Works are underway for capturing three other suspects 
     who are believed to be in Sanliurfa. END TEXT. 
 
¶4.  (U) Published in Cumhuriyet on Sunday, May 1: 
     TITLE:   Is there Child Pornography? 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  There is no data in Turkey on children who 
     were subject to commercial exploitation.  But it is 
     known that their number is not small.  In recent years 
     the fastest growing exploitation is pornography 
     because its production, duplicating and distribution 
     is very easy. 
 
     Harika Yucel is a psychologist.  She also is the 
     coordinator of a study by ECPAT on children who were 
     subject to commercial exploitation in Turkey.  The 
     research in Diyarbakir and Istanbul looks for answers 
     to questions such as, "What is the status of 
     commercial exploitation involving children?" "What 
     types are more widespread?" "What is the policy of the 
     media on this issue?" and "What are the protective 
     measures?"  We spoke to Yucel on child pornography in 
     Turkey. 
     Would you talk about yourself first? 
     I've been working for six years with groups that are 
     under risk.  At the Association for Renewed Health and 
     Education, I dealt with children who lived on the 
     streets and especially girls who were subject to 
     commercial exploitation.  For the last six months I 
     have been working with adolescents who are at intensive 
     risk and their families at the Community Center in 
     Umraniye.  We provide education and psychological 
     support to these kids and their families. 
     What is the status of child pornography in Turkey? 
     Although one may not hear a lot about child pornography 
     in Turkey, it is an existing problem.  Globalization 
     and the developments in digital technology turned this 
     issue into a problem that crosses the borders.  It is 
     very, very simple to produce, duplicate, exchange them. 
     One can reach a photograph issued anywhere around the 
     world on the Internet or you can produce and market 
     something else.  Pornography is one of the fastest 
     growing types of sexual exploitation right now around 
     the world. 
 
     What kind of results did you obtain in the ECPAT study? 
     It won't be right for me to say anything about the 
     results because the study is not yet over.  Sexual 
     exploitation is kept as a secret and it is hard to find 
     data on it.  It is the same around the world.  With 
     this study we will take the picture of the status of 
     children who are exposed to commercial exploitation in 
     Turkey.  The study will be completed in a month or two. 
     But this is only the beginning.  Later we will prepare 
     a campaign for convening a national consultation and an 
     action plan meeting with the participation of all 
     experts on the issue and necessary measures to be taken 
     will be determined.  For this study we met with those 
     who sell pornographic products.  If we can obtain 
     permission, we will also meet with children who were 
     exploited commercially and who are under protection. 
     When we asked whether there was child pornography to 
     those who sell pornographic material, they say "No." 
     But if we ask for "minor pornography" they say that 
     they have it.  As is the case around the world in 
     Turkey, too, people don't think that until the age 18 
     all are considered a child.  It is thought that if a 
     person's body is developed, he/she no longer is a 
     child.  Another defense mechanism is that in the child 
     pornography they sell, it is foreign kids playing. 
 
     What is the scope of child pornography? 
     There is a dispute in the world on this issue.   In 
     general it is defined as showing a child in actual 
     action or pretension of being involved in a sexual act 
     or to expose the genitals of the child.  There is a 
     debate that "artistic" activities with pictures and 
     graphics should be evaluated as part of expression of 
     freedom and democratic rights.  But all these indicate 
     that there can be sexuality between a child and an 
     adult.  All children from babyhood on can be used as a 
     sexual material.  But the real risk is for the 
     adolescents because they are considered as adults. 
     There are many websites that use the rhetoric like high 
     school students and virgins.  Mostly adolescents enter 
     the Internet.  There are many traps in particular in 
     the chat sites.  Photographs and chats there can be 
     used for very different purposes. 
 
     If there a profile for those who view child 
     pornography? 
     There is not a particular profile. But particularly it 
     is the men.  Reaching a certain social or cultural 
     status is not a determining factor.  In the past it was 
     said that people who watch such things had suppressed 
     sexuality.  But the research now shows that there is no 
     longer such a difference. 
 
     What is the satisfaction lying beneath? 
     Many people think that if a child shows sexual 
     development there would not be a problem in entering a 
     relation with him/her.  This also has something to do 
     with gratifying youth and beauty.  On the other hand, 
     it also has something to do with power and authority. 
     In relationship with a youngster, the person feels more 
     powerful.  I believe there has been sexual exploitation 
     aiming at youngsters for centuries.  But when you look 
     at the issue from pornography, you see a serious 
     change. 
     Is it the Internet that played a key role? 
     Yes there are many websites on the Internet that 
     include child pornography.  They constantly change 
     their names and addresses.  By creating a virtual 
     credit card and without identifying yourself, you can 
     "shop" from these sites.  Indeed some websites require 
     depositing serious fees to admit members. Some others 
     demand pictures or photographs never aired before to be 
     presented for new memberships.  Interpol is trying to 
     detect those who enter child pornography sites.  But it 
     could reach a few.  Very few of the kids whose pictures 
     and photographs were aired could be reached. END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  (U) Reported by Anadolu Ajansi on Tuesday, May 3: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A panel discussion was held on child 
     pornography at the Gazi University on May 3, 2005. 
 
     Prof. Oguz Polat, Head of the Forensic Medicine 
     Department at the Marmara University, argued that 
     children end up on the streets in Turkey basically 
     because of child exploitation.  He stressed the 
     importance of children living through the role that 
     his/her age requires.  He added that economic, as well 
     as physical exploitation of children affect children 
     badly.  Polat noted that child exploitation includes 
     all types, such as physical, sexual, emotional 
     exploitation and negligence.  He argued that the 
     percentage of children in secondary education who are 
     beaten in Istanbul was 87.  He added that 91 percent of 
     women who leave their houses because of domestic 
     violence and take refugee in shelters were beating 
     their children. 
 
     Polat stated that sexual exploitation of children in 
     general occurs when a child is between 8-11.  He added 
     that it was one of the exploitations hardest to detect. 
     Polat noted that when one studies the court cases of 
     those exploited sexually by their relatives, you see 
     that 57 percent are exploited by their own fathers. 
     Four percent by their own older brothers, three percent 
     by their close relatives, and 26 percent by a second 
     degree relative. 
 
     Prof. Ayse Yalin, president of the Turkish Psychologist 
     Association, said that mostly kids between 9-11 were 
     subject to sexual exploitation.  She noted that ten 
     percent of such kids were under the age of six.  She 
     noted that sexual exploitation affects the health and 
     development of a child in a bad manner. END TEXT. 
 
¶6.  (U) Published by Kosovareport, Tuesday, May 10, 
www.kosovareport.blogspot.com: 
 
     TITLE:  Gul:  "We support the realization of the 
     standards of international community prior to a final 
     status on Kosovo" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Bucharest (A.A.) - 10.05.2005 - Turkish 
     Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah Gul 
     has indicated today (Tuesday) that Turkey supports the 
     realization of the standards of international community 
     prior to a final status of Kosovo. 
 
     Participating in a meeting of the ministers of foreign 
     affairs within the framework of Southeast European 
     Countries Cooperation Process, Gul remarked that the 
     status quo in Kosovo is a matter of concern for the 
     whole region.  "There are problems that have not been 
     resolved.  High levels of unemployment and the 
     instability in the economy continue to be threats to 
     stability in Kosovo," mentioned Gul. 
 
     Gul stressed that Kosovo must be supported with 
     economic packages.  "The solution in Kosovo would be 
     possible with the participation of all groups involved. 
     Dialog between the main groups is essential for the 
     resolution of all disputes in Kosovo," told Gul. 
 
     Gul commented that the maintenance of peace and 
     stability in the Balkans would be beneficial for every 
     one.  "The international organizations can play a vital 
     role in the region," expressed Gul. 
 
     Gul noted that Turkey supports NATO's "open door" 
     policy and added that NATO is open to all countries 
     that meet the basic criteria. 
 
     Gul said that countries must cooperate full in order to 
     deal with immigration, organized crime and human 
     trafficking.  Gul stated that Turkey is ready to do all 
     it can to fight against international terror. 
     "International terror is a threat to the region and the 
     whole world itself," declared Gul.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Published by Chisinau Infotag on Tuesday, May 10: 
 
     TITLE:  Moldovan-Turkish Sex Trafficking Ring 
     Eradicated 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  Chisinau, 10 May:  The 
     [Moldovan] law-enforcement agencies have exposed and 
     eradicated a ring of Moldovan-Turkish traffickers, who 
     earned more than 1m dollars by sexually exploiting a 
     large number of Moldovan girls. 
 
     The Interior Ministry's press service told Infotag that 
     the network consisted of three Moldovan criminal rings 
     headed by a 38-year-old Turkish national,(?Mustafa 
     Estimez).  These groups, called the Central group, the 
     Gypsy group and the Gagauz group, were active in 
     central and southern parts of Moldova in 2001-04. 
 
     About 20 victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation 
     were found in brothels in Turkey owned by the Turkish 
     citizen.  The traffickers had promised girls that upon 
     their arrival to Turkey they would work as dancers in 
     night clubs. 
 
     The law-enforcement agencies have identified all 
     members of the trafficking ring and detained seven of 
     them, including their leader (?Mustafa Estimez).  Ten 
     criminal cases have been filed against them.  Some of 
     the detainees face life imprisonment. 
     Infotag note.  Since the beginning of this year, 87 
     cases of women trafficking, 25 cases of child 
     trafficking and 31 cases of prostitution have been 
     discovered. END TEXT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Published by Islamic Republic News Agency on 
Wednesday, May 11, www.irna.ir: 
 
     TITLE:  Pakistan, Greece to cooperate in anti-terror 
     war 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Pakistan and Greece have agreed to enhance 
     cooperation to curb the menace of human trafficking, 
     narcotics and drugs and war on terrorism. 
 
     This was agreed between a meeting of the Interior 
     Minister Mr. Aftab Ahmed Khan Sherpao and Greek 
     Minister for Public Order Mr. George Voulgarakis in 
     Islamabad on Wednesday. 
 
     Both the sides also signed an agreement to curb the 
     menace of human trafficking, production and trafficking 
     of narcotics and drugs, war on terrorism and organized 
     crime. 
 
     Both the countries have also agreed to launch a 
     campaign among the people to create awareness about the 
     negative impacts "of illicit human trafficking," 
     Interior Minister Aftab Sherpao and Mr. Voulgarakis 
     told a joint news conference. 
 
     Pakistan and Greece have also agreed to contact Iran 
     and Turkey which are used as a land route for human 
     trafficking to "Greece from Pakistan for taking 
     measures to control this menace," Sherpao said. 
 
     He said Pakistan had proposed a meeting of the four 
     countries to discuss the issue in Athens.  "Both the 
     countries will convince Iran and Turkey to extend 
     cooperation in other fields also including forensic 
     technology, methods of criminology research and prevent 
     illegal entry in the both countries. 
 
     He appreciated Pakistan's role in the war against 
     terrorism and said his country looks more important 
     role of Pakistan in this war in future also. 
 
     He said that strengthening relations with Greece will 
     also help Pakistan to further cement its ties with the 
     European Union. 
 
     About seventy thousand Pakistanis are working in 
     Greece, who proved themselves as a peaceful community 
     and the "government is working to legalize their stay," 
     the Greek official added.  END TEXT. 
 
¶9.  (U) Reported by Kiev Kanal 5 TV in Ukrainian on 
Saturday, May 7: 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  Ukraine and Turkey will 
     ease visa procedures for the nationals-businessmen and 
     international haulage drivers.  Agreement was reached 
     to prepare an appropriate document, the Ukrainian 
     Foreign Ministry's press service has said. 
 
     The two parties also decided to sign an agreement on 
     extradition of criminals and cooperation in human 
     trafficking very soon.  END TEXT. 
 
¶10. (U) Published by Bucharest Observatorul Militar on 
Thursday, April 28: 
 
     TITLE:  Romania Organizes International Conference on 
     Black Sea Security, Cooperation 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  The international 
     conference considering the "Black Sea Area and Euro- 
     Atlantic Security:  Strategic Opportunities" took place 
     last week at the Cotoceni Presidential Palace.  The 
     conference was organized by the Romanian Presidency, 
     with the assistance of the American, British and German 
     Embassies to Bucharest, and of the "George C. Marshall" 
     European Center for Strategic Studies and of the 
     Association "George C. Marshall" Romania.  Its goal 
     was, as President Traian Basescu pointed out in his 
     opening speech, the debate of the Black Sea-related 
     problems, as well as the search for "solutions apt to 
     best meet both the legitimate national interests, and 
     the need for security of the Euro-Atlantic community." 
     Considered in a wider context, the Black Sea area 
     includes both the countries located along the sea 
     coast, and the Caucasus states, whose geographic 
     proximity is doubled by their identify of economic and 
     cultural interests with the countries in the Black Sea 
     area.  Moreover, the present and future interests of 
     the European Union and of the North-Atlantic Alliance 
     lead to the need to set up good relations between 
     Romania and Bulgaria, which are both NATO members and 
     future EU members, on the one hand, and among the 
     countries interested in setting up partnerships with 
     those organizations, on the other hand.  In that 
     context, Romania's initiative of starting such debates 
     and cooperation actions helps achieve a higher level of 
     understanding of the situation in the Black Sea area, 
     and, at the same time, promotes our country as an 
     important actor in the region. 
 
     Many speakers expressed their opinions in the debates: 
     ambassadors, professors, or representatives of several 
     institutions that cooperate in the field of security. 
 
     Mihai Stanisoara, president of the Defense Commission 
     of the Chamber of Deputies, Dr. John Rose, president of 
     the "George C. Marshall" European Center for Strategic 
     Studies, and Dr. Roger Kangas, professor at the same 
     prestigious institution, made exclusive declarations 
     for the military press. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] Will there also be cooperation 
     at the level of the parliaments in the countries in the 
     region, on the subject of the strategic opportunities 
     offered by the Black Sea area? 
 
     [Stanisoara] Certainly, as the parliamentarians are 
     authorized by the people's vote, who work alongside 
     with the experts in the ministries in the field.  By 
     their activity and by a dialogue with the citizens, 
     they can inform the people regarding plans for the 
     future, and can assure a consultation, capable of 
     placing the citizens at the center of the political 
     decision making process. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] What is the importance of the 
     Black Sea area? 
 
     [Stanisoara] Its importance is given by the increasing 
     interest of both the EU and the United States, as well 
     as of other actors in the region.  Beside the fact that 
     it is an area of a strategic military importance, it is 
     also a crossing point of several goods transportation 
     routes, power conveyance networks, and of cultural 
     cooperation. 
 
     Dr. John Rose 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] What was the goal of this 
     conference? 
 
     [Rose] Its goal was that to give the possibility to 
     important leaders o the international and Romanian 
     community to meet, have the possibility to discuss, 
     find political solutions, and set up new connections. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] Which are the countries in the 
     Black Sea area that have been the main targets of this 
     conference? 
 
     [Rose] We can see which they are by just looking at the 
     black Sea map:  Bulgaria, Romania, the Republic of 
     Moldova, Russia, Turkey, Ukraine, the countries in the 
     Caucasus region.  In other words, all the countries 
     located by the Black Sea coast, plus a few other 
     countries that are located in its vicinity, and had to 
     participate in the conference. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] Why did the countries in the 
     Caucasus region have to also participate? 
 
     [Rose] Because the security subjects discussed here 
     will influence the political developments in the whole 
     Black Sea region. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] How do you see the development 
     of the region in the following five years? 
 
     [Rose] There are two variants, which are equally 
     possible.  One of them is that we will solve some of 
     the most difficult problems-drug and personnel 
     trafficking, terrorism, border security-and thus will 
     create the pre-requisites for a generation of peace, 
     stability, and economic growth.  If we are not able to 
     solve those problems, we will have a generation that 
     will be confronted with conflicts, war, and 
     instability, and this is something that nobody wants. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] What is the role that Romania 
     plays in assuring the achievement of the first variant? 
 
     [Rose] First of all, Romania has already assumed a 
     leading role.  Nobody needs to tell the people who live 
     in the Black Sea region what their problems are, 
     because they know them very well.  The only thing that 
     they have to do is find the will to start solving those 
     problems, and this is what Romania is doing.  It 
     invites the other countries in the region to discuss 
     those problems, to develop a mutual trust, and I hope 
     that this will lead to the carrying out of more stable 
     actions, and to finding variable solutions. 
 
     Dr. Roger Kangas 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] What this the identity of the 
     Caucasus and of the Black Sea? 
 
     [Kangas] The countries in the Caucasus region are in a 
     special position.  Their identity has been tied to the 
     one of the Soviet Union for many years, as they were 
     its members.  What can we say about their position now? 
     Are they located in the Middle East, in Asia, in 
     Europe?  Our colleagues in Georgia consider themselves 
     as Europeans.  Georgia is a Christian state; it has 
     commercial relations with Romania, Turkey, Bulgaria, 
     Ukraine, and this is why it wants to follow the same 
     course as the others do.  Their goal can be fulfilled 
     if they create their Black Sea identity. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] What will happen if this 
     identity is not created?  What if the European variant 
     is refused to them? 
 
     [Kangas] This possibility also exists.  Nothing we can 
     say about the future can be 100% certain.  They will 
     probably reconsider their position if conflicts 
     continue in the region, for example, or if the states 
     decide to change their orientation, or if the European 
     organizations and the security structures, such as 
     NATO, for instance, decide to no longer get involved in 
     the Caucasus region.  They will probably remain a part 
     of the former Soviet space, or will choose to orient 
     themselves toward the south, toward Turkey, Iran, or 
     other countries in West Asia.  I myself believe that 
     NATO and the EU consider this region as an important 
     one, and that they will certainly play an important 
     part in the region. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] Could a rift from the EU and 
     NATO become a security risk? 
 
     [Kangas] Possibly, but the major challenge is for the 
     countries in the region to cooperate.  The southern 
     Caucasus has unfortunately never been a stable region, 
     but if economic relations improve, we will probably be 
     able to also work on the political relations, and solve 
     the security problems, one by one. 
 
     [Observatorul Militar] Do you believe in the 
     possibility that those countries come to work together? 
 
     [Kangas] The Marshall Center has a course on security 
     in the southern Caucasus that is attended by people 
     from Azerbaijan, Georgia, Armenia, and Russia, who are 
     dealing with security issues for four weeks.  We can 
     see the tensions that are being created, but 
     cooperation is possible if all interested parties make 
     compromises, to a certain extent.  It is true that 
     there are animosities and tensions among them, but 
     organizations such as NATO or OSCE can intervene, and 
     solve those conflicts. END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  (U)  Published by Southeast European Times 
(www.setimes.com) on Wednesday, May 11: 
 
     TITLE:  Greece Takes Over SEECP Chairmanship from 
     Romania 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The eighth summit of the South-East 
     European Co-operation Process (SEECP) began in 
     Bucharest on Tuesday (10 May), marking the end of 
     Romania's one-year term as the organization's chairman- 
     in-office and the beginning of Greece's mandate.  The 
     two day event began with a  meeting of the heads of 
     government of the nine member states-Albania, Bosnia 
     and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, 
     Macedonia, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and Turkey. 
     Representatives of a number of international 
     organizations are also attending, including the EU, the 
     OSCE, the UN, NATO, the Council of Europe and the 
     Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe.  According to 
     a Romanian Foreign Ministry statement, the main topic 
     on the agenda is SEECP's role in democratic stability 
     processes and as a platform for regional co-operation. 
 
     Co-operation was the theme of Romanian President Traian 
     Basescu's opening address.  Noting that countries in 
     the region face common challenges, "from terrorism to 
     trafficking in human beings and organized crime," he 
     urged them to work together to find solutions. 
     The summit took place less than a month after Romania 
     and Bulgaria signed their accession treaty with the EU. 
     Greece is the only SEECP country that is already an EU 
     member. 
 
     "I am convinced that Bulgarian President Georgi 
     Parvanov and Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis 
     will agree with me that we should share our countries' 
     experience in order to speed up the processes in the 
     Western Balkan countries," Bulgaria's Focus agency 
     quoted Basescu as saying.  Membership in the Euro- 
     Atlantic structures is the only option for achieving 
     security and stability in the region, he added. 
     Addressing the foreign ministers of Tuesday, Romanian 
     Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu said SEECP 
     countries have a common goal of joining the EU and 
     should thus overcome the legacies of the past. 
     Stressing the importance of partnership, and sharing of 
     experience on the road to Europe, the prime minister 
     said that economic co-operation, joint efforts in 
     fighting organized crime and corruption, and 
     harmonization of the judicial system with EU standards 
     were some of the major challenges in confronting the 
     countries.  Tariceanu called for strengthened security 
     in the Balkans and for working in partnership with the 
     EU and NATO.  He added that Kosovo is one of the 
     important issues today, not only for the UN but for the 
     entire region. 
 
     Regional media reports on Tuesday also cited Kosovo as 
     one of the key issues the SEECP country leaders were 
     expected to discuss during the summit.  Other topics 
     mentioned included the development of infrastructure in 
     the region and the co-ordination of co-operation 
     processes. 
 
     Describing the issue of Kosovo's future status as a 
     very delicate matter, with a potentially enormous 
     impact on regional stability and security, BiH Foreign 
     Minister Mladen Ivanic said it could only be resolved 
     through dialogue and in the best interests of all 
     sides. 
 
     On Tuesday, Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk 
     Draskovic sought support from the SEECP member states 
     for his country's bid to join NATO's Partnership for 
     Peace programme.  Serbia-Montenegro does not deserve 
     isolation, Draskovic told the summit, voicing hope that 
     NATO membership was a viable target for 2007, to be 
     followed by EU accession.  END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  (U)  Published by VOA News on Saturday, May 14: 
 
     TITLE:  Kenya Investigates 69 Bangladeshis for Alleged 
     Terrorism, Drug Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Police in Kenya say they have arrested 69 
     Bangladeshis and are investing them for possible links 
     to terrorism, drugs and human trafficking. 
 
     Police say they picked up the men late Friday from two 
     houses in an upscale area of the coastal city of 
     Mombassa after an anonymous tip. 
 
     They say officers found very little in the houses, only 
     mattresses, small amounts of food and computers. 
 
     A Kenyan caretaker of the houses also was arrested. 
     The Kenyan told police that all the Bangladeshis were 
     crew members of two vessels, sailing from Turkey. 
     However, police say the men did not have seafarers' 
     identification documents. 
 
     Bangladesh's foreign ministry says it is trying to get 
     details about the arrests through its embassy in 
     Nairobi.  It says the suspects may be migrant workers 
     who went to Kenya in search of jobs.  END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  (U)  Published at Turks.US (www.turks.us) on Saturday, 
May 14: 
 
     TITLE:  A Turkish man has been detained by Greek police 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A Turkish man has been detained by Greek 
     police for human trafficking on the eastern Aegean 
     Greek Island of Lesbos.  The man who has been 
     identified as 26-year-old Deniz Atisi was arrested 
     Friday and is due to appear before Magistrates on 
     Saturday. 
 
     The smuggler was in the act of trafficking 13 
     immigrants at the time of arrest.  It is believed that 
     the Turkish people-trafficker was ferrying the illegal 
     immigrants from Turkey to Europe. 
 
     The immigrants from Algeria, Palestine, Lebanon, and 
     Pakistan were forced into the sea by Deniz as he saw 
     the Greek coast-guard approaching.  Deniz was aboard 
     the seven-meter speed boat, which was believed to have 
     ferried the illegal immigrants to the Greek island. 
 
     Later on an immigrant from India was found dead.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶14.  (U) Published by The Peninsula, Qatar's Leading English 
Daily, on Sunday, May 15: 
 
     TITLE:  Bangladeshis held in Kenya could be job 
     seekers:  FM 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Dhaka: Bangladesh's foreign minister said 
     yesterday 69 Bangladeshis arrested in Kenya "may be job 
     seekers" looking for better futures abroad through 
     unauthorized travel agents. 
 
     The Bangladeshis were arrested by police in the Kenyan 
     port city of Mombassa late on Friday.  Kenyan police 
     said they were investigating the men for possible links 
     to terrorism, drugs and human trafficking. 
 
     "They may be job seekers.  We've asked our embassy in 
     Kenya to send us a report," Bangladesh's Foreign 
     Minister M Morshed Khan said in Dhaka. 
 
     "These things are happening every now and then.  We are 
     taking steps to control these incidents," the minister 
     said, referring to recent arrests of Bangladeshis in 
     Algeria, Mauritania and Italy. 
 
     Police in Kenya said they found mattresses but no beds 
     and a few bags of rice in the houses where the men were 
     staying in Mombassa's upmarket estate of Nyali. 
 
     Kenyan police said none of the men who were arrested 
     could speak English and that they had been forced to 
     communicate using sign language. 
 
     Many Bangladeshis travel each year through legal and 
     illegal channels to seek jobs in Western Europe in a 
     bid to flee the poverty of their homeland. 
 
     Their journey can take years with migrants spending 
     months in transit countries in northern and eastern 
     Africa before reaching western Europe. 
 
     The country has more than 2,000 illegal travel 
     agencies, according to the Bangladesh Travel Agents 
     Society, which describes outlets as fronts for "people 
     traffickers" that prey on the desperation of the poor. 
 
     Meanwhile, Kenyan police said yesterday they were 
     investigating 69 Bangladeshi nationals arrested in the 
     country's port city of Mombassa for possible links to 
     terrorism, drugs and human trafficking. 
 
     The suspects, who were seized in the Friday night 
     operation, were living in two houses in a plush area of 
     Mombassa, heavily guarded by private security. 
 
     "We have confirmed that they are all Bangladesh 
     nationals and there is no single Pakistanis as earlier 
     thought," local deputy police chief John Mbijjiwe said 
     by phone.  "We are now pursuing three lines in our 
     investigations:  whether they are linked to terrorism 
     activities, drugs or human trafficking," he said. 
 
     Mbijjiwe refused to disclose where the men were 
     detained, but witnesses said they were in the city's 
     Port Police Station.  Officials said most of the seized 
     passports - some which had Ethiopian immigration seals 
     - appeared fake, but would still be screened by 
     immigration experts to ascertain their veracity. 
 
     A Kenyan caretaker of the houses, Ali Masudi, was also 
     arrested, Mbijjiwe said.  On Friday, Masudi told police 
     that the Bangladeshis were crew members of two vessels, 
     sailing from Turkey, which were to dock and pick them 
     up at Mombassa harbour on May 25 and 27, but they did 
     not have seafarers' certificates. 
 
     Mbijjiwe refused to comment on the claims, saying 
     everything would also be investigated.  Kenyan 
     authorities have voiced concerns that traffickers in 
     drugs and people are increasingly looking toward Kenya 
     - notably the coastal region, a poor country suffering 
     from endemic corruption, as a safe way-station for 
     illicit drugs and human beings. 
 
     In December last year, anti-narcotics officers seized a 
     massive quantity of cocaine-the biggest haul in the 
     east African nation since its independence from Britain 
     in 1963-in two separate raids in Nairobi and Malindi 
     town, near Mombassa.  END TEXT. 
 
¶15.  (U)  Published by China View (www.chinaview.cn) on 
Sunday, May 15: 
 
     TITLE:  Kenyan police probe 63 Bangladeshis for alleged 
     terrorism, drug trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Nairobi, May 15 (Xinhuanet)-Kenyan police 
     confirmed here on Sunday that they have arrested 63 
     Bangladeshis and are probing them for possible links to 
     terrorism, drugs and human trafficking. 
 
     Police said the suspects, believed to be Asian of 
     Bangladeshi origin, were arrested in the port city of 
     Mombassa on Friday night. 
 
     Mombassa deputy police boss John Mbijjiwe confirmed 
     that all those detained are men from Bangladesh who are 
     suspected of holding false passports. 
 
     "We are now investigating alleged criminal activity 
     involving terrorism, drug and human trafficking," 
     Mbijjiwe told Xinhua by telephone. 
 
     But he added that the suspects could also be linked to 
     money laundering, drugs trafficking or being in the 
     country illegally.  Police have recovered 24 fake 
     passports. 
 
     Mbijjiwe declined to disclose how the suspects entered 
     the country, saying none of the suspects could speak 
     English. 
 
     "The search revealed even more.  We found gemstones, 
     electronic equipment, air tickets, rubber stamps and 
     even pornographic material," the deputy police boss 
     said. 
 
     Mbijjiwe said that a Kenyan caretaker of the houses was 
     also arrested. 
 
     Sources said that all the Bangladeshis were crew 
     members of two vessels, sailing from Turkey.  However, 
     police said the men did not have seafarers' 
     identification documents. 
 
     The Bangladeshi authorities said they may be job 
     seekers seeking a better future, not criminals. 
 
     Bangladeshi Foreign Minister Morshed Khan said in Dhaka 
     that some such incidents had taken place in recent 
     times and the government is taking necessary steps, 
     including actions against so-called unauthorized travel 
     agents to put a brake on undocumented migration.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶16.  (U) Published by Baku Olaylar on Friday, May 13: 
     TITLE:  Human Rights Defender says 248 Women Trafficked 
     from Azerbaijan in 2004 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  A total of 520 women were 
     subjected to violence in 2004, 248 of them were victims 
     of human trafficking, the Clean World public union for 
     civil rights has said. 
 
     The union's chairwoman, Mehriban Zeynalova, said that 
     there were women in all regions of Azerbaijan who fall 
     victims to human trafficking. 
 
     "Human traffickers were formerly taking women to 
     Turkey, the UAE, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan, Iran and 
     Russia.  This network is expanded now.  They are now 
     taking women to the United States, Israel, South Korea, 
     Malaysia, Indonesia, Oman and Canada.  All this allows 
     us to say that the network is controlled by fairly 
     influential agencies, otherwise it would not be so easy 
     to run this business. 
 
     "We have provided 14 women with legal and psychiatric 
     assistance since last August.  Five of them were Uzbek, 
     one Moldovan and the rest our citizens," Zeynalova 
     said.  END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN