05HALIFAX113
NEW BRUNSWICK DEPUTY MINISTER DISCUSSES BORDER, PREMIER
Mon May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000113 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CPAS ETRD CA US
SUBJECT: NEW BRUNSWICK DEPUTY MINISTER DISCUSSES BORDER, PREMIER 
LORD'S TRIP TO WASHINGTON 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  New Brunswick Deputy Minister for 
Intergovernmental Affairs, Jim McKay, traveled from Fredericton 
to Halifax recently to meet with CG to discuss issues related 
the border as well as to seek suggestions for appointments for 
Premier Lord's upcoming trip to Washington.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  New Brunswick Deputy Minister for Intergovernmental Affairs 
Jim McKay said that food shipments to Campobello Island during 
winter months remained a problem.  (FYI and Comment:  Campobello 
Island is a part of New Brunswick accessible most months of the 
year only by traveling through the U.S. Its situation in this 
regard is similar to that of Pt. Roberts, WA.  The island's 
residents have claimed for some time that tightened U.S. border 
controls have made it difficult to stock the island's only store 
and have effectively cut off the island from the rest of the 
province.  Our understanding was that an arrangement had been 
worked out locally for this "enclave" to receive needed 
shipments for the store, but McKay said that this had not worked 
well over the winter.  End FYI and Comment.) 
 
¶3.  McKay also expressed concern about the provisions of the 
Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative, saying that for many 
border communities in Maine and New Brunswick a passport 
requirement would significantly curtail commerce, tourism and 
daily exchanges of all sorts.  His comments were similar to 
those that we have heard from other border provinces.  We told 
McKay that the language of the WHTI allowed for other acceptable 
documentation, and encouraged him to make New Brunswick's views 
known -- perhaps jointly with Maine -- during the rulemaking 
public comment period. 
 
¶4.  Regarding border infrastructure, McKay noted that New 
Brunswick had upgraded to four lanes the highway from Woodstock, 
NB, to Houlton, ME, the point where Interstate 95 reaches the 
Canadian border.  McKay said that a significant number of people 
had registered for FAST but that there was no infrastructure on 
the U.S. side yet for it to be used. 
 
¶5.  McKay also noted that Premier Bernard Lord was planning a 
trip to Washington May 20.  He hoped to see Senators Collins and 
Snowe of Maine, as well as senior executive branch officials to 
discuss the border and to plead Atlantic Canada's case on 
softwood lumber.  We made a number of suggestions for meetings 
and appreciate comments from colleagues in Ottawa and Washington 
in this regard.  (COMMENT:  To the extent that it is possible to 
accept Lord's requests for meetings we would urge USG agencies 
to do so.  He is intelligent and well-spoken, an advocate for 
better cross-border relations and is likely to be a force in 
Canadian politics for years to come.  Many identify the young, 
bilingual Lord as a potential leader of the Conservative Party 
at the national level.  END COMMENT.) 
 
HILL