05MANAMA679
PARTICPANT EVALUATION FOR MRP "PERFORMING ARTS IN
Wed May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000679 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ECA/PE/V/M ALISON MOYLAN / AZZA MOUNIB-ZAKI; 
NEA/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL BA
SUBJECT: PARTICPANT EVALUATION FOR MRP "PERFORMING ARTS IN 
U.S. SOCIETY," MARCH 10 - 31, 2005. 
 
 
¶1. "Traveling to the U.S. is a dream come true" for Mr. 
Abdulla AlKooheji, who attended the "Performing Arts in U.S. 
Society," IVLP March 10-31, 2005. Meeting with the Cultural 
Affairs Assistant, Mr. AlKooheji described the three-week 
trip as overwhelming because it provided a rich opportunity 
to exchange knowledge and information about American theater 
and art. Mr Alkooheji was particularly impressed with the 
great appreciation that American artists, producers and 
directors have for their trade and hopes to spark the same 
in Bahrain. 
 
¶2.   Mr. Alkooheji, who participated in other regional and 
international professional exchange programs stressed the 
IVLP was unique in offering participants a wide range of 
experiences through workshops and lectures organized at 
various universities and art institutions around the U.S. He 
said that the many trips to arts institutions gave him a 
better and closer understanding of the American arts and 
culture, pointing out, that this is "this was a new and very 
appreciated experience." Cleveland and Kentucky visits, 
according to Mr. AlKooheji, were the most beneficial as they 
were "able to see many practical artistic activities". 
 
¶3. He pointed out that the program enabled him to see the 
strong mutual respect between U.S. artists and the audience. 
He hopes that a similar relationship will be fostered in 
Bahrain in which producers and actors work hard to provide 
the best for their audience who dedicate their time to see a 
show.  Mr. Alkooheji cited the program as an experience that 
he would "cherish for life because of the interaction among 
the various participating nationalities, the contact with 
U.S. directors and producers, and the opportunity to attend 
different American plays". 
 
¶4. Mr. AlKooheji also made some thoughtful criticism on the 
program. He would have preferred more practical involvement 
of the participants and less theoretical emphasis, in 
particular in the program in Washington, San Francisco and 
New York.  He also pointed out that the intensity of the 
program left little or no time for leisure activities.  He 
has expressed great interest in nominating a member of his 
Awal Theater Group to any future cultural events sponsored 
by the U.S. State Department, and he would be more than 
happy to host any of the U.S. theater artists he had met to 
attend cultural festivals in Bahrain. 
 
MONROE