07ANKARA2487
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8026
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2487/01 2781339
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051339Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3945
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8414
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3381
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2358
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6186
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5989
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2583
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002487 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 5, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
AKP Seeks Opposition Support on Oct.21 Referendum Change 
All papers report the ruling AKP will amend a text on constitutional 
reforms to be submitted to referendum October 21 to avoid any 
challenge to the status of President Abdullah Gul.  The AKP said a 
clause in the referendum text that stipulates Turkey's 11th 
president, a position currently held by Gul, must be elected through 
direct popular vote would be removed.  The new wording would say 
that all presidents after Gul will be elected by popular vote. 
 
AKP had talks with opposition CHP and MHP with regard to the 
possibility of changing the clause.  On Thursday, MHP leader Bahceli 
said various comments regarding the possible consequences of a "yes" 
vote for the constitutional package made it clear that the vote will 
cause political tension.  Parliament must move swiftly to prevent 
this, Bahceli said, pledging full support for the withdrawal of the 
clause from the constitutional amendment package.  CHP, meanwhile, 
said the referendum process must be stopped, rather than having the 
text changed.  The amendments to be submitted to the referendum 
would also cut the president's term to five years from seven, 
renewable by another five, and the parliament's term to four from 
five years. 
 
PKK Condemnation Added to Armenian Genocide Resolution 
Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report that US Congress 
members have added a clause condemning PKK terror to the Armenian 
genocide resolution as a "mitigating factor."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports the Congress would raise the resolution for 
debate October 10.  Papers report that Democrat lawmaker Steny Hoyer 
has said following the adoption of the resolution in the Foreign 
Relations Committee, it would be adopted by the Congress before 
November 22. 
 
Kurdish DTP Complains of Double Standard on Immunity 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
Kurdish party DTP lawmaker Hasip Kaplan said at a news conference he 
held in the parliament that a court ruling to continue the trials of 
three DTP deputies was illegal.  The court ruled that court cases 
launched against DTP deputies Aysel Tugluk, Sebahat Tuncel and Ayla 
Akat Ata before they were elected would reportedly continue even 
though the MPs have parliamentary immunity.  Kaplan criticized the 
judiciary's "discriminatory" approach, and said that when summoned, 
the lawmakers would not go to the prosecutor. 
 
Business daily Referans reports Hasip Kaplan recalled that Prime 
Minister Erdogan had invited Hamas to Ankara despite the fact that 
it is on the EU and US terror lists.  "Having saluted Hamas 
officials in Ankara, the Prime Minister cannot press me to name the 
PKK a terror organization," Kaplan said.  He said the DTP views the 
PKK as an "armed political illegal organization."  Kaplan accused 
the media, the military and the government of engaging in a 
systematic attack against the DTP. 
 
US Inspectors Investigating the Missing US Weapons 
Yeni Safak, Zaman, Star:  Responding to Turkey's continuing 
complaints, the US sent a delegation to Turkey last week under the 
lead of retired General Claude Kicklighter, Inspector General of the 
Department of Defence.  The delegation had meetings with the Foreign 
Ministry, Turkish National Police and the General Staff.  Turkish 
officials told the US delegation that the missing US weapons from 
Iraq continue to enter Turkey and are being used by the PKK 
terrorists and that the US should take necessary steps to stop it. 
Turkish authorities warned the US delegation that 811 US-made 
weapons, including 14 M-16s were confiscated in Turkey in the first 
nine months of the year.  Yeni Safak adds that PM Erdogan had 
already presented President Bush with a "Blue File" last year 
containing information on the missing weapons, and is planning to 
present the second file on the same issue during his upcoming visit 
to the US in November. 
 
ANKARA 00002487  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
FM Babacan Plans to Travel to Iraq 
Liberal Radikal and Islamist-oriented Zaman report that FM Ali 
Babacan, to encourage the attendance at the Iraq's Neighbors Meeting 
in Istanbul on November 2-3, is starting a Middle East tour this 
weekend.  It is expected that Babacan will pay a visit to Iraq as 
well. Papers highlight that Babacan will be the first top level 
Turkish official to visit Baghdad since the US occupation of Iraq in 
March 2003. 
 
Editorial Commentary: US Turkey Policy, Iraq 
Haluk Ulman observes in the business daily Dunya: "Analyzing 
Turkish-American relations requires acknowledging the fact that 
there is no single US entity to refer to.  The White House, the 
Congress with two branches, Pentagon, think-tanks, lobbies and media 
-- they are all the US and don't necessarily have the same or even 
similar views on Turkey.  Congress and the White House both agree on 
the geo-strategic importance of Turkey and do not want to lose 
Turkey.  The methodology is of course not the same for the different 
parties.  Republicans and the White House want Turkey to accept the 
autonomous status of Iraqi Kurds and engage in close dialogue with 
them.  It is a bare fact that Ankara, on the other hand, is 
sympathetic neither to dialogue with the Northern Iraqi Kurds nor to 
the establishment of American military bases in Northern Iraq. 
Republicans and Democrats also differ on policy priority on the 
future of Turkish-American ties.   The Bush administration's foreign 
policy was founded on the conflict of civilizations, i.e. the 
conflict of religious ideology.  Turkey should position itself as 
moderate Islamic country to reduce this conflict according to their 
argument.  Democrats however do not prioritize religion, and focus 
on human rights and freedoms instead.  Rights of ethnic and 
religious minorities are a priority issue for Democrats.  Thus when 
they think about Turkey they focus on issues like the Armenian 
genocide resolution, Christian properties and the opening of a 
seminary.  In the near future an Armenian Genocide Resolution is on 
the way.  The Bush administration is too weak to prevent it.  The 
Jewish lobby is not supportive of Turkey any longer.  The future of 
bilateral ties is not very bright." 
 
Sami Kohen writes in the mainstream daily Milliyet: "The US Senate 
passed a resolution suggesting a federal system for Iraq which 
surprisingly had a unifying impact on Iraqi groups.  Putting 
militant Kurds aside, the majority of Sunnis and Shiites spoke in a 
single voice saying they are against the division of the country. 
The Senate decision which was revised and explained by Senator 
Biden, does not reflect the official US policy for Iraq.  In any 
case, the common perception about the resolution is that this is the 
beginning of a process to divide Iraq into three, based on ethnic 
and sectarian lines.  A federal system is also a provision within 
the Iraqi Constitution.  I think the main question is how to form a 
federal system that would ensure territorial integrity and national 
unity.  There are successful examples of federal systems around the 
world, as Senator Biden suggested.  But there are examples of 
failure as well, such as Yugoslavia and Belgium which is on the 
verge of division.   Ankara believes that the best solution for Iraq 
is to let Iraqis decide how to be ruled.  Turkey also wants the 
Iraqi federal system to attach fundamental authority to the central 
administration.  Otherwise it will pave the way for eventual 
disintegration which means division in the end." 
 
TV Highlights   --NTV, 7.00 A.M. 
Domestic News 
 
- French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner is due to visit Ankara on 
Friday for talks with President Gul, Prime Minister Erdogan and 
Foreign Minister Babacan.  Before coming to Turkey, Kouchner will 
meet EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn in Paris to review the 
Turkish file. 
 
- Parliament's human rights commission headed by Prof. Zafer Uskul 
 
ANKARA 00002487  003 OF 003 
 
 
will visit the relatives of 12 people killed last week in a minivan 
in the southeastern province of Sirnak. 
 
- The Court of Appeals has upheld the 18-year prison sentence given 
to the murderer of Catholic priest Andrea Santoro in the Black Sea 
city of Trabzon in February 2006.  The murderer, who was 17 years 
old when he killed the priest, will be released from jail after 8.5 
years when he turns 26. 
 
- Turkey's elite business forum TUSIAD pointed to the risks stemming 
from delays in Turkey's EU accession bid, and called for more 
reforms. 
 
International News 
 
- The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Thursday cholera has 
jumped the border from Iraq to Iran, highlighting the need for 
neighboring countries to boost their defenses against the deadly 
disease which has struck over 3,000 people in Iraq. 
 
- President Jalal Talabani told the Washington Post Iraq is buying 
100 million dollars of light military equipment for its police from 
China because the US cannot provide the material. 
 
- Britain's Special Cyprus Representative Joan Ryan said after 
meeting Turkish and Greek Cypriot leaders Talat and Papadopoulos 
that the Cyprus question would become the focus of attention after 
the Greek Cypriot elections in February. 
- Kirkuk is to hold a census on November 15 in preparation for a 
referendum that will determine the future of the city. 
 
WILSON