07ANKARA2569
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1819
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2569/01 2901224
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171224Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4045
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8431
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3424
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2380
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6201
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6005
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2598
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002569 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 17, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Hashimi Visits Ankara, Iraq Incursion Motion to Parliament Vote 
All papers report the Iraqi Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi, 
visiting Ankara amid rising strains over a possible Turkish military 
incursion against the PKK in northern Iraq, said Wednesday Iraq 
should be given a chance to prevent the cross-border terrorist 
activities.  "I got what I wanted from my talks," al-Hashimi said, 
"In the first place, the anti-terror memorandum of understanding 
signed between Iraq and Turkey should be implemented." 
The Turkish Parliament is due later on Wednesday to vote on a motion 
on cross-border operations in an open debate.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet says the visit came when the Iraqi Kurdish leaders Jalal 
Talabani and Massoud Barzani requested the Iraqi government to 
negotiate related to the crisis with Turkey.  Mainstream Milliyet 
expects a high-level delegation of Iraqi political and security 
officials to visit Turkey tomorrow. 
 
In an AKP group meeting yesterday, Prime Minister Erdogan warned his 
ruling party lawmakers from the mainly Kurdish southeast Turkey 
against opposing the motion.  Cumhuriyet says the AKP administration 
is concerned that MPs from east and southeast Turkey might not back 
the motion.  Erdogan sent strong messages to the US, Iraq, and the 
pro-Kurdish DTP in parliament, saying "whatever is necessary will be 
done."  Under the headline "War Drums," liberal Radikal says the 
opposition party leaders are not satisfied with a motion, and want 
war against Iraq declared, reporting that Erdogan said "normal rules 
do not apply when self-defense is at stake."  The main opposition 
CHP head Baykal said targeting the PKK alone would not be 
sufficient, and "we should force those who protect them to choose 
between Turkey and the PKK."   The head of the far-right MHP Devlet 
Bahceli said "an operation should target Barzani too."  Bahceli also 
said the motion should include measures for preventing the 
establishment of an independent Kurdish state in the region. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Possible Turkish Operations against Iraq 
Erdal Safak comments in the mainstream Sabah:  "In order for a 
possible cross-border operation to succeed, Turkey has to prepare 
the Turkish and foreign public for a possible operation; not use 
this for domestic politics; use diplomatic channels to form a front 
in the supporting countries; determine operation targets properly; 
and limit the duration of the operation to avoid occupation 
allegations.  However, looking at the debates regarding the motion, 
one can see that none of these conditions have been fulfilled. On 
the contrary, most of them been ignored fully.  MHP leader Bahceli's 
remark that the target should not only be the PKK but also Barzani 
and the Peshmerge is rather worrying.  On this issue, Turkey 
definitely should pursue a cool-minded strategy, a strategy that 
will be supported internationally.  Since the first and the main 
path for Turkey to follow goes through the Barzani-Talabani front, 
especially the Barzani front, Turkey should make Barzani its 
interlocutor rather than its target." 
 
Bilal Cetin says in the mainstream Vatan:  "Even though the motion 
is going to be voted on in the Parliament General Assembly today, 
the AKP government is still hoping that there will be no need to use 
the motion.  The government's hope is that the PKK in Northern Iraq 
will be eliminated without a military operation.  This has been the 
government's stance in the past and it still is today.  Even at a 
time when the government is running out of patience, it still hopes 
that the US, the Iraqi government and the Kurdish leaders in 
Northern Iraq will take some action against the PKK.  That is why, 
the Turkish Government is reiterating that even after the approval 
of the motion, they have no intensions for immediate military 
operations but want to use the motion as a trump card while they are 
continuing diplomacy with Iraq and the US.  While the government 
considers the operation as a last measure, there is huge pressure on 
the government from the public and the opposition parties.  Is it 
possible to avoid an operation into Northern Iraq even after having 
the motion authorized?  Of course, it is.  If the US and Iraq change 
 
ANKARA 00002569  002 OF 003 
 
 
their stance, stop sheltering the PKK and arrest a few of the PKK 
leaders and return them to Turkey, and coordinate with Turkey 
strongly against PKK infiltration through the border, then, it is 
possible to avoid the cross-border move.  If this coordination is 
not established, then Turkey will be left with no choice but to 
launch an operation." 
 
Armenian Genocide Resolution 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan yesterday warned the US on 
the Armenian genocide resolution, telling his ruling AKP lawmakers 
that "the enemies of Turkey will never recover.  Whatever damage 
Turkey suffers, its opponents will suffer ten-fold."  Mainstream 
Sabah says this "apparent reference" was directed against the US, 
France, and Armenia.  Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal voiced 
concern that if the resolution passes in the US, other countries 
might copy it. 
 
On Tuesday, President Abdullah Gul held a meeting with Foreign 
Minister Ali Babacan, Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Ertugrul 
Apakan and Turkish Ambassador to Washington Nabi Sensoy to discuss a 
plan of action in case of passage of the resolution.  Papers claim 
that if the bill passes, Ankara considers measures such as 
restricting US plane take-offs from Incirlik Airbase, stopping the 
purchase from the US of 30 F-35 jetfighters worth USD 100 billion, 
ceasing the maintenance of American vessels at Tasucu port on the 
Mediterranean, and developing ties with Iran. 
 
Meanwhile, Sensoy told the press Prime Minister Erdogan would go 
ahead with his visit to Washington on November 5.  Sensoy, summoned 
to Turkey after last week's approval of the resolution, said he will 
return to his office in Washington after the consultations in 
Ankara. 
 
Syria's Assad in Ankara 
All papers report the visiting Syrian Head of State Bashar Assad and 
President Abdullah Gul will hold a meeting today to be followed by a 
joint press conference.  Gul will later host a luncheon in honor of 
Assad in which Prime Minister Erdogan will also participate.  Assad 
will also meet Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan and address the 
Turkish Parliament later in the day.  Prime Minister Erdogan will 
host a dinner in honor of Assad this evening.  On Thursday, Assad 
will move on to Istanbul and meet Turkish business leaders before 
leaving Turkey on October 19. 
 
Kazakh Group Bid for Petkim Vetoed, Armenian Links Suspected 
All papers report Turkey's Privatization Administration has decided 
to sell the state-owned oil refiner Petkim to a consortium of Azeri 
energy firm Socar, Turkey's Turcas and Saudi-based Injaz Projects, 
the second highest bidder in the privatization tender.  The highest 
bidder, a Kazakhstan-based consortium, Transcentral Asia 
Petrochemical Holding, was vetoed by the Privatization 
Administration because of its ties with Armenian lobby groups, 
according to several papers.  Milliyet says the cancellation came 
due to the Kazakh group's failure to resolve its financial problems. 
 The group had presented the highest bid with USD 2.05 billion. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Diyarbakir prosecutor has filed a suit against Mayor Osman 
Baydemir, asking for 4.5 years of prison sentence for instigating 
hatred when he said last month "Diyarbakir is a fortress and it 
cannot be conquered." 
 
- Three members of the "Kurd-Der" association have been given 
one-year prison sentences each for attempting to march from 
Diyarbakir to Habur border gate to protest against a possible 
cross-border operation into northern Iraq. 
 
ANKARA 00002569  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
- The Turkish Parliament Tuesday held a meeting chaired by a female 
speaker, opposition CHP lawmaker Guldal Mumcu, for the first time in 
34 years. 
 
- The strike of some 25,000 workers of fixed-line operator Turk 
Telekom strikes a blow at telecommunication services and domestic 
and international flights. 
 
International News 
 
- On Tuesday, Russia's lower house of parliament called on Turkey 
not to launch a cross-border offensive against PKK terrorists in 
northern Iraq. 
 
- UNHCR chief Antonio Guterres warned against "any development that 
might lead to meaningful displacements of population in the northern 
governorate, or Kurdistan, saying "I sincerely wish that this motion 
[for Turkish cross border incursion] will never be applied." 
 
- Armenian diaspora in Europe criticizes European Parliament 
rapporteur Ria Oomen-Rujiten for her reluctance to mention genocide 
claims in her report about Turkey. 
WILSON