07BAGHDAD3565
CHALABI'S SERVICES COMMITTEE SHOWS PROMISE
Sun Oct 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1203
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3565 3010325
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 280325Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4067
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003565 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ
SUBJECT:  CHALABI'S SERVICES COMMITTEE SHOWS PROMISE 
REF: BAGHDAD #3259 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  Pending a formal executive order from Prime Minister, 
Nouri AL Maliki, the services committee holds regular meetings and 
shows early signs of cooperation and action. At an October 25 
meeting, the Committee made several decisions. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
Fuel and Health Tops the Agenda 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. On Thursday, October 25, Dr. Ahmed Chalabi chaired the service 
committee meeting.  The attendees were the Deputy Minister of 
Electricity, the Inspector General of Health, the Deputy Minister of 
Education, Dr. Tahseen al Shekhli (Fard al-Qanoon spokesperson) and 
representatives from the USEMB and Coalition Forces. Dr. Khalid 
Rasheed and Dr. Karesh, both of former Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) 
Zobai's staff, were also in attendance. 
 
¶3. First item of discussion was fuel.  Committee members agreed that 
access to various types of fuel present the greatest obstacle to 
their respective ministries.  While discussions ranged from 
production to distribution to storage and corruption, several 
courses of action were offered.  Chalabi suggested that the services 
committee immediately address fuel supplies. He intends to raise two 
potential proposals with the Prime Minister: allow ministries to 
import their own product or appoint a body to import fuel to Iraq. 
 
 
¶4. The IG of Health discussed issues including physician and bed 
shortages, low wages, an inadequate emergency care network and a 
non-existent referral system.  Additionally, the IG expressed 
significant concerns regarding the current supply chain for durable 
medical equipment (DME) and pharmaceuticals (Rx). 
 
¶5. The Committee will send several health proposals to PM Maliki. 
The Ministry of Health (MoH) requested an additional 100 million 
dinars to pay salaries for the doctors working in public health 
facilities, such as the public health centers (PHCs). A suggestion 
to additionally compensate on-call doctors appeared to also be a 
part of this funding request. (NOTE: Embassy staff is working to 
clarify whether this was part of the funding request or an 
additional proposal. END NOTE) Chalabi also offered to lobby the PM 
to adopt a proposal before the Prime Minister's Office that would 
allow the World Health Organization (WHO) to procure equipment and 
pharmaceuticals on behalf of the MoH. 
 
----------- 
Electricity 
----------- 
 
¶6. The Ministry of Electricity representatives named security as 
their number one issue; secure facilities as well as security for 
MoE personnel to rapidly repair downed lines.  Representatives from 
the Iraqi Army offered their continued assistance to provide a 
secure perimeter for MoE to conduct repairs.  The MoE stated that 
the existing process to make such arrangements (72 hours) was too 
time consuming. 
 
¶7. The MoE reported on the 10 amp gauges being installed in 
residences throughout Baghdad. MoE representatives report that the 
project is largely successful, regulating personal use and 
increasing main generator efficiency by limiting the load. 
Residences furnished with such amp limits are reportedly able to 
operate air conditioners, refrigerators, televisions, etc. Next year 
the MoE wants to upgrade to digital limiters which will allow remote 
adjustment of the limits based on increased generation. The 
committee suggested a media campaign to educate the public about 
this project. (NOTE: It is not clear whether this committee will 
launch a campaign, ask the PM to launch a media campaign or were 
simply suggesting that the MoE launch a media campaign. END NOTE) 
 
¶8. In an attempt to wrap up the 2+ hour meeting, Chalabi asked the 
MoE what they wanted and/or needed.  They asked that the diesel 
importation issue be resolved, and that the PM address the militias 
who are preventing plant operators from complying with load shedding 
requirements through intimidation and other fear tactics.  Chalabi 
requested a list of areas who are not complying in order to present 
that list to the PM. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. Awaiting the PM's executive order, Chalabi's Services Committee 
forges ahead. The meetings thus far are well attended and address 
larger issues through an open dialogue.  This meeting marks the 
first set of requests that Chalabi will take to Maliki. It is not 
clear what will occur once this information reaches the PM, but 
Chalabi could be the political impetus necessary to revitalize the 
services push in the continued absence of DPM Zobai. 
 
 
Butenis