07HARARE947
NOMINATION FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S AWARD FOR
Fri Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO3907
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0947 2920902
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190902Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2044
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITYUNCLAS HARARE 000947 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/IWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMNPHUMPRELKPAOZW
SUBJECT: NOMINATION FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S AWARD FOR 
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN OF COURAGE 
 
REF:  STATE 126072 
 
¶1. (U) The following is Embassy Harare's nomination for the 
Secretary of State's Award for International Women of Courage. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NAME: Beatrice Tele Mtetwa 
TITLE: Senior Partner 
INSTITUTION: Mtetwa & Nyambirai Law Firm 
DOB: November 30, 1958 
POB: Zimbabwe 
Citizenship: Zimbabwean 
Contact: 4th Floor, 101 Union avenue building Kwame Nkrumah avenue, 
Harare, Zimbabwe. 
TEL: 263-4-730896 
 
¶2. Ms.Beatrice Mtetwa is a renowned human rights lawyer and is 
currently serving as president of the Law Society of Zimbabwe (LSZ). 
She is a fearless lawyer who has represented dozens of human rights 
defenders, journalists and pro-democracy activists -- all at great 
personal risk. Despite increasing state-violence, she continues to 
be an outspoken advocate for the respect of human rights, women's 
rights, the rule of law, and an independent press. As the first 
woman President of the LSZ, Mtetwa has been a passionate advocate 
for Zimbabwean women, serving as a role model and promoting a fuller 
participation and advancement of women in the legal and judicial 
community, and fighting to insure their equal protection and 
participation in all facets of Zimbabwean society. 
 
¶3. Police have arrested and harassed Mtetwa on numerous occasions 
during her career - yet she continues to serve as a vocal critic of 
the government. On May 8, for example, Mtetwa led a demonstration of 
more than 50 lawyers in front of the high court to protest the 
arbitrary arrest and detention of two prominent human rights 
lawyers. Police disrupted the gathering by brutally beating the 
lawyers with batons. Police forced Mtetwa and three other lawyers 
into a truck and drove them to a secluded area on the outskirts of 
town where they were severly beaten and abandoned. Mtetwa did not 
let her injuries, or threats from police, prevent her from vocally 
condemning the attack or the continued detention of her colleagues 
in the days that followed. Mtetwa's bravery and resolve inspired 
other demostrations by lawyers around the country. 
 
¶4. In March 2007, police physically manhandled and threatened Mtetwa 
while she was serving court papers. In October 2003, police 
arbitrarily arrested Mtetwa on false allegations and detained her 
for three hours. Police beat and choked Mtetwa before releasing her 
without charge. Although she was unable to speak for two days as a 
result of the assault, she returned to the police station on the 
third day, with medical evidence in hand, to file charges. 
 
¶5. Mtetwa's experiences as a victim have fueled her engagement with 
civil society. As a board member of Counseling Services Unit, the 
premier service provider to victims of state-sponsored and organized 
violence and torture (OVT), (a majority of whom have been women and 
of whom Mtetwa was one), she has provided leadership to assure that 
all victims of OVT receive prompt and adequate medical and 
psycho-social treatment and care. As a member of Zimbabwe Lawyers 
for Human rights and one of the leading human rights lawyers in the 
country, Mtetwa has played a key role in assuring that expert legal 
representation and counsel is provided to human rights defenders and 
other pro-democracy activists. She has worked with women activists 
such as WOZA, helping them to continue their activism, secure in the 
knowledge that a safety net of first class legal (and medical) care 
is available to them should they fall victim to the regime's 
repression and violence. 
 
¶5. Promoting democratic change is the U.S. government's highest 
priority strategic goal in Zimbabwe.  Ms. Mtetwa is one of 
Zimbabwe's most courageous women. In consideration of her continued 
commitment to the defense of human rights defenders, the rule of 
law, and an independent media in Zimbabwe, Embassy Harare highly 
recommends Mtetwa be considered for the 2008 International Women of 
Courage Award. 
 
¶6. Embassy Officers working on women's issues: 
NAME: Mr. Scott Higgins (POL Section), U.S. Embassy Harare, TEL: 
263-4-250593/4 
NAME: Ms. Priscillah Kapungu, (Public Affairs Section) U.S. Embassy 
Harare, TEL: 263-4-758800/1 
 
DHANANI