07HAVANA999
INTERNATIONAL WOMAN OF COURAGE: MARTHE BEATRIZ
Fri Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
US Interests Section Havana
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUB #0999 2921613
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191613Z OCT 07
FM USINT HAVANA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2398UNCLAS HAVANA 000999 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PHUM
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL WOMAN OF COURAGE: MARTHE BEATRIZ 
ROQUE 
 
REF: STATE 126072 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  In response in request in reftel, Post 
wishes to re-nominate leading Cuban dissident Martha Beatriz 
Roque for the International Woman of Courage Award.  As we 
noted in nominating Ms Roque for the inaugural award in 
2007, while her work is not focused specifically on women's 
issues Martha Beatriz has continued to show exceptional 
courage and leadership in pressing for democratic change 
and respect for human rights in Cuba.  Facing possible 
additional jail time and constant harassment by Cuban 
authorities, she has not only continued to advance her agenda 
and push for the release of all political pisoners, she has 
increased those activities.  By any definition, Martha Beatriz 
Roque is a true woman of courage,  End summary, 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Roque, an economist, was part of the establishment 
until 1990, teaching statistics and mathematics at the University 
of Havana.  That year, after performing a critical audit of 
the tourism industry, she decided to join the opposition. 
In 1995, she formed the Cuban Institute of Independent Economists. 
In 1997, she was among four key dissidents jailed for signing "The 
Homeland Belongs to All," a statement in response to Communist-Party 
glorification of the island's communist system. 
In all, Roque spent more than three years behind bars for peacefully 
expressing her democratic ideals.  In the infamous "Black Spring" 
crackdown of 2003, when the regime arrested, quickly tried and 
sentenced 75 dissidents to lengthy terms, Roque was the only female 
dissident rounded up.  She was sentenced to 20 years for violating 
Law 88 on "Protection of the National Independence and Economy of 
Cuba." 
In July 2004, the GOC released her on conditional probation, 
presumably on health grounds.  However, because the GOC could 
return her to prison at any time, Roque still considers herself a 
political prisoner. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Roque has shown tremendous courage in standing up to the 
Castro regime.For its part, the regime continues to show 
persistence and creativity in trying to harrass Roque and 
intimidate her into silence. It has dispatched State Security agents to 
infiltrate her organization; had militants besiege her home, 
preventing Roque from leaving; and carried out countless "acts of 
repudiation" against her, using humiliating and degrading material. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In a sense The Cuban government's preoccupation with Roque is 
understandable;her commitment to promoting human rights and speaking 
openly about the regime's abuses poses a very real threat to the 
totalitarian state.  On September 28, Roque organizedand carried out a 
country-wide protest directed at delivering a petition to the Minister 
of Justice asking for the release of political prisoners.  The 
response of the Cuban government was to detain Roque and many of her 
followers. 
The event helped expose the nature of the regime just as it was arguing 
in favor of its anti-embargo resolution before the U.N. General 
Assembly. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) As we noted in our nomination for the inaugural award in 2007, 
Martha BeatrizRoque may not fit the typical mold for the Secretary's 
"Women of Courage" award as she has never focused on "women's rights" 
per se. Nevertheless, we continue to believe that her 16-year crusade 
in opposition to the totalitarian regime is aimed at empowering both 
women and men with fundamental political and economic freedoms that 
will enable themone day to build a democratic Cuba. 
 
¶6. (SBU) While we beleive Martha Beatriz Roque is an excellent 
candidate for the award,we do not believe she would be allowed to 
leave the island to accept it.  We do not think this should stand 
in the way of her nomination, however.  Roque's mail and 
phone communications are monitored by the Cuban Government; her 
telephone number is 53-7-406-821. Her address is Calle Luis 
Esteban No. 352, Apto. 3, Santo Suarez, Havana. 
 
Point of contact for this nomination is Human Rights Officer Thomas 
Hamm; tel: 53-7-833-3555 ext. 2686. 
 
WILLIAMS