07PARIS4311
OUTREACH TO WOMEN LEADERS IN FRANCE
Thu Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO3174
RR RUEHIK RUEHPOD RUEHYG
DE RUEHFR #4311/01 2911509
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181509Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0842
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEHMRE/AMCONSUL MARSEILLE 1916
RUEHSR/AMCONSUL STRASBOURG 0497UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 004311 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/WE, EUR/PPD, EUR/WE, INR, R 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL FR PHUM
SUBJECT: OUTREACH TO WOMEN LEADERS IN FRANCE 
 
 
PARIS 00004311  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
SUBJECT: Ambassador Tahir-Kheli conducts outreach to women leaders 
in France about women's empowerment and integration 
 
Summary 
 
¶1. October 10-12, Senior Adviser to the Secretary of State for 
Women's Empowerment Ambassador Shirin Tahir-Kheli conducted outreach 
to women leaders at the Deauville Women's Economic Forum and in 
Paris, reaching audiences from leaders in French politics to women 
social workers in underserved areas of Paris.  She appeared widely 
in the French press including on France-24 television that 
potentially reaches 8 million viewers, amplifying her message about 
the unique and positive role women leaders are playing today on the 
toughest issues including human rights, through such networks as the 
Secretary of State's Women Leaders Group. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
---- 
Deauville Women's Forum, Empowering Women Par Excellence 
---- 
¶2. At the Deauville Women's Forum known as the Davos for women, 
Ambassador Tahir Kheli spoke for an audience of about two hundred 
women business and political leaders from around the world and 
responded to questions on a panel about building trust in political 
institutions.  The panel included Elisabeth Guigou, Member of the 
French National Assembly and Former Minister of Justice, and 
moderator Christine Ockrent, respected journalist (and long-time 
partner of France's Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner).  She met 
also with Anne Lauvergeon, Chairman of the Executive Board of Areva, 
and with Laura Liswood, Senior Advisor at Goldman Sachs and 
Secretary General (SYG) of the Council of Women Leaders, USA, and 
 
SIPDIS 
organized follow-on meetings with both in Washington. 
 
---- 
Reaching out to French Minority Audiences 
---- 
¶3. On October 10 and 12, Ambassador Tahir-Kheli spoke with 
individuals and groups active in trying to build tolerance as well 
as opportunity in the troubled, somewhat isolated and diverse 
suburbs of Paris.  She met with a team of about 15 women social 
workers as well as the mayor of the Paris suburb Bondy, both 
listening to their worries about possible continued unrest if more 
economic opportunity is not made available, and at the same time 
offering a positive role model as a successful American woman 
ambassador who is also Muslim.  Ambassador Tahir-Kheli also met with 
the young French Jewish author Olivia Cattan, President and Founder 
of Paroles de Femmes," an advocacy group involving both Muslim and 
Jewish women who are trying to improve the communication and 
atmosphere for minority women who interact with public institutions 
such as schools and hospitals. This group will speak at the French 
National Assembly on October 25. She visited on site as well 
officials of "Ni Putes Ni Soumises," a well-known French NGO working 
in support of women in such areas as protection against battering. 
The former president of this organization, Fadela Amara, is 
Secretary of State for Housing in President Sarkozy's government. 
 
SIPDIS 
Finally, Ambassador Tahir-Kheli addressed minority students from 
French universities who have traveled on scholarship for one-year 
study programs in the U.S. during a breakfast hosted by Mrs. 
Stapleton at the Chief of Mission Residence. 
 
---- 
Invitation for State Secretary for Human Rights Rama Yade 
---- 
 
¶4.  Ambassador Tahir-Kheli met with State Secretary for Human Rights 
Rama Yade at the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs on October 12 
and extended an invitation for her to actively participate in the 
work of the Secretary of State's Women's Leader Group that currently 
includes 26 foreign ministers and 5 heads of state.  State Secretary 
Rama Yade welcomed the invitation enthusiastically, pointing out 
that she would confirm the appointment with the Foreign Minister. 
She would then participate in the next meeting of the Secretary's 
group in Greece.  Also on her way to speak in Deauville at the 
women's forum, State Secretary Yade emphasized that the forum is not 
only international, but also an important meeting place for French 
women leaders.  She also mentioned her recent lobbying at the UN for 
more women to join in political negotiations in war zones, and for 
female peacekeeping forces that are reportedly less frightening for 
women in refugee areas.  Ambassador Tahir-Kheli supported this idea, 
citing the successful example of India's all-female unit for 
Liberia.  Finally, the State Secretary raised the topic of women 
refugees in Western countries including high profile women such as 
Ayaan Hirsi Ali who could be harmed as soon as the spotlight is not 
on them.  She recommended that networks be established to assist 
such vulnerable women.  In closing, the State Secretary noted that 
she hopes to accompany President Sarkozy to the U.S. during his 
November visit. 
 
PARIS 00004311  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
---- 
Media Interest in Ambassador Tahir-Kheli's Message 
---- 
 
¶5. Ambassador Tahir-Kheli offered several media interviews during 
her visit.  At the Women's Forum in Deauville, 24-hour news channel 
France-24 (potentially 8 million viewers worldwide) interviewed her 
about her participation in the panel on "What should women expect 
from political leaders to restore the trust in our governance 
systems?" She also briefly joined Melanne Verveer for a press 
conference with the NGO Vital Voices about U.S. women's engagement 
with women of the developing world. In Paris, she had two interviews 
with editors-in-chief from African Magazines: Amina (circ. 55,350), 
the magazine of African women and Afrique Magazine (circ. 35,000), a 
pan-African international magazine directed to the 25-45 year old 
audience. With them, she discussed her visit to France, her 
background and the objectives of the U.S. for women's empowerment, 
especially in Africa.  She also did a TV talk show interview on 
all-news channel France 24 about the Women's Forum and women's 
power, which was aired both in French and in English.  In addition, 
a French reporter plans to interview Ambassador Tahir-Kheli during 
an upcoming visit to U.S. for a documentary entitled "100 Muslim 
Women's Voices."  The documentary is expected to come out in movie 
theatres and to be used in museum exhibitions. 
 
---- 
Conclusion 
---- 
 
¶7.  Ambassador Tahir-Kheli projected several important messages to 
audiences ranging from France's top leaders to the residents of the 
sensitive suburbs of Paris, and these messages were effectively 
amplified by the press.  For Muslim audiences in France, her 
presence here proved to be moving, as she offers a very positive 
role model as an active and respected U.S. Ambassador who is also 
both female and Muslim.  She spoke with clarity and wisdom about the 
unique role and responsibilities of women at the highest levels of 
government, and presented the positive initiatives of the Secretary 
of State in promoting and networking women leaders on key issues 
ranging from the human rights plight in Burma to transparency in 
government. Her visit to France was hence most productive and 
appreciated.  The Deauville Women's Forum continues to offer a 
stellar opportunity for networking among women leaders from around 
the world, and we look forward to high level participation from the 
U.S. Government once again in next year's forum scheduled for 
October 16-18, 2008. 
 
Stapleton