07USUNNEWYORK899
UNAMI, MNF-I BRIEF SECURITY COUNCIL ON IRAQ
Mon Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0006
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0899/01 2952118
ZNR UUUUU ZZH CCY TEXT ADX 001FAFFB TOQ2469 614
O 222118Z OCT 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2850
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000899 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D C O P Y (SENSITIVE CAPTION ADDED) 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: UNAMI, MNF-I BRIEF SECURITY COUNCIL ON IRAQ 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIFED 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: At the October 19 debate on Iraq in the 
Security Council, Undersecretary for Political Affairs Lynn 
Pascoe told Council members that the UN was focused on 
implementing its expanded role as authorized in Security 
Council Resolution 1770.  Pascoe emphasized that the UN "must 
be given political and humanitarian space" in Iraq, and its 
ability to talk to all sides "must be respected."  Speaking 
on behalf of MNF-I, Ambassador Khalilzad noted security gains 
in Anbar, Diyala and Ninewa provinces, and underscored the 
crucial importance of international and regional engagement. 
Iraqi PermRep Bayati emphasized his government,s 
determination to focus on national reconciliation and echoed 
Ambassador Khalilzad,s emphasis on international and 
regional engagement.  Council members all acknowledged the 
recent security gains but noted that the security situation 
remains tenuous, and called on the Iraqi government to focus 
on national reconciliation and on passing needed legislation. 
 Council members also expressed their concern regarding the 
humanitarian situation, which the UN described as 
"worsening."  Several Council members called on stricter 
control and oversight of private security forces.  Some, 
including Russia and France, called for a timetable for the 
withdrawal of foreign forces from Iraq.  End summary. 
 
U/SYG DISCUSSES UNAMI 
 
¶2. (SBU) Undersecretary for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe 
told the Council that Iraq still faced enormous challenges, 
although the security trends in September were better than 
before.  The key priority is Iraq,s wider political 
reconciliation process, and the UN "stands ready to assist." 
Pascoe acknowledged the UN,s strengthened role in Iraq, and 
the expanded mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission 
for Iraq (UNAMI).  He noted that UN staff ceilings in Baghdad 
and Irbil had increased, and the UN was considering reopening 
its office in Basra.  UNAMI is working to become more 
self-sufficient, said Pascoe, and he urged the international 
community to help the UN in this regard.  He announced that 
the Distinct Entity Trust Fund, which pays for the UN,s 
"middle-ring security" will be exhausted by November.  (Note: 
UN staff told Poloff separately that the Secretary-General 
will be sending letters asking for new contributions to the 
Trust Fund.  They asked for U.S. assistance in following up 
with prospective donors, once the UN has made their initial 
request.  End note.) 
 
¶3. (U) Pascoe underscored the importance of regional 
engagement, and said "neighboring countries need to embrace 
responsible actions."  He added that dialogue among the 
neighboring countries was "encouraging."  Pascoe urged that 
that the UN and UNAMI be given "political and humanitarian 
space" in fulfilling its mandate.  He emphasized that the 
UN,s ability to talk to all sides "must be respected." 
 
THE ROLE OF MNF-I 
 
¶4. (U) Ambassador Khalilzad spoke on behalf of MNF-I, and 
provided an update of the security, political and economic 
situation in Iraq.  He reinforced calls for international and 
regional engagement, but noted that Iran and Syria were 
playing destabilizing roles and "appeared to believe they can 
benefit from instability in Iraq."  He concluded that the 
security situation in Iraq is transforming, and noted that 
the Iraqis have stressed the importance of renewing the MNF-I 
mandate.  He said the U.S. intends to put forth a resolution 
renewing the MNF-I mandate before the end of the year.  The 
UK PermRep, speaking in his national capacity, told the 
Council that the UK remained dedicated to MNF-I and its role 
in Iraq, while beginning the transition to "over watch" in 
the south.  He noted that the significant and positive impact 
on security by MNF-I and Iraqi security forces needed to be 
followed up with political steps. 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS, IRAQ REACT 
 
¶5. (U) Council members underscored three main themes: 1) 
concern over the humanitarian situation, especially the 
growing numbers of internally displaced persons and refugees; 
2) the importance of renewed international and regional 
engagement on Iraq issues, especially the upcoming Expanded 
Neighbors meeting in Istanbul; and 3) support for an expanded 
UN mandate.  Separately, a number of countries, including 
Russia, South Africa, Congo and Qatar, criticized the role of 
private security contractors in Iraq.  They expressed support 
for the Iraqi government,s decision to restrict contractors. 
 Russia said that private security contractors were hurting 
not only the Iraqi government "but also foreign diplomats in 
Baghdad, including Russian diplomats."  South Africa said 
contractors risked blurring the line between the military and 
civilians, and argued they should be subject to international 
law. 
 
¶6. (U) Russia and France both called for a timeline for the 
withdrawal of foreign forces in Iraq.  Russia said that a 
"hasty withdrawal" would be bad, but that a timeline for 
withdrawal is necessary to improve the security situation in 
Iraq.  Russia also noted that any timetable must include 
"prospects of full withdrawal."  France was less 
prescriptive, and stated its preference for a "withdrawal 
horizon for foreign forces."  South Africa said that the 
Security Council must exercise greater oversight of MNF-I, to 
ensure that MNF-I was acting properly under its Security 
Council mandate. 
 
¶7. (U) Iraqi PermRep Bayati emphasized his government,s 
dedication to national reconciliation, but said that Iraq 
needed significant help from neighboring countries and the 
international community.  He said, "Iraq aspires to become an 
arena for all parties to engage in dialogue rather than a 
space for settling issues."  Bayati emphasized Iraq,s desire 
to expand the UN,s mandate, in particular the role and 
presence of the UN,s specialized agencies.  Bayati ended 
with a call for the Security Council to reassess the role of 
the UN Compensation Committee, which is responsible for 
compensating neighboring countries following Iraq,s invasion 
of Kuwait.  Bayati asked that the Security Council suspend 
the UNCC deductions taken from Iraq,s sale of oil, because 
of Iraq,s tense internal situation. 
KHALILZAD