09MEXICO1339
MEXICO'S FEDERAL POLICE TO RECEIVE A FACELIFT
Thu May 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXRO4876
RR RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #1339/01 1342352
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 142352Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6496
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/HQ USNORTHCOM
RUEAHLA/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MEXICO 001339 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/LP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/21/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR MX
SUBJECT: MEXICO'S FEDERAL POLICE TO RECEIVE A FACELIFT 
 REF: A. MEXICO 873 
     ¶B. MEXICO 1224 
     ¶C. MEXICO 1314 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Charles V. Barclay. 
Reason: 1.4 (b), (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  Mexico's Congress has passed a new Federal 
Police law, which will convert the Federal Preventive Police 
into the Federal Police with expanded investigative and 
intelligence authorities.  The bill represents a compromise 
between President Calderon -- who had initially proposed to 
merge the federal police forces into one organization and 
move them under the authority of the Public Security 
Secretariat -- and his opponents, since the Public Ministry's 
Policia Federal Ministerial will remain intact and under the 
management of the Attorney General's office.  The reform has 
the potential to significantly improve the police's ability 
to fight crime by expanding the capabilities of the country's 
largest federal police force.  Nevertheless, the new Federal 
Police will need to overcome coordination challenges with the 
Attorney General's Office, avoid abusing its new authorities, 
and carefully train its new cadre of investigators in order 
to make real improvements to Mexico's security situation. 
End Summary. 
 
New Law a Compromise 
-------------------- 

¶2. (C) President Calderon has made nationwide police reform a 
lynchpin of his efforts to combat Mexico's security 
challenges.  Riddled with corruption and inefficiencies, as 
well as lacking effective cooperation mechanisms to 
coordinate the some 2000 federal, state, and municipal 
organizations, Mexico's police have long been seen as a 
barrier to meaningful improvements in the country's security 
situation and justice system.  Calderon's most recent effort 
to address the police quandary, the Federal Police law, was 
approved in Congress on April 30 and aims to convert the 
Federal Preventive Police, or PFP, into a new force with 
expanded authorities known as the Federal Police.  The bill 
represents a significant compromise for Calderon, who had 
originally proposed and had even started the merger under the 
SSP of the Attorney General's (PGR) Federal Investigative 
Agency (AFI), which has served as Mexico's primary 
investigative force, with the PFP.  Opposition political 
parties were long unenthused about the legislative proposal, 
and repeatedly cited a reluctance to support a measure that 
would put so much police authority in the hands of one 
Secretary.  Opponents to the plan also were concerned about 
transferring to the SSP investigative powers, including 
judicially authorized telecommunications intercept capability 
(ref a). 
 
Federal Police's New Look 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The new Federal Police law, passed on April 30 by 
large margins in both the Chamber and the Senate, mandates 
that the PFP, newly rebranded as the Federal Police (PF), 
will remain under the management of the SSP, currently headed 
by Genaro Garcia Luna.  Under the April 30 PGR law, the AFI, 
renamed the Policia Federal Ministerial (Federal Ministerial 
Police), will remain in the Public Ministry under the 
authority of the Attorney General and will continue to be the 
primary investigative force supporting the agency.  Oscar 
Rocha, adviser to Attorney General Medina Mora, told Poloffs 
that PGR is now engaged in rebuilding AFI/Ministerial Police, 
and will look to strengthen its ranks both from new hires as 
well as former AFI officers who were transferred to SSP. AFI 
Director Nicandra Castro told NAS Director on May 14 that AFI 
currently counts 4,764 members in its ranks, and that she is 
looking to hire 1,500 more. PGR will only accept officers who 
pass a series of confidence control measures. 
 
¶4. (C) Despite the failure to merge the two forces, the 
Federal Police under the new legislation will receive 
significant new authorities, which proponents say will 
resolve a major challenge facing the PFP -- the lack of 
investigative and intelligence-gathering abilities.  Garcia 
Luna in a seminar on May 9 told attending diplomats, 
including Poloff, that these powers are specifically geared 
toward helping the PF's preventive crime work -- its primary 
mission.  The new PF will have broader investigative and 
intelligence-gathering powers, which include: 
 
--the right to carry out investigations for the purpose of 
preventing crime; 
--the use of undercover operations and informants in 
investigations; 
--the ability to do tactical and strategic technical and 
scientific analysis of information received through 
intelligence-gathering mechanisms; 
--knowledge of crime scene investigation techniques in order 
to secure evidence at the scene of the crime; 
--the ability to request from a judge authorization for 
wiretaps and other interventions into various 
telecommunications systems for up to a six month period.  The 
judge by law must respond to the written request within 
twelve hours. 
 
¶5. (C) The new law expands and codifies Federal Police 
resources and authorities in other areas, as well.  It grants 
the Federal Police the ability to tap into new resources by 
allowing the force to use state and municipal police 
officers, SSP technical personnel and captains of boats or 
national airlines as necessary.  It also gives the PF the 
authority to conduct surveillance and inspect the entrance 
and exit of goods and people at airports, maritime ports, and 
various other customs points throughout the country.  The PF 
will also have purview over the security of national parks 
and other federal spaces. 
 
¶6. (C) In accordance with the Law for the National Public 
Security System, signed by Calderon in January, the Federal 
Police legislation establishes a National Council for Police 
Development, which will help develop career service for 
officers, and mandates the hiring, firing, and education 
requirements for the force.  The law facilitates the firing 
of officers who do not meet vetting or performance 
objectives, for example, by allowing the Federal Police to 
provide only monetary restitution to an officer who claims he 
was wrongly fired rather than requiring that the PF rehire 
that person.  The law also stipulates that officers in the 
areas of investigation or high-level training must at least 
have a bachelor's degree. 
 
Coordination With PGR 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Long-standing rivalries between the SSP and PGR have 
at times complicated their working relationship.  Both 
organizations have said that the new police law will enhance 
cooperation between the two agencies.  Garcia Luna 
highlighted for diplomats that the law explicitly allows 
Federal Police investigators to support PGR investigations at 
the Public Ministry's behest and under its authority.  PGR's 
Rocha told Poloff that he thinks the Federal Police's 
expanded investigative role will help the PGR more 
effectively build and prosecute cases.  He noted that being 
able to tap into a more highly trained and capable 25-30,000 
strong Federal Police for investigative assistance can only 
help PGR. 
 
¶8. (C) Nevertheless, how coordination between the two 
entities on the ground actually works is less clear.  Garcia 
Luna's definition of "investigation for prevention" seems 
quite broad, and when the Federal Police would turn an 
investigation over to PGR and its Ministerial Police is 
poorly defined.  The law does stipulate that the Federal 
Police must hand over a case to the Public Ministry 
immediately if, during the course of the police's 
investigation, a "major crime" is committed.  When asked to 
describe the division of labor during the course of police 
work, Garcia Luna explained that the Federal Police will be 
able to do the initial crime scene investigation, secure the 
evidence, and then hand it over to Public Ministry and the 
Federal Ministerial Police.  The PGR may also be reluctant to 
request Federal Police intercept or investigation assistance 
-- which the Federal Police may be eager to give -- since the 
organization has been enthusiastically setting up its own 
operational and analytical wiretapping unit.  How cooperation 
will evolve over the course of the rest of the investigation 
-- particularly should the Federal Police try to take 
advantage of its new authorities to assert itself more 
strongly -- seems up for debate. 
 
Some Observers Wary of Potential Abuses... 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (C) Human rights groups and some government opponents have 
reacted tepidly to the new law.  Madeline Penman from Centro 
Proderecho, an NGO focusing on judicial institutions and the 
rule of law in Mexico, told Poloff on May 11 that the 
organization is concerned by the vague language covering 
regulations of wiretaps and telecommunication intercepts. 
Groups are also concerned about the potential for abuses 
during undercover operations unless they are carefully 
monitored.  Some of Calderon's political opponents are 
bothered by any legislation they see as concentrating too 
much authority in the hands of one organization and cite 
wiretaps, for example, as ripe for misuse.  Other observers 
explain that Mexico's history of single party rule where the 
state security apparatus was used not only for legitimate 
concerns but also to control or observe political enemies 
generates unease. 
 
...But Not a Return to the Old Days 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) The law is drafted with checks and balances included 
that probably will help to prevent serious police abuses of 
the new authorities.  For example, requests for wiretaps have 
to come from the General Commissioner, the head of the 
Federal Police force, which should provide internal 
accountability and minimize the risk that such tools will be 
used for retribution against personal or political enemies or 
for some kind of personal gain.  Moreover, police are 
required to present a written request before a judge to 
obtain permission for telecommunications intercepts for up to 
a six month period.  The judge will determine the kinds of 
intercept authorities granted in each case, the limits, and 
the means.  Should the police want to expand the intercept 
use to other subjects or locations, they will have to present 
to a judge a new request.  Moreover, at the end of every 
intercept operation, the police will have to present a report 
in the form of the recorded sounds or images to prove to the 
judge that the case was run in accordance to the established 
guidelines.  The judge also has the right at any time to 
verify that the intercepts are done in accordance with these 
terms and can partially or totally revoke the permission if 
necessary.  Police are required to submit monthly a report on 
their intercept activities, which will be passed from the 
judge to the Public Ministry. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11. (C) Mexico's Federal Police reform has the potential to 
significantly improve the police's ability to fight crime by 
expanding the capabilities of the country's largest federal 
police force.  A Federal Police with a strong investigative 
component also feeds well into efforts to transform Mexico's 
antiquated judicial system inasmuch as it increases the 
number of officers who can help build stronger cases by 
understanding the need for thorough forensics work, crime 
scene investigation, and a secure chain of evidence.  The 
Federal Police could be an important partner for the far more 
limited Federal Ministerial Police, which will only number in 
the few thousands initially.  A more effective police force 
could go a long way -- in the long term -- toward getting the 
military out of the organized crime fight. 
 
¶12. (C) Nevertheless, the SSP will need to clarify, in 
coordination with PGR, the roles of each organization's 
police force and how they can complement each other on the 
ground.  Continued feuding between the two agencies will do 
little to improve Mexico's troubled security environment. 
Moreover, a Federal Police doing top notch investigative work 
will not accomplish much if the PGR cannot effectively 
prosecute cases, nor would a poorly trained Federal Police be 
of much help to its prosecutorial counterpart.  The SSP will 
also have to carefully monitor its use of its new powers, 
particularly in the early trial period, or will risk feeding 
into fears that the reforms make the Mexican security 
apparatus too powerful. 
 
¶13. (C) Garcia Luna faces a formidable challenge in preparing 
the some 9,000 federal police officers he envisions acting as 
investigators (ref b and c).  He has requested U.S. 
assistance, which provides an unprecedented opportunity to 
the U.S. to engage with the SSP on a large scale and help 
shape the future of the organization.  NAS has been working 
on planning for a possible 1,500 person pilot project with 
the SSP starting as early as June-July.  Ensuring this 
training produces a capable and credible new force, however, 
will require a serious and sustained effort on the GOM's 
behalf. 
 
Visit Mexico City's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/mexicocity and the North American 
Partnership Blog at http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap / 
BASSETT