06KAMPALA1613
NORTHERN UGANDA: RETURNS OF DISPLACED PERSONS
Fri Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO1092
RR RUEHGI RUEHHM RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #1613/01 2371234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251234Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7465
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNRPP/REFUGEE PROCESSING POSTS
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0480UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KAMPALA 001613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, AF/E, AF/SPG, DRL, INR, PRM; PASS TO 
USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM EAID PREF UG SU
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA: RETURNS OF DISPLACED PERSONS 
INCREASING 
 
REF: KAMPALA 1583 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary: In northern Uganda, humanitarian 
organizations are reporting increases in the numbers of 
internally displaced persons returning to their land.  The 
process of "decongestion" of the camps has led to the 
spontaneous movement of IDPs from more crowded camps to areas 
where they can more easily access their land.  The arrival of 
harvest time and perceptions of a declining security threat 
from the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) are motivating the 
voluntary movements.  Camp decongestion is increasing food 
security, creating less crowded living quarters, and 
relocating IDPs near traditional trading centers. 
Nonetheless, re-establishment of property boundaries, lack of 
infrastructure to support basic needs, and the revitalization 
of economic activity are posing significant challenges to 
returnees.  Serious human rights concerns remain, but field 
reports suggest a decrease in abuses perpetrated by security 
forces.  As the security situation continues to improve, the 
needs of northern Ugandans will shift away from emergency aid 
toward long-term reconstruction.  This will require a focused 
approach by the GOU and donors to meet the needs of returning 
northerners.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - -  - - -  - - - - 
VOLUNTARY DECONGESTION UNDERWAY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU)  As peace talks continue between the LRA and the 
GOU, a significant trend of resettlement by internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) has emerged in northern Uganda.  The 
"decongestion" of over 200 camps has taken two forms.  In the 
Acholi districts of Pader, Kitgum, Gulu, and the newly formed 
Amuru districts, IDPs are moving to sites closer to their 
original homes and community centers.  (These sites are 
technically called "decongestion camps", but are often 
informally referred to by donors and NGOs as "land access 
sites", leading to some confusion.  For consistency, we will 
use "decongestion camps" in official communication.)  IDPs in 
Acholiland are returning to their homes to participate in 
farming activities during the day, but elect to continue to 
spend their nights within the security of the new sites or 
existing IDP camps.  UNOCHA reports that in Gulu and the new 
Amuru district, 18 decongestion sites are currently occupied. 
 In Pader, the GOU has planned 46 new sites with 18 already 
occupied and in Kitgum, 47 sites are planned with four that 
are operational.  Each site has a UPDF garrison stationed in 
close proximity.  While UNOCHA estimates that close to 
100,000 people have moved to decongestion camps in 
Acholiland, the numbers are expected to be much higher once 
results are obtained from World Food Program's revalidation 
census of all IDPs in Acholi district (expected start date is 
early September).  In Lango region, UNHCR reports that nearly 
120,000 people in Lira--35 percent of the displaced 
population in the district-- have already left the camps and 
are living on and working their own lands.  The UN and 
Ugandan government agencies are taking a census in September 
to get a better understanding of the scope and magnitude of 
population movements in the north. 
 
¶3. (SBU)   Reporting from the UN, NGOs, the GOU, and USAID 
teams indicates that movement by the IDPs is voluntary.  The 
arrival of harvest time and perceptions of a declining 
security threat from the LRA is fueling returns.  There is no 
indication that the UPDF is restricting movement, although 
sundown to sunup curfews remain in effect in the camps and 
new sites in Acholi region.  A recent USAID/OFDA field report 
notes that family members, particularly children and the 
elderly, have been left behind in camps while home 
construction and land preparation takes place in the 
decongestion camps. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
IMPLICATIONS: CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM AMID CHALLENGES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Increased food security, less crowded living 
conditions, and the concentration of IDPs near traditional 
trading centers are positive results of decongestion.  The 
harvest is projected to be productive in most places and 
diverse in crop type.  The UN World Food Program has reduced 
rations to the general camp population to 40-60 percent of 
the daily requirement.  Recent food distribution as witnessed 
by poloff and OFDA officials at Amuru camp (the second 
largest in Gulu-Amuru district) was markedly calm.  Food 
 
KAMPALA 00001613  002 OF 003 
 
 
assistance experts noted the IDPs displayed no signs of the 
panic and disorder that often accompanies distribution in 
locations with food insecurity.  The renewed presence of 
women and children in the streets in Gulu municipality and 
the resumption of public bus service between Kitgum and Gulu 
towns indicates northerners are increasingly mobile.  An OFDA 
field officer speculates that as many as 40 percent of the 
displaced population could leave the original IDP camps for 
the decongestion camps starting in mid-October and notes that 
"humanitarian conditions are the best I've seen in the north 
in 18 months". 
 
¶5. (SBU)  According to the OFDA Regional Advisor, UNHCR is 
estimating that an additional 110,000 IDPs from Lira district 
will return to their lands in October when grass will be 
available for home construction and that approximately 
100,000 will remain in Lira camps because they are from areas 
near the camps or are too indigent to return to their own 
land.  There are no decongestion camps in Lira.  Furthermore, 
IDPs interviewed in Pader stated that more family members 
will move to new sites once the dry grasses are available, 
the second harvest begins, new food distribution patterns are 
established, and access to healthcare and education services 
becomes more readily available. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  However, returnees are faced with significant 
challenges after decades of war and displacement, including 
re-establishment of property boundaries and a lack of 
infrastructure to support basic needs and the revitalization 
of economic activity.  According to northern GOU officials 
and NGOs, many IDPs are returning to their lands to discover 
that their homes and traditional markers of property lines 
(such as trees) are gone.  With a significant increase in 
returns now a becoming a reality, there is concern among 
stakeholders that land distribution will be a flashpoint 
issue.  A high level of fear of the LRA remains amongst the 
population, and any surge in attacks could negatively affect 
current levels of humanitarian activity and resettlement. 
Infrastructure in the north cannot support massive returns in 
its current state and despite attempts at increased autonomy 
by IDPs, many remain dependent on humanitarian agencies for 
services. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
UPDATE ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (SBU)  While serious human rights concerns remain, 
including access to healthcare and education by vulnerable 
groups, field reports suggest a decrease in abuses 
perpetrated by security forces and major reductions in child 
"night commuters" (reftel).  IDPs in decongestion camps are 
reporting improved relations with local UPDF garrisons and 
cite UPDF presence near the decongestion camps as a key 
factor in their decision to move from the original IDP camps. 
 Some reports indicate an overall reduction in reported 
attacks against civilians by security forces.  Protection 
issues including rape, particularly for women and children, 
continue to be a problematic.  The UN's Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights in Gulu is in regular contact 
with the UPDF on human rights issues and has found UPDF 
divisional commanders to be highly responsive in following up 
on cases.  In many cases, the military has made arrests. 
Unfortunately, due to the weak police presence in the region, 
the military does not turn over its soldiers who commit 
crimes against civilians to local law enforcement officials, 
preferring instead to try them in military courts. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The UPDF has rescued over 17,000 children from the 
LRA since 1996.  Save the Children officers also told poloffs 
that after a series of training sessions on protection 
issues, the UPDF changed its operational tactics when 
attacking LRA camps to ensure the maximum protection for 
child victims.  Non-governmental organizations also reported 
that the UPDF followed agreed upon procedures for processing 
formerly abducted children after rescues.  In some cases, 
however, children are kept longer in UPDF's child protection 
unit if they have valuable time-sensitive intelligence 
information.  Save the Children is working with the CPU to 
allow children in such cases to be questioned at reception 
centers rather than in a military environment. 
Non-governmental organizations arranged for meetings between 
the UPDF and child victims to share their experiences in 
captivity and during rescue operations to improve the 
military's handling of victims. 
 
KAMPALA 00001613  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU)  With reports of arrivals at night commuter 
shelters, reception centers, and UPDF child protection units 
markedly reduced (reftel), UNICEF and other stakeholders are 
assessing possible alternative uses for these locations that 
would support reconciliation and reconstruction activities. 
Field reporting and poloff visits to camps found many 
displaced children are not attending school.  The children 
cited the absence of appropriate clothing and text books as 
the reason they are turned away.  While access to water in 
the camps is improving, due in part to USAID programs, 
sanitation and healthcare are lacking, with the largest 
impact, as usual, on vulnerable populations. 
 
- - - - - 
COMMENT 
- - - - - 
 
¶10.  (SBU)   Decongestion, despite many challenges, is 
generally a good news story.  We expect displaced persons to 
continue to return to their land, whether permanently or 
part-time, as long as the security situation continues to 
improve.  Returnees, however, are going back to areas without 
little or no services which poses an enormous challenge to 
the Government of Uganda, the UN, and international donors. 
BROWNING