07KAMPALA1485
NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (SEPTEMBER 8 - SEPTEMBER 21, 2007)
Tue Sep 25 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO7102
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #1485/01 2681337
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251337Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9409
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0656
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0447
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 3360
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KAMPALA 001485 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL MOPS ASEC CASC EAID UG SU
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (SEPTEMBER 8 - SEPTEMBER 21, 2007) 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: The following Northern Uganda Notes provides 
information on the situation on the ground and USG activities aimed 
at meeting Mission's objectives in northern Uganda.  These 
objectives include promoting regional stability through peace and 
security, good governance, access to social services, economic 
growth, and humanitarian assistance.  Post appreciates feedback from 
consumers on the utility of this product and any gaps in information 
that need to be filled.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION PROCESSES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  President Yoweri Museveni and Congolese President Joseph 
Kabila signed an agreement in Arusha, Tanzania on September 8 that 
established a 90-day timetable after which Congo would take action 
against Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in Garamba National Park.  The 
Congolese armed forces were working with the U.N. Mission in the 
Congo (MONUC) on training integrated brigades and plans to attack 
the "negative forces" in eastern Congo. 
 
¶3.  (U)  On September 13, the LRA's Juba spokesman Godfrey Ayoo 
declared that any attacks on LRA bases in eastern Congo would 
reignite the war in the north.  Ayoo's comments were in response to 
the agreement that was signed in Arusha between President Museveni 
and Congolese President Joseph Kabila, and remarks made by Africa 
Bureau Assistant Secretary Jendayi Frazer on September 5.  Ayoo 
asserted that the 90-day timetable in the Arusha agreement was 
hostile propaganda and violated the Cessation of Hostilities 
Agreement and the spirit of the Juba peace talks.  Ayoo threatened 
that "any attack on the LRA will be a declaration of war, and it 
will be a call on the Lord's Resistance Army to fight its way back 
to Uganda and should this peace process break, then the Lord's 
Resistance Army will fight until it overthrows the government of the 
Ugandan dictatorship that knows nothing else but war-mongery and 
war." 
 
¶4.  (U) A Voice of America report quoted a response from Ugandan 
Minister of Defense Crispus Kiyonga.  "The Government of Uganda 
remains fully committed to the peace process and talks in Juba, and 
it is our expectation that soon we should reach agreement with the 
LRA so that they can have a soft landing and return home," said 
Kiyonga.  "The LRA is not in a position to overthrow the Government 
of Uganda.  We are talking so that our brothers and sisters come 
back home and have a soft landing." 
 
¶5.  (U)  On September 8, Vincent Otti, LRA deputy took part in the 
Gulu-based Te-Yat radio program.  Otti reiterated his concerns about 
the International Criminal Court (ICC).  He also stated that he 
would not sign any peace agreement that would incriminate him and 
put him in jail.  Otti declared that there were over 3,000 "bombs" 
in northern Uganda.  He asserted that effective eradication of these 
weapons could be done only by the LRA.  UPDF's northern spokesman, 
Lt. Chris Magezi, stated that the UPDF had recovered almost 300 
different types of weapons and ordnances within villages. 
 
¶6.  (U) USG Activities:  AF Bureau Senior Advisor for Conflict 
Resolution Tim Shortley traveled in the region from September 5-17. 
He emphasized the importance of establishing a clear and reasonable 
timetable for the peace process, and looked at the administration of 
the mediation secretariat, and the launch of the Peace, Recovery, 
and Development Plan for northern Uganda. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Africa Bureau Deputy Assistant Secretary for Africa James 
Swan served as the chief mediator of the U.S.-facilitated Tripartite 
Plus Commission, which met in Kampala from September 15-17.  The 
process brings together Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Rwanda, and Uganda to discuss and coordinate dealing with negative 
forces operating against various member states, improvement and 
upgrading of diplomatic relations, and development of a common most 
wanted list and an extradition treaty. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (U)   The official phasing out of internally-displaced persons 
(IDP) camps in Lango sub-region began on September 18.  The GOU 
stated that the phase-out illustrated its commitment to a peaceful 
resolution of the LRA conflict and the reconstruction of the north. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  The U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization initiated a 
food drive to meet the needs of returning IDPs.  The regions of 
 
KAMPALA 00001485  002 OF 004 
 
 
Lango, Acholi, and Teso are currently participating in the cassava 
planting program that was launched in November 2006.  Other crops 
being harvested include maize, rice, sweet potatoes, ground nuts, 
sorghum, sim sim and millet. 
 
¶10.  (U)  Severe flooding has cut off roads in 25 districts in the 
northern districts of Teso, Lango Acholi, Karamoja, and West Nile 
regions.  Bridges in Pader and Gulu districts have become 
impassable.  On September 12, Prime Minister Apollo Nsibambi called 
an emergency meeting to address the disaster.  The Government 
dispensed by boat emergency supplies and food such as maize and 
beans.  Non-governmental organizations such as World Health 
Organization, UNICEF, Lutheran World Federation, the International 
Committee of the Red Cross, and Population Services International 
have donated funds and pledged blankets, mosquito nets, plastic 
sheeting, and water treatment tables.  A spike in disease and 
infections was expected. 
¶11.  (SBU)  USG Activities:  On September 14, the U.S. Ambassador to 
Uganda declared a disaster for the flooded districts in northern 
Uganda, resulting in the release of USD 100,000 to provide 
assistance to affected areas.  A joint USAID-Uganda and Office of 
Foreign Disaster Assistance assessment team had visited the flood 
affected Teso region from September 4 to 7.  Early reports issued 
suggested that over 150,000 people were affected.  The U.S. 
assessment team found the number to be 50,000.  Assistance to be 
provided includes food, plastic sheeting, seeds, and cuttings for 
the forthcoming planting season.  The cumulative effects of the 
rainfall have begun to compromise the structural integrity of many 
dirt homes, contaminate wells, inundate latrines, and wash away 
seeds and cassava cuttings.  The USAID team also reported 
significant crop loss, minimal food reserves, and a lack of planting 
material for the upcoming agricultural season. An additional USD 
400,000 has been released from Washington to aid flood victims. 
¶12.  (SBU)  The USAID-funded Community Resilience and Dialogue 
Activity (CRD), implemented by International Rescue Committee 
(lead), Associazione Volontari peri il Servizio (AVSI), CARE, 
Catholic Relief Services (CRS) and Save the Children Uganda (SCiU), 
closed on August 31.  The USG contribution of USD 15.5 million 
focused on the rehabilitation and development for individuals in 
conflict-affected areas in northern Uganda.  CRD reintegrated over 
4,700 formerly abducted children and ex-combatants, initiated 
economic development opportunities in affected areas, created peace 
clubs, and increased education for children affected by HIV/AIDS. 
 
¶13.  (U)  On Friday September 21, representatives from the Office of 
Food for Peace, Office of Transition Initiatives, Office of Foreign 
Disaster Assistance, Africa Bureau, and the Uganda Mission met to 
develop an integrated USAID strategy for the transition from 
humanitarian assistance to sustainable development for Northern 
Uganda.  The integrated strategy is to function as a guide and 
tactical planning framework to assist in coordinating development 
progress across USAID offices to ensure success in the peace 
process, the return of internally displaced people, the 
reintegration of former combatants and the mitigation of future 
conflict. 
 
 
- - - - - - - - 
SECURITY UPDATE 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶14.  (U) On September 21, the Ugandan Peoples' Defense Forces 
announced that it had court martialed 120 soldiers for capital 
offenses such as murder, rape, defilement, and armed robbery in 
northern Uganda since September 2006, according to spokesman Lt. 
Chris Magezi.  The UPDF's disciplinary committee tried cases of 
minor offenses.  The cases of 21 soldiers were still at trial at the 
Fourth Division Court Martial.  Magezi said "the UPDF image is 
sacred and therefore the army will continue to guard it.  It will 
not hesitate to punish any soldier who engages in criminal 
activities that breach the army's standard operating procedures." 
 
¶15.  (U) USG Activities: On September 21, USAID, DOJ/ICITAP, and 
Embassy personnel participated in a lessons-learned review of the 
pilot community justice activity in Lira District that ends on 
September 30.  These lessons will feed into any future activities in 
security sector reform; justice, law and order; and community 
policing.  The goals of the four-month pilot project were to provide 
training for police trainers and improve the coordination between 
police, prosecutors, and magistrates in support of re-establishment 
of a civilian-controlled judicial system in Lira District.  Four 
police advisors and a prosecutor worked with the Ugandan Police 
Force and judges to design a one week community policing program 
 
KAMPALA 00001485  003 OF 004 
 
 
aimed at training newly-recruited Special Police Constables.  The 
specific skills taught included crime scene investigation, 
interrogation, report writing, and first aid.  The Lira Police 
Station was given a face-lift intended to project a more 
professional image for the police and four motorbikes were donated 
to the police and one to the prosecutor's office.  Twenty-two 
trainers and 72 Special Police Constables (SPCs) were trained in 
four different iterations of the course.  The instructors will 
deploy on motorbikes and conduct training for SPCs at the sub-county 
level. 
 
¶16.  (U)  As part of the DOJ/ICITAP program, the U.N. Office for the 
High Commission for Human Rights conducted human rights training for 
the constables and was involved in all stages of the program 
development.  The police force also was given techniques for using 
daily roll call to disseminate information and training to officers. 
 A unique part of the pilot was the involvement of church leaders 
and faith-based organizations to assist the police with juvenile 
justice issues.  Local churches were enlisted to assist in the 
protection of children who commit crimes.  Due to a lack of remand 
facilities for children in the north, the juvenile is released to 
his family but his punishment, such as community service, is 
overseen by local church officials. 
 
¶17.  (U)  The Joint Monitoring Commission was set to hold its last 
meeting on October 3.  President Museveni reportedly will attend and 
formally launch the PRDP. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
IN THE MEDIA AND THE WEB 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶18.  (U)  The New Vision reported that fear among returned IDP's is 
increasing as a direct result of LRA threats to reignite the war if 
its bases in Congo are attacked.  Lira's Resident District 
Commissioner held an emergency security meeting to assuage concerns 
among local residents.  In response Ruhakana Rugunda, Chief 
Government negotiator stated that the GOU was committed to peace and 
is supporting the formation of a new force made up of police, local 
law enforcement officers, militia, and the military to guarantee 
peace and security in northern Uganda. 
 
¶19.  (U) On September 14, the International Crisis Group released a 
new briefing paper on northern Uganda.  The ICG reports that "Recent 
developments create an opening to deal with core issues but have not 
altered the parties' questionable desire to do so."  The IGC 
recognized that the LRA was getting more from the process - an 
opportunity to regroup and to improve its image - than it was 
giving. 
 
¶20.  (U) The ICG called for a comprehensive justice framework 
requiring prosecution of LRA and army commanders with the greatest 
responsibility for crimes, reconciliation of ordinary rebels, and 
truth-telling and compensation for victims.  ICG acknowledged the 
possibility of safehaven for the LRA leaders indicted by the 
International Criminal Court, but "only as an absolute last resort 
and with international endorsement."  The ICG called for donors and 
mediators to continue to close opportunities for those who seek to 
prolong the process indefinitely, including through monitoring of 
food and other aid to prevent the LRA from rebuilding its strength. 
The briefing called for an extension of the mandate of the Cessation 
of Hostilities Monitoring team so it could operate in the DRC, 
should the LRA continue to refuse to assemble in Sudan, and for the 
Sudan Peoples' Liberation Army (SPLA) to bolster forces on the DRC 
border to limit LRA mobility.  It stated further that, "a clear 
message must be sent to Kampala that unilateral military action in 
Congo is unacceptable."  The ICG also called for a "two - track 
strategy" of negotiating away the security threat while dealing with 
long-term redevelopment in northern Uganda as the best approach to 
ending the conflict. 
 
¶21.  (U) Resolve Uganda issued a statement on September 13, 
"welcoming the increased efforts of the United States government to 
contribute to a lasting resolution of the twenty-one year crisis..." 
 Resolve noted the recent visit to the region by A/S Frazer and the 
appointment of Timothy Shortley as Senior Advisor on Conflict 
Resolution.  Resolve urged the U.S. to "devote increased diplomacy 
and resources in support of the negotiations process." 
Specifically, Resolve called for the USG to publicly announce that 
its policy was to respect and uphold any agreement reached in Juba, 
to take every possible precaution against new military operations 
before "all reasonable peaceful options" have been exhausted, and 
"refrain from making pubic threats of military operations against 
 
KAMPALA 00001485  004 OF 004 
 
 
the LRA while a viable negotiations process was taking place." 
 
¶22.  (SBU)  In excerpts from her new book, "Turning War into Peace: 
An Insider's Story," printed in the East African newspaper, former 
member of parliament and government minister, Betty Bigombe, accused 
corrupt officers in the former National Resistance Army of fueling 
the LRA war.  Bigombe's accusations arise from her experiences as 
chief mediator from 1993- 2004 for the GOU during the previously 
failed LRA peace talks.  The East African article cited corrupt 
practices such as the misquoting of personnel numbers and equipment 
needs, illegal acquisition and sale of oil, vandalizing of army 
trucks, and the sale of rations and uniforms to the SPLA.  UPDF 
Spokesman Felix Kulayigye refused to confirm or deny allegations 
until the UPDF received a copy of the book and investigated its 
accusations. 
BROWNING