07KAMPALA449
NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (February 27-March 9, 2007)
Wed Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO4680
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #0449/01 0730547
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140547Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8419
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0554
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0389
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 3196
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KAMPALA 000449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL MOPS ASEC CASC EAID UG SU
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (February 27-March 9, 2007) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Post presents the fifteenth edition of Northern Uganda 
Notes to provide information on the situation on the ground and 
activities aimed at meeting Mission's objectives in northern Uganda. 
 These objectives include promoting regional stability through peace 
and security, good governance, access to social services, economic 
growth, and humanitarian assistance.  Post appreciates feedback from 
consumers on the utility of this product and any gaps in information 
that need to be filled.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION PROCESSES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  There were various efforts to get the peace talks restarted at 
Juba.  The Acholi Conference, held in Juba from March 2-4, brought 
together religious, political and business leaders; elders; women; 
youth; and professionals from the wider Acholi community to discuss 
ways in which to put the peace process back on track.  The LRA did 
not attend the meeting which attracted some 150 participants. The 
meeting was organized by Acholi cultural leader Rwot Acana and 
funded by DANIDA and the Canadian Government.   On February 27, 
President Museveni stated that the Ugandan military would not pursue 
the LRA if they did not try to re-enter Uganda.  During a session on 
February 28, Parliament urged the Government and LRA rebels not to 
resume hostilities, but to restart the peace talks and reach a 
peaceful settlement quickly 
 
¶3.  UN Special Envoy Joaquim Chissano briefed the diplomatic corps 
on March 2 about his travel in the region and meeting with LRA 
leaders Joseph Kony and Vincent Otti.  The meeting took place near 
Bunia in Congo.  Kony reportedly told Chissano that he was no longer 
interested in war and stated that the LRA would remain committed to 
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement.  Kony said he would count on 
Chissano to address the issues that forced the LRA to quit the 
talks.  Chissano also met with Sudanese President Omar Bashir, who 
clarified his statements on the LRA's presence in Sudan.  According 
to Bashir, the LRA was welcome to attend negotiations but otherwise 
its presence in Sudanese territory would not be tolerated. 
 
¶4.  Chissano led a delegation to meet with Kony and Otti at 
Ri-Kwangba starting on March 10.  Uganda's lead negotiator, Minister 
of Internal Affairs Rugunda, and Minister of State Henry Okello 
Oryem, Gulu District Chairman Norbert Mao and Gulu Resident District 
Commissioner Walter Ochora, and at least five Acholi religious, 
traditional, and elected leaders will participate in the meetings. 
The delegation spent one day with the LRA leadership to find a way 
to get the talks restarted.  The LRA's complaints were largely 
technical and administrative demands regarding the mediation team, 
per diems, and personal security.  Another meeting was planned 
between Kony, the GOU, and the GOSS in two weeks to determine the 
date for the resumption of the talks.  (Septel) 
 
¶5.  Local district officials tell us that Kony and Otti remain in 
Garamba National Park and have not traveled to Central African 
Republic. 
 
¶6.  USG Activities: Olamide Abedalja, MONUC's new representative in 
Uganda, paid a courtesy call on Ambassador Browning on March 6. 
According to Abedalja, MONUC would not be engaging in operations 
against the LRA. 
 
¶7.  Government mediator Ruhakana Ruganda expressed his appreciation 
for the U.S. Congressional resolution on northern Uganda. 
 
¶8.  On March 5, the Governments of South Sudan and Uganda signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) regarding their support for 
"Conservation Landscapes for Peace" to be created along the shared 
border.  Trans-boundary natural resource management, peace parks, 
and peace landscapes are conservation tools that can help maintain 
peace and alleviate tension over shared resources.  This is 
particularly important as IDPs and refugees return home.  USAID's 
Office of Transitional Initiatives funded the technical meetings in 
Juba and Kampala. 
 
- - - - - - - - 
SECURITY UPDATE 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  Kitgum security officials reaffirmed their commitment to protect 
the public and noted that there was a marked improvement in security 
in the district since the beginning of the year.  Officials remain 
concerned about the presence of a small group of LRA in Labone, 
South Sudan, about 20 kilometers from the border with Uganda. 
 
¶10.  The judiciary's program to eliminate backlogged court cases and 
 
KAMPALA 00000449  002 OF 002 
 
 
decongest prisons in northern Uganda will begin another round of 
court sessions in five cities.  Although it was supposed to begin on 
March 5, the launch, was postponed until Uganda's courts resumed 
business, which was suspended over the invasion of the High Court 
premises by government security forces to re-arrest individuals who 
had been granted bail. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11.  USG Activities: USAID's Office of Food for Peace made a $10 
million food aid contribution to World Food Program/Uganda.  To date 
in FY07, FFP has contributed USD 27.4 million for food aid to WFP, 
targeting the IDPs, refugees, and those affected by drought in 
Karamoja. 
 
¶12.  From March 2-5, the Mission hosted a six-person USG delegation 
led by David McCormick, Deputy National Security Advisor for 
International Economic Affairs and Dina Powell, Assistant Secretary 
of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs.  The delegation 
traveled to both Gulu and Kitgum in northern Uganda to see the 
impact of U.S.-funded humanitarian and development assistance 
projects, as well as meet Ugandan alumni of USG exchange programs. 
During their visit to the North, McCormick and Powell observed a 
World Food Program food distribution at Ongaku IDP camp, and toured 
Gulu's Lacor hospital to look at the President's Emergency Plan for 
AIDS Relief and Presidential Malarial Initiative programs. 
 
¶13.  The delegation also met with night commuters at a USAID funded 
shelter and former LRA combatants at a World Vision rehabilitation 
center.  (The number of clients at both facilities is markedly lower 
than during the heights of the LRA insurgency.) The delegation also 
met with representatives of numerous non-governmental organizations 
working in northern Uganda, including the Invisible Children 
organization. In Kitgum, the delegation visited the USAID-Dunavant 
public-private partnership project which is supporting cotton 
cultivation, processing and marketing in northern Uganda. In Kitgum 
district, some 2,900 families have organized themselves into cotton 
"producer organizations." 
 
¶14.  On March 6, Ambassador Browning and Deputy USAID Director 
Elzadia Washington briefed Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials on 
the new USAID/OFDA office in Gulu.  Ambassador James Mugume, the 
Acting Permanent Secretary, expressed the Government's appreciation 
for the establishment of a U.S. presence to work on development 
activities in northern Uganda. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
FROM THE MEDIA AND THE WEB 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶15.  International Crisis Group's John Prendergast and actor Ryan 
Gosling published an opinion piece "At War in the Fields of the 
Lord:  The Best Chance for Peace in Uganda" which was posted on the 
ABC News Online website.  In the op-ed, Prendergast and Gosling 
state that, "although the U.S. government hasn't paid much attention 
to this conflict, ordinary Americans have.  When they learn what is 
going on, their reactions are swift and compassionate."  They also 
suggest that neither U.S. troops nor billions in aid dollars are 
needed: "Dispatching a senior American diplomat - with the blessing 
of the White House - to work all the issues necessary to end the 
conflict" would be sufficient to give both sides the confidence and 
motivation necessary to pursue peace. 
BROWNING