09ANKARA1744
Iran Student's Day Protest Feedback
Tue Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3585
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHAK #1744 3421548
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 081548Z DEC 09 ZDS CTG RUEHSD SVC 0047W
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1414
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6617
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS ANKARA 001744 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
XXXXX CORRECTED COPY ADDING "SENSITIVE" CAPTION XXXXX 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: CVIS PREL PINS PGOV PHUM SOCI SCUL TU IR
SUBJECT: Iran Student's Day Protest Feedback 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: On Tuesday December 8th, CONOFF surveyed Iranian 
non-immigrant visa (NIV) applicants regarding the December 7th 
"Student's Day" protest in Iran.  The protests were described as 
better organized and larger than the November 4th demonstrations. 
Reactions to the present political climate reflected mixed feelings 
of support for the protesters to hope for a return to calm.  An 
overall uncomortable feeling of tightened state security and 
surveillance pervaded all applicant responses.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The most impassioned of the Iranian respondents was an 
architecture student whose brother participated in the December 7th 
Tehran University protest.  According to her brother, Sunday night 
people chanted "God is Great" from their rooftops to defy Supreme 
Leader Khamenei.  She said demonstrations took place at many 
universities including Tehran's Sharif Institute of Technology and 
in other cities such as Shiraz, Mashhad, and Kerman.  On December 
7th, Basij militiamen with batons reportedly deployed at Tehran 
University in advance of the protest, but students were present in 
such great numbers that they reportedly managed to force the 
Basiji's out.  When the Basijis tried to attack certain students, 
other students locked arms and came in between them.  She added that 
security authorities targeted protest leaders who led 
anti-government chanting for arrests.  She said that the protests 
were far better organized than the last demonstration on November 
4th.  Her father, a university professor, attributed this to the 
government's visible deployment of rooftop snipers to discourage 
participation during the November protests. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The architecture student described the Basijis as paid 
government mercenaries with no fear of committing murder.  She 
attributes their pro-government zeal to government payments as well 
as special treatment.  For example, Basijis who choose to pursue 
higher education do not need to take regularly required university 
entrance exams.  She added that because of this, "Khamenei is like a 
god to them." 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The architecture student had participated in previous 
demonstrations.  She said that though leaderless, students were 
still hopeful of an evolution in their political system towards a 
true democracy.  She explained that if the position of Supreme 
Leader were eliminated, Iran would become a true democracy.  She 
added that students remain excited and are willing to sacrifice 
despite the level of danger.  She repeatedly noted that "40 million" 
Iranians are against the current regime so eventually they must 
succeed.  She cited the government's strong reaction to the protest 
as a sign of fear and that the students are "fearless."  She was not 
aware of any future planned protests. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Other applicant responses were far more low-key and 
moderate.  One student from Sharif University said he was interested 
to hear about the protest from his friends but was apolitical 
himself.  He explained that he was an academic and did not approve 
of the current climate of instability as it was detrimental to his 
studies.  He hopes for a return to calm so he can focus on his 
coursework.  A middle-aged Iranian woman noted that the public 
environment was not good since moderate to liberal Iranians feel as 
if someone is "watching over their shoulder."  She noted that prior 
to the election everyone wanted to believe that they had a real 
democracy, but that now the lie has become so obvious that most 
people cannot accept it.  She thinks the best way forward is for the 
government to admit its mistakes so confidence can be restored.  In 
the end she noted that a stable and safe environment for her 
children was all she hoped for.  Another middle-aged Iranian woman 
responded, "What can I say, it's not good" and quickly walked away. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) COMMENT: Based on accounts from Iranians visa applicants, 
the current protest movement appears to be self-generated among 
student groups with no direct connection to Mir Hossein Mousavi or 
other public opposition leaders.  As the architecture student noted 
"Mousavi is a good man but not a leader."  The internet appears to 
be the primary source of protest information and communication. 
Despite her excitement the architecture student was unable to 
explain how the student movement would lead to meaningful change. 
Although yesterday's protest appears to be larger than last month's, 
none of the applicants was able to quantify its size.  Most 
applicants, although unhappy about the elections and the resultant 
increased security situation, appear to err on the side of caution, 
moderation and hope simply for a return to pre-election stability 
and order.  END COMMENT. 
 
SILLIMAN