09ANKARA1795
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9006
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1795/01 3511153
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171153Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1501
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0199
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6660
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4337
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7696
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7603
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4200
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001795 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 17, 2009 
 
US Embassy Ankara Media Reaction 
Prepared by Public Affairs Information Office on a daily basis 
 
Media Highlights: 
 
How US is Playing 
Iran Missile Test: "Iran Plays With Fire" is how mainstream Milliyet 
describes Iran's 12/16 test of a new medium-range missile, noting 
that "while the West expects Iran to take steps for negotiations, 
Iran has challenged the world."  Liberal Radikal headlines the "West 
is Angry With Iran's Missile Test" emphasizing "the US and Western 
countries branded as provocative Iran's test-firing of an upgraded 
version of its most advanced missile, which is claimed to be capable 
of hitting Israel, Arabic countries, Turkey, and parts of Europe." 
The paper quotes US State Dept Spokesman Ian Kelly as saying, "these 
kinds of tests can only undermine Iran's claims of peaceful 
intentions."   In "Washington Tightens Sanctions On Iran," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet comments on Iran's provocative timing 
and notes that US lawmakers have approved expanded sanctions 
measures against Iran.   Islamist-oriented Zaman goes further, 
predicting "US Will Respond with An Exercise to Iran's Missile Test" 
next month in the Pacific.  In "US-Israel and Iran: Potential 
Confrontation," Zaman columnist Fikret Ertan opines on the danger 
that "both sides are giving messages to each other through missile 
tests" and predicts US missile tests next month will accelerate 
tensions. 
 
US Bombs Yemen:  A front page story in Islamist Yeni Safak claims 
"The US is carrying out massacres in Yemen."  Similarly, HaberTurk 
and Cumhuriyet report that local Shiite sources in Yemen confirm 
that US air force bombing of Shiite-controlled areas have killed "at 
least 120."  Stories mention the US decision to treat Yemen as the 
new headquarters for Al Qaeda.  In "Are We About to See a War 
Between Iran and Saudi Arabia?" Yeni Safak columnist Ibrahim Karagul 
wonders if the US has opened a new war front in Yemen.  Since there 
is a civil unrest between Shiites and Sunnis in Yemen, and because 
"the US started bombing the Shiite areas" the writer concludes 
there's growing danger: "all of this might turn into a war between 
Iran and Saudi Arabia with the US backing the Saudis." 
 
Gordon: In "Turkey is Not Distancing from West" leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet highlights A/S Philip Gordon's remarks at a 12/15 
Congressional hearing that "it will be a wrong impression to 
consider Turkey as turning its back to the US and Europe" and his 
praise of Turkey's regional role: "Turkey plays an active role in 
its region and is seeking for itself for an important role." 
Today's Zaman emphasized Gordon's comment that "the benefits of 
Turkey conducting equal relations with its neighbors for the US and 
the West outweigh its harms."  The paper further opines that the PM 
Erdogan visit was "an opportunity to diversify the strong political 
and military cooperation between the two allies with the launch of 
the initiative aimed at boosting trade and investment ties.  The 
initiative is "widely considered to be another concrete sign of the 
mutual desire to make the model partnership more substantial." 
Gordon speech is carried on the Wires: 
 
Other News 
Interior Minister Atalay: "We will eliminate terror and lift 
democratic standards."  All TV channels broadcasted live Interior 
Minister Atalay's midday press conference on the Government's next 
steps on regional unrest and reforms.  In summary, Atalay said 
"Violence is not a way to seek for rights in democracies.  We will 
continue to act with determination on eliminating terrorism as well 
as lifting democratic standards.  We will take some steps in the 
parliament in the short and the mid-term. Atalay asked opposition 
and media to act with common sense and "not exaggerate events." 
Atalay said new measures would include:  establishing an independent 
HR agency; establishing an independent committee to look into 
complaints about law enforcement; establishing a committee to 
prevent discrimination; and "we also will try to enact as soon as 
possible the draft law on the establishment of a Public Order and 
 
ANKARA 00001795  002 OF 002 
 
 
Security Undersecretariat.  Regarding the DTP, Atalay noted he met 
with banned leader Ahmet Turk on 12/13 and noted the upcoming 
trilateral meeting with the US, Turkey and Iraq.  In liberal Radikal 
columnist Murat Yetkin observed: "The government wants to see DTP 
members back in the parliament and Minister Atalay is working on 
this issue."  The writer believes that DTP is ready to cooperate 
only if "reforms, including change in political parties and election 
law are introduced to the parliament."  Similarly mainstream Sabah's 
Mehmet Barlas calls the government to act on the reforms even more 
determinedly: "the AKP will be more powerful if works toward 
comprehensive democratization package, including constitutional 
changes." 
 
DTP Resignations on Friday: "Door is open to Come Back" (Cumhuriyet) 
To avoid mass protests by their supporters, Mainstream Sabah reports 
that DTP deputies will not resign en masse on Friday.  Instead, DTP 
deputy chairs Selahattin Demirtas and Gulten Kisanak will submit 
their resignations to the parliament tomorrow.  DTP leader Ahmet 
Turk called for commonsense regarding the incidents in Mus and said 
"our actions should not harm either the shopkeepers or the people. 
However, it is necessary to show reaction with commonsense within 
the framework of real democracy."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
quotes Ahmet Turk as saying "the people do not want us to leave the 
parliament.  We also considered the parliament as the only address 
to resolve the problems.  However, this parliament doesn't tolerate 
our differences. "  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet's fronts "Door is 
Open to Come Back" and reports that despite the resignation of 19 
DTP deputies, the party  will keep open the opportunity to return if 
concrete steps are taken on election and party law reforms. 
Meanwhile,  NTV, CNN Turk, Show TV and all other TV channels last 
night featured scenes showing DTP signs across Turkey have been 
replaced by the new ones proclaiming the  "Peace and Democracy 
Party" (BDP). 
 
"Freedom for Gaza" Convoy Left Sakarya for Ankara 
Turkish Red Crescent and major television stations along with web 
sites report a motorcade of 200 vehicles taking humanitarian aid to 
Palestine from London arrived in Istanbul yesterday.  The motorcade 
left Sakarya for Ankara which will then be transported to Gaza. 
 
TGS Chief Basbug Responds to Terror Charge 
NTV at midday reported that during a terror summit with the other 
commanders in Trabzon, Chief of General Staff General Basbug told 
journalists the "PKK and its supporters can link terror activities 
with the Turkish Armed Forces," but warning "the politicians and the 
media members cannot do that  and they should not do it." 
 
Copenhagen: "No Consensus For Climate" (Cumhuriyet) 
Turkish media are predicting failure in Copenhagen and note that 
"the clock is ticking."  Liberal Radikal asks "Will the World Return 
Back With Empty Hands?" and says forcing agreement among 192 nations 
is like "forcing a lazy kid do his homework."  Mainstream Sabah 
headlines "Summit is on the Streets" and observes that "hundreds of 
protesters were arrested outside the Copenhagen climate conference 
after violent clashes with police."  Meanwhile, Today's Zaman 
reports extensively that Turkey's climate change presentation in 
Copenhagen drew fire from environmental civil society groups which 
say their views were not taken into consideration.  Though 
Environment and Forestry Ministry official Fulya Somunkiranoglu 
explained that Turkey's national strategy includes encouraging 
renewable sources and nuclear energy, Greens of Turkey official 
Devin Bahceci argued that Turkey's continued use of coal as its 
primary energy source "hinders the climate change fight" adding that 
"we have clearly seen that environmental organizations do not have a 
place in the government's decision making process." 
 
SILLIMAN