09BEIJING3286
MEDIA REACTION: COPENHAGEN CLIMATE CONFERENCE
Wed Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1243
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3286/01 3430953
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090953Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7132
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003286 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: COPENHAGEN CLIMATE CONFERENCE 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
COPENHAGEN CLIMATE CONFERENCE 
a.  "Climate negotiations are stuck in a 'prisoner's dilemma'" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(pg 14): "The ongoing Copenhagen climate 
conference is stuck in a prisoner's dilemma: the countries attending 
the conference want to achieve the best results, but they are not 
sure what the others will do.  They want to cooperate, but are 
equally likely to betray each other.  Once the emissions reduction 
targets are set, some countries' collection of a carbon tax will be 
legitimatized.  For developing countries with an export-oriented 
economic model that are unable to reach the environmental standards 
set by developed countries, it is equivalent to giving away their 
economic development rights.  Many issues today affect more than one 
country or region.  The deteriorating environment, which will have 
consequences for the whole of mankind, should be dealt with on the 
basis of cooperation.  Only when developed countries discard their 
selfish and egoistical ways of thinking can all countries join hands 
to escape from the prisoner's dilemma." 
 
b.  "Prelude has been opened; smoke has begun to dissipate" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(12/09)(pg 3): 
"China has made a significant contribution to the climate change 
negotiations by putting forward its own emissions reduction targets 
despite the fact that it still faces poverty and economic 
development issues.  The question of maintaining the Kyoto Protocol 
hinges on whether or not the principle of 'common but differentiated 
responsibilities' will be adhered to, which is the red line for 
developing countries.  The chief U.S. climate change negotiator 
clearly stated that the conference will only reach a political 
agreement.  Comparatively, Xie Zhenhua, the Deputy Director of the 
China National Development and Reform Commission, stressed that a 
'fair, just and legally binding' climate change agreement should be 
the goal.  Although the United States needs to get Congress' 
approval to improve its emissions reduction targets, the key is 
whether or not the U.S. leadership has the political will." 
 
c.  "Wrestling in Copenhagen: conspiracy and the fate of mankind" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(12/09)(pg A4): "The focus of the 
Copenhagen conference has been intentionally shifted towards the 
U.S. and China by EU member countries, and thus the U.S. is helping 
them achieve their agenda by attempting to pressure China.  Jiang 
Kejun, the Director of the Energy Systems Laboratory at the National 
Development and Reform Commission's Energy Research Institute, said 
that emissions reductions must be accompanied by technological 
support.  The United States believes that by 2020 its emissions 
reduction technology will have improved significantly, but how this 
is determined needs to be clear and convincing.  However, the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency's announcement that five kinds of 
gas emissions are harmful to human health is good news and has paved 
the way for the EPA to oversee carbon emissions in the future.  This 
announcement is also seen as exhibiting the maximum amount of 
political sincerity on the part of the Obama administration, since 
it enables Obama to seek administrative measures to control 
emissions, bypassing Congressional legislation.  Xie Zhenhua, the 
Deputy Director of the National Development and Reform Commission, 
said it is irrational to request China to take more responsibility 
for emissions reductions when China is still in the process of 
industrialization and has a per capita GDP of only $3,000." 
 
d.  "The United States may become the obstacle to agreement [on 
climate change]" 
 
The Beijing-based newspaper sponsored by official intellectual 
publication Guangming Daily and Guangdong Provincial official 
publication Nanfang Daily The Beijing News (Xin Jing Bao)(12/09)(pg 
A26): "At the Copenhagen climate conference, developing and 
developed countries are in disagreement with each other over 
emissions reduction goals and funding, and over expectations about 
the result of the conference.  When asked how much money they can 
provide, developed countries all answer with one phrase: 'the 
appropriate amount.'  China urges developed countries to stop 
writing empty checks.  The major disputes also focus on whether or 
not developing countries need to make emissions reduction promises 
that are 'measurable, reportable and verifiable.'  China clearly 
stated its stance with regards to a firm implementation of the Bali 
Roadmap.  When the U.S. climate change representative answered 
questions at the press conference, many got the impression that the 
United States is hoping to downgrade the agreement from a 'legally 
binding treaty' to a 'political statement.'  It seems that the 
United States might become the biggest obstacle to the Copenhagen 
 
BEIJING 00003286  002 OF 002 
 
 
treaty." 
 
 
HUNTSMAN