09BEIJING3398
MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE CHANGE, AFGHANISTAN, CHINA-CENTRAL
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0048
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3398/01 3520948
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180948Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7297
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003398 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE CHANGE, AFGHANISTAN, CHINA-CENTRAL 
ASIA RELATIONS 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1.  CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
a.  "Climate change poses a threat to global security" 
 
The official Communist Youth League China Youth Daily (Zhongguo 
Qingnianbao)(12/18)(pg 10): "Climate change poses a greater threat 
to the world than terrorism.  This is not just an alarmist view 
since climate change will lead to increased competition between 
countries over resources, which may lead to conflict and war.  The 
role of the military in the future will be challenged as 
unconventional security threats posed by climate change increase. 
In addition to emissions reductions, militaries should decrease, or 
give up completely, their usage of 'climate weapons,' which, 
although satisfying short-term military goals, will ultimately cause 
long-term damage to the earth by changing natural conditions. 
Climate change directly influences mankind's survival and, 
therefore, will also inevitably influence global security.  From a 
military angle, combating global warming requires not only a sense 
of environmental protection, but also requires that all countries be 
cautious about the possibility of war." 
 
b.  "The United States is despotic at Copenhagen" 
 
The official Communist Youth League China Youth Daily (Zhongguo 
Qingnianbao)(12/18)(pg 5): "Three incidents that occurred at the 
Copenhagen Conference - the delay of the meeting of the Ad Hoc 
Working Group on Long-Term Cooperative Action, the change of the 
conference chairwoman, and the release of the Danish draft agreement 
- all reflect the United States' overweening mentality.  Another 
incident that occurred at the gate of the conference's main venue on 
December 16 was further proof of this attitude.  While people were 
waiting outside in extremely cold temperatures in the security 
screening line, which was progressing very slowly, the American 
delegates at the conference got approval to enter the venue through 
the exit door without waiting in line, which caused people to 'boo' 
at them.  Rajendra Pachauri, the Chairwoman of the UN 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, who was also waiting in 
line, wore the expression of someone who could do nothing about it." 
 
 
¶2.  AFGHANISTAN 
 
"Afghanistan is not China's battlefield" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(12/18)(pg 15): "Despite all the reasons 
outlined by people who support China's sending of troops to 
Afghanistan, such as protecting China's economic interests and 
establishing a good image for China, China's international and 
military strategies are defensive in nature, not interest-oriented 
or prone to pre-emptive strikes.  In addition, the war in 
Afghanistan is the United States' war, not China's.  China will only 
send troops to another country to engage in war when China's core 
interests are seriously threatened.  Moreover, there are various 
ways to protect China's interests in Afghanistan.  The Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization has taken responsibility for promoting 
security cooperation in Central Asia.  The counterterrorism war in 
Afghanistan has not yet become a threat to China's core interests. 
It is in fact Obama's strategic plan to ask China to send troops to 
Afghanistan.  It is important for China to evaluate how it will send 
troops to foreign countries and how to use armed force in today's 
non-traditional security environment.  But it is surely a joke to 
say that the United States' request for China to send troops is 
based on a consideration of China's interests." 
 
¶3.  CHINA-CENTRAL ASIA RELATIONS 
 
"China obtains resources from Central Asia in good faith" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(12/18)(pg 2): "As China's domestic consumption 
has increased, so has its demand for energy resources.  Great powers 
are competing against each other in Central Asia.  In order to 
direct the flow of Central Asia's resources to the East, China needs 
to strengthen its economic ties with Central Asian countries.  The 
big natural gas pipeline from Central Asia to China, which opened on 
December 15, shows that China's cooperation with Central Asia has 
made great progress.  Cooperation on energy resources is a win-win 
situation for both China and Central Asia, but China should also be 
aware that its economic ties and cooperation with Central Asia are 
not yet stable or thorough enough.  In order to strengthen its 
energy cooperation with Central Asian countries, China should 
continue to provide them with long-term, low-interest loans as well 
as additional financial cooperation.  In light of the possible 
 
BEIJING 00003398  002 OF 002 
 
 
obstacles in the process of cooperation, China should also obtain 
Central Asian countries' trust by adopting a more sincere and 
friendly attitude towards them." 
 
 
GOLDBERG