09BEIRUT1280
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT GOES PUBLIC
Fri Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #1280/01 3381636
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041636Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6140
INFO RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 3710
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1504
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 3845
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 4640
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4247
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCUNCLAS BEIRUT 001280 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM PTER UNSC LE IS
SUBJECT: MINISTERIAL STATEMENT GOES PUBLIC 
 
REF: BEIRUT 1231 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Lebanese Arabic-language daily newspaper 
An-Nahar printed today the full Arabic text of the 
ministerial statement text that will be debated by parliament 
beginning December 8.  Following is the Embassy's informal 
translation of Articles 5-8, which deal with UN Security 
Council Resolution 1701, "the resistance," Lebanon's 
relations with its Arab neighbors, and the GOL's upcoming 
participation on the UN Security Council. 
 
-- Article 5:  In the higher interests of Lebanon, the 
Lebanese government renews its respect for international 
resolutions and emphasizes the demand of the international 
community for the implementation of UNSCR 1701 and for an end 
to Israel's violations of it, its (Israel's) ever-present 
threats, and the acts of espionage which it (Israel) 
practices.  The government will continue, on the basis of 
this resolution, to demand a permanent cease-fire and 
armistice agreement in accordance with the Taif Accord.  It 
will also continue in demanding that Israel compensate 
Lebanon for the damage inflicted by its excessive aggression, 
to release prisoners, and return the bodies of the martyrs. 
 
-- Article 6:  Based on its responsibility to protect 
Lebanon's sovereignty, independence, unity, and the safety of 
its territory, the government asserts the right of Lebanon, 
its people, its army, and its resistance to liberate or 
regain Shebaa Farms, the Lebanese Kfar Shouba Hills, and the 
Lebanese part of Ghajar village, its right to defend Lebanon 
against any aggression, and its right to keep its water 
through all legitimate and possible means.  Lebanon affirms 
its commitment to UN Security Council Resolution 1701, and 
all it includes, and it also affirms that it will work to 
unite the position of the Lebanese through agreement on a 
comprehensive national strategy for protecting Lebanon and 
defending it, as endorsed by the National Dialogue. 
 
-- Article 7:  The government will work on strengthening its 
relations with its Arab brothers, reinforcing the bonds that 
bring us together, and energizing common Arab efforts within 
the Arab League framework.  The government is committed to 
the course of Arab solidarity avoiding axis policies, in the 
interest of all Arabs, and certainly in the interest of 
Lebanon, so that it will not become a field for regional and 
international conflicts but rather a sovereign, free, 
independent, and stable nation for all of its children; this 
is its right and an Arab need. 
 
-- Article 8:  The government will work on strengthening the 
Arab and international role for Lebanon, especially through 
its active presence in the United Nations and on the Security 
Council, particularly given that our country's membership on 
it carries a large responsibility to defend our national 
rights, Arab issues, and issues of justice and peace in the 
world; at the forefront of those is the issue of Palestine 
and the national rights of its people to confront Israel and 
its aggressive practices, its continued occupation of 
Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian lands, and its violation of 
international laws, including humanitarian and international 
law. 
 
¶2. (SBU) While the text of Article 5 is similar to the 2008 
ministerial statement, the 2009 draft is expanded to include 
Lebanon's assessment of Israeli violations of UNSCR 1701. 
This is a significant departure from 2008 and earlier drafts 
of this year's statement (reftel).  An early draft text of 
Article 5 read: 
 
-- Keeping in mind Lebanon's higher interests, the Lebanese 
government renews its respect for international laws and its 
claims, working on the complete implementation of its 
resolutions.  The government will continue its demand on the 
basis of UNSCR 1701 for a permanent cease-fire and truce 
according to the Taif Agreement. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Procedurally, to obtain a vote of confidence 65 of 
128 parliamentarians (a simple majority) must vote for the 
statement.  Article 34 of the Lebanese constitution 
stipulates that decisions taken by the parliament shall be 
decided by a majority vote (half plus one), unless otherwise 
stipulated.  Examples of issues requiring a two-thirds 
majority, include, but are not limited to, amending the 
constitution, election of the president, and cases of 
impeachment. 
 
DAUGHTON