09DAKAR1527
Imams Versus President Wade's Statue
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO0218
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1527 3521238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181238Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3509
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 001527 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS PINR KDEM SG
SUBJECT: Imams Versus President Wade's Statue 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  A group of 18 Islamic associations in the capital 
area directed their imams to denounce President Abdoulaye Wade 
during their December 11, 2009 Friday sermons because he had 
characterized them as being ignorant in the ways of Islam after they 
had accused the President's African Renaissance Monument of being 
idolatrous.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. In an usually forceful statement President Wade, who is normally 
very wary of taking on any members of the religious establishment 
for fear of alienating voters, labeled a group of imams as 
theologically ignorant after they remarked that the African 
Renaissance Monument's depiction of the human form to include a 
partially clothed female was un-Islamic and degenerate.  Wade 
explained, "In the Koran, it is prohibited to raise a monument and 
worship it like a god and ask favors from it.  But, if it is just to 
admire its beauty and on top of that make money from it, there is 
nothing wrong with it." 
 
¶3. In reply, the imams first stood by their interpretation, saying 
that Islam prohibited the raising of such monuments because it 
detracts from the worship of God and then they prepared a joint text 
that their members would read in their respective mosques on Friday; 
which they did.  However, the reaction has so far been muted.  A 
review of the press in the following days failed to turn any major 
newspaper reporting the story.  According to local Embassy staff who 
attended Friday prayers, the subject was barely mentioned by the 
imams themselves.  One embassy employee reported that his imam 
touched on the subject for less than one minute in his 30-minute 
sermon, averring that Senegal had many other moral issues to deal 
with and then questioned the motives of the imams.  In a separate 
conversation with a leading Mouride religious figure, Poloff was 
told that, as long as the monument was not worshipped, they did not 
see a real problem with it. 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) As the imams themselves acknowledged, all of the polemic 
surrounding the monument comes far too late in the day as the statue 
is finished and almost ready to be dedicated; this may explain the 
very low-key reaction of the Senegalese people to the imams' 
objections.  Additionally, some question the imams' sincerity, 
wondering whether or not this is just politics and a ploy to get 
President Wade to open his coffers to them.  An abstract theological 
argument around whether or not the monument is idolatrous resonates 
very little as the Senegalese people remain focused on their meager 
pocketbooks while the government fragrantly wastes public funds to 
build a statue that to many has come to symbolize the worst Wade's 
administration has to offer them.  End Comment. 
Bernicat