09JAKARTA1968
Copenhagen - Advancing U.S.-Indonesia Environmental
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #1968/01 3351120
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011120Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3956
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF INTERIOR WASHDC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE USD FAS WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0113
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 001968 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SECC, OES AND EAP 
COMMERCE FOR NOAA 
EPA/OIA FOR RKASAT, MKASMAN, KBUCKLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV KGHG EAID EFIS PREL ID
SUBJECT: Copenhagen - Advancing U.S.-Indonesia Environmental 
Cooperation 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Cooperation in climate change, energy and 
environment is a key component of the U.S.-Indonesia Comprehensive 
Partnership, which President Obama is likely to launch formally when 
he visits Indonesia in 2010.  Bilateral cabinet-level meetings 
during climate negotiations in Copenhagen present an opportunity to 
advance this partnership, influence key Indonesian cabinet members, 
and cultivate a constructive role for Indonesia within the G20.  It 
is also an opportunity to demonstrate our support for President 
Yudhoyono - his acknowledgement of the need for actions by all 
countries, and willingness to depart from the developing country 
negotiating bloc by announcing specific targets, has positively 
influenced international negotiations.  Paragraph 3 onwards outlines 
potential bilateral meetings or side conversations, Indonesian 
counterparts, and issues on which we can deepen the partnership. 
(Note: The counterparts listed are likely to be in Copenhagen, but 
we do not yet have formal confirmation of this.)  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Background: Indonesia is the world's third-largest global 
emitter of greenhouse gases.  It is also particularly vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change, and consequently pushes strongly in 
multilateral fora for significant adaptation assistance.  80% of 
Indonesia's emissions currently come from deforestation and peat 
land degradation, but its emissions from energy are projected to 
grow seven-fold by 2030.  President Yudhoyono received sharp 
criticism from the G77 after the Pittsburgh G20 Summit when he 
declared a unilateral emissions target of 26% below 
business-as-usual (BAU), and up to 41% with international assistance 
by 2020.  He will need encouragement to maintain this constructive 
position in the multilateral process.  The U.S. and other donors 
should support Indonesia's explicit targets, which stand in stark 
contrast to China's and India's positions to date. 
 
Possible Bilateral Meetings 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Agriculture Secretary Vilsack (Counterparts: Minister of 
Agriculture Suswono, Coordinating Minister for Social Welfare Agung 
Laksono, Minister of Forestry Zulkifli Hasan): 
 
-- Food Security:  This is a Yudhoyono priority.  Climate change is 
exacerbating severe food insecurity in parts of Indonesia.  As many 
as 150 million Indonesians are potential beneficiaries of 
improvements in food security.  Indonesia needs help on agricultural 
adaptation, particularly drought-resistant food crops.  It would be 
mutually beneficial to establish research and extension linkages 
through USDA agencies and Land Grant Universities.  Another focus 
could be agro forestry.  Marine conservation and adaptation are also 
vital: Indonesia's marine biodiversity supports the livelihood of 34 
million people, and over 60% of Indonesia's national protein comes 
from fish. 
 
-- Sustainable Land-Use Management:  This will require addressing 
the tension between competing land-uses - land for agriculture 
versus land as carbon sink or conservation area - since much forest 
and peat land conversion is for agricultural uses, including oil 
palm and other plantation crops.  USAID and the U.S. Forest Service 
have done substantial work on this, but much more could be done. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Interior Secretary Salazar (Counterparts: Minister of 
Forestry Zulkifli Hasan, Minister of Agriculture Suswono) 
 
-- Sustainable Land-Use Management:  This is crucial for reducing 
Indonesia's emissions.  Indonesia has indicated that, of its 26% 
reductions target, 14% will come from forestry/peat. Consequently, 
one Yudhoyono administration priority is harmonizing land-use and 
spatial planning across ministries and levels of government to 
resolve land-tenure issues and ensure sustainable, balanced 
land-use. Interior - together with other agencies like USDA - could 
assist Indonesia by sharing our policy experience and technical 
expertise on land-use and conservation of forests and wetlands, as 
well as on parks/protected areas management. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Jackson 
(Counterparts: Minister of Environment Gusti Muhammad Hatta, 
Coordinating Minister for Social Welfare Agung Laksono, Minister of 
Energy and Mineral Resources Darwin Saleh): 
 
-- Environmental Management:  EPA can help improve environmental 
governance and management in Indonesia.  EPA is finalizing an MOU 
 
with the Ministry of Environment to lay the groundwork for future 
cooperation, including on prevention of greenhouse gas emissions, 
air and water pollution, chemical and hazardous waste, and watershed 
management.  With Indonesia indicating that 6% of its 26% reductions 
target will come from waste, the partnership opportunities in this 
area are promising. 
 
-- Mitigation:  When Indonesia joins the Methane to Markets 
Partnership shortly, EPA can help assess mitigation opportunities in 
the oil and gas sector, as well as in other sectors such as coal-bed 
methane and landfills.  Assistance for accurately monitoring, 
reporting, and verifying greenhouse gas emissions and inventories is 
critical for addressing climate change effectively and an important 
area for collaboration.  This could help Indonesia quantify its 
domestic actions in a global agreement, and prepare it for future 
carbon markets. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Commerce Secretary Locke, NOAA Administrator Lubchenco 
(Counterparts: Minister of Marine Affairs and Fisheries Fadel 
Muhammad, State Minister for Research and Technology Suharna 
Surapranata, Minister of Environment Gusti Mohammad Hatta, Minister 
of Energy and Mineral Resources Darwin Saleh): 
 
-- Sustainable Fisheries:  The Ministry of Marine Affairs and 
Fisheries (MMAF) is eager to establish a joint "Center for 
Sustainable Ocean Fisheries".  USAID and NOAA are already working 
with MMAF on capacity building for marine protected areas and 
sustainable fisheries.  USAID is launching a $25 million, 5-year, 
marine program.  This work is intimately related to both adaptation 
and food security in Indonesia. 
 
-- Ocean Exploration and Science:  Marine research is vital for 
understanding climate change impacts on the ocean and marine 
ecosystems.  The U.S. and the Government of Indonesia (GOI) have a 
mutual commitment to a partnership in ocean exploration and to bring 
NOAA's Okeanos Explorer to Indonesia in 2010.  NOAA scientists are 
currently planning a joint research cruise with Indonesia's Baruna 
Jaya IV vessel in mid-2010. 
 
-- Green Industry, Green Technology (for Minister of Environment and 
Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources):  There are potentially 
significant opportunities for increased involvement by Commerce. 
The Government of Indonesia has established a national interagency 
team to develop plans for "Green Industry", and they are likely to 
seek U.S. expertise and technology for this. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Energy Secretary Chu (Counterpart: Minister of Energy and 
Mineral Resources Darwin Saleh): 
 
-- Renewable Energy:  Indonesia has indicated that, of its 26% 
reductions target, 6% will come from the energy sector.  Several 
U.S. agencies have already held successful renewable energy events 
in Indonesia, including the Departments of Commerce and USAID.  A 
strong energy efficiency/renewable energy component to the upcoming 
Energy Policy Dialogue that the Department of Energy will host early 
in 2010 will solidify regular engagement in this critical area.  The 
U.S. can help Indonesia meet its current renewable energy and 
geothermal power targets. 
 
-- Fuel Subsidies:  Rationalizing energy prices is the key to 
providing incentives for energy efficiency.  SBY's commitment at the 
Pittsburgh G20 Summit to gradually eliminate fossil fuel subsidies 
needs continued follow-up and support given the highly political 
domestic ramifications. 
 
HUME