09KHARTOUM1389
MISSERIYA IN MUGLAD REJECT PCA DECISION
Sun Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4623
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #1389/01 3471054
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131054Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4869
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001389 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PBTS KDEM KPKO SOCI SU
SUBJECT: MISSERIYA IN MUGLAD REJECT PCA DECISION 
 
REF: A) KHARTOUM 862 B) KHARTOUM 1344 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In meetings with Poloff in Muglad on December 9 
and 10, Misseriya from traditional leadership, civil society groups, 
and local NGOs universally expressed the view that the Permanent 
Court of Arbitration (PCA) ruling on Abyei (Ref A) was an unjust 
taking of their land.  Members of these groups also universally 
condemned the border demarcation process as misguided and a barrier 
to peaceful co-existence.  However, Dr. Rahama Azaz, 
recently-appointed locality commissioner for the area, predicted 
that the Misseriya will not fight for Abyei.  These meetings with a 
relatively diverse and educated cross-section of Misseriya society 
limit the hope that the solution to Misseriya concerns about the PCA 
decision is an awareness campaign, since these individuals were 
focused not on access or grazing rights, but instead on land 
ownership.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Traditional Leaders: Ownership is Issue, Not Access 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a meeting with Poloff in Muglad on December 10, 
traditional leaders echoed many of the same themes expressed to U.S. 
Special Envoy to Sudan General Scott Gration on November 19 (Ref. 
B).  Each speaker repeatedly returned to the idea that the PCA 
decision is a misguided and unjust taking of Misseriya land, and 
that the parties to the arbitration did not represent Misseriya 
interests.  In response to questioning, speakers acknowledged that 
the Government of National Unity (GNU) is their government and 
represents them, except with respect to the Abyei issue.  They also 
stated that the only peaceful way forward is for the decision to be 
appealed or set aside and a new arrangement made with involvement of 
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka traditional leadership. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Leaders in this meeting made it abundantly clear that their 
concern regarding Abyei is ownership of the land, not access or 
grazing rights.  (Note: The PCA decision guarantees Misseriya people 
secondary rights to Abyei.)  Speakers noted that the Misseriya wish 
for peaceful co-existence with the Dinka, but will fight to keep 
their land.  In response to the idea that the Abyei referendum in 
January, 2011 will actually decide whether Abyei district becomes 
part of northern or southern Sudan, leaders rejected a referendum on 
the status of Abyei. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Traditional leaders focused on border demarcation as the 
crux of the issue, stating that any form of demarcation is a barrier 
to peaceful co-existence and will be resisted.  Furthermore, these 
leaders expressed the view that other issues, such as development of 
the region, are of secondary importance, or simply impossible, 
without first addressing this issue.  For instance, when asked 
whether there are plans to hold an overdue annual migration 
conference with Ngok Dinka traditional leadership, Misseriya leaders 
rejected the idea, and said that the Misseriya cannot look to the 
future without first solving the demarcation problem. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Local NGOs - "This is the Opinion of All Misseriya" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) On December 9, leaders of local NGOs in Muglad, including 
Elghoni, Angato, Setab, Zamzam, and Shahad, told Poloff that local 
Misseriya believe that the PCA decision took their land, and that a 
fence will be built north of Abyei.  Local NGO leaders added that 
they themselves share this belief, stating "this is the opinion of 
all Misseriya."  When asked whether people in the local community 
know the content of the PCA decision, these leaders said this is the 
responsibility of the government, as the decision is a political 
issue, and that there has not been a dissemination campaign.  They 
added that the PCA decision was one reached on behalf of the 
National Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan People's Liberation 
Movement (SPLM), and therefore does not concern the Misseriya. 
 
¶6. (SBU) NGO leaders stated that it is their goal to build peace and 
confidence in Misseriya areas, but that these efforts have been 
damaged by the PCA decision and border demarcation, and  any 
demarcation of the boundary will prevent a durable peace  between 
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka.  When asked whether there were plans to 
hold a peace conference between Misseriya and Ngok Dinka traditional 
leaders, these NGO leaders expressed support for the idea, but said 
that to create the foundation for such a conference, the PCA 
decision must first be suspended or dissolved. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Civil Society: Boundary Will Create More Conflict 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001389  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Civil society leaders from Muglad's youth group and women's 
union told Poloff that a boundary between Misseriya and Dinka will 
create more conflict and hinder civil society efforts to foster 
peaceful co-existence.  They repeated many of the same themes stated 
by traditional and NGO leaders regarding the PCA decision and border 
demarcation.  Women's leaders added that there is a lack of security 
near the proposed Abyei boundary, claiming that people are being 
killed in the area and prevented from crossing into the Abyei 
district.  (Note: Poloff has not received any information 
corroborating killings in Abyei or that Misseriya have been 
prevented from entering the Abyei district.  Poloff did note 
numerous checkpoints manned by Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and 
militia forces affiliated with SAF on the road entering and leaving 
the Abyei district.  Mark Rutgers, UN Coordinator for Abyei, 
reported a gunfight in Unity State on November 26 in which three 
migrating Misseriya and two Sudan People's Liberation Army soldiers 
were killed.  End Note.)  Women's leaders suggested that a peace 
conference between women from Abyei and Muglad may be helpful at 
reducing tensions, but stated that currently they do not have the 
resources for such an event. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Abyei Commissioner: Misseriya Will Not Fight 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) On December 10, Poloff met with Dr. Rahama Azaz (NCP), 
recently-appointed commissioner for Abyei Locality.  (Note: Abyei 
Locality is in the western sector of Southern Kordofan State, and 
includes Muglad and land north of the northern boundary of the Abyei 
Special Administrative District.  However, it does not include the 
Abyei Special Administrative District.  Azaz is from the Misseriya 
tribe.  End Note.)  When asked, Azaz stated that the Misseriya will 
not fight to block the PCA decision and Abyei referendum, but 
acknowledged that some Misseriya have joined the Darfur Justice and 
Equality Movement (JEM) rebel movement (Note: Although JEM 
frequently boasts of widespread support in Kordofan, any connection 
between JEM and Misseriya tribal leaders is most likely ideological. 
 End note.)  Azaz stated that the Misseriya want development in 
Muglad, and noted that while coordination with local and 
international NGOs has been good, the area has many unaddressed 
needs.  Azaz said, however, that what he most wants from the 
international community is for the UN's disarmament, demobilization 
and reintegration program to come to his locality, as the amount of 
weapons in the area is creating insecurity.  Azaz stated that 
dissemination of the PCA decision is not taking place and that it 
should be the responsibility of the federal government. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment: Views expressed in these meetings with a 
relatively diverse and educated cross-section of Misseriya society 
debunk the notion that the solution to Misseriya concerns about the 
PCA decision lies solely in a comprehensive awareness campaign. 
Misseriya leaders were focused on ownership of the land, not the 
secondary right of access promised by the PCA.  Speakers made a 
number of references to the situation of the Palestinians, and 
passions in the community are clearly high.  There was no evidence 
that representatives of these various groups had coordinated their 
responses in advance, but the same views were repeatedly expressed, 
often without prompting, and in relation to questions on seemingly 
unrelated topics.  Azaz's statement that the Misseriya will not 
fight is hopeful, although it may have been politically-motivated. 
End comment. 
 
WHITEHEAD