09KUALALUMPUR1014
FARAH PANDITH'S VISIT SHOWS MANY FACES OF ISLAM IN MALAYSIA
Thu Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Kuala Lumpur
VZCZCXRO4752
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHKL #1014/01 3580203
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240203Z DEC 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3620
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KUALA LUMPUR 001014 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR EAP/MTS AND S/SRMC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAOY PHUM KDEM MY
SUBJECT: FARAH PANDITH'S VISIT SHOWS MANY FACES OF ISLAM IN MALAYSIA 
 
REF: A. KUALA LUMPUR 716 -- CANING PUNISHMENT POSTPONED 
     ¶B. KUALA LUMPUR 980 -- AMB VERVEER'S VISIT TO 
        MALAYSIA 
 
KUALA LUMP 00001014  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Special Representative to Muslim Communities (SRMC) 
Farah Pandith visited Malaysia to begin engagement with civil 
society and establish contacts with government officials, 
politicians, teachers, students, and NGOs on December 13-14. 
SRMC Pandith explained her recent appointment as the Special 
Representative to Muslim Communities, emphasizing the 
President's and the Secretary,s policy of creating new 
partnerships  with Muslim communities around world.  SRMC 
Pandith was well received by the Malaysians--both as a 
champion of Islam and for her efforts in promoting a new 
relationship based on mutual interest and mutual respect 
between the U.S. and Muslims around the world--but concerns 
over U.S. foreign policy remained apparent in meetings with 
politicians, government officials and students.  SRMC Pandith 
established solid connections during her initial visit and 
several organizations expressed interest in remaining in 
contact with her.  Post hopes that she will be able to 
capitalize on her initial success with a return visit in 
¶2010.  End Summary. 
 
SISTERS IN ISLAM, SISTERS IN THOUGHT 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) On December 13, Farah Pandith met with the pioneers 
of the local NGO Sisters in Islam (SIS): Zainah Anwar 
(Founder), Hamidah Marican (Executive Director), and Norani 
Othman (co-founder) and discussed a wide range of social and 
religious issues pertaining to Islam.  Zainah explained that 
she started the organization 20 years ago out of concern that 
Muslim women in the country were being discriminated against, 
especially in issues concerning Family Law (marriage, 
divorces, custody), which is the purview of Syariah courts. 
According to Zainah, "Everything was argued in the name of 
religion and no one questioned it." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Sisters in Islam attracts criticism from 
conservative Muslim groups in Malaysia because SIS argues for 
fresh interpretations of the Quran, and is seen as backing a 
Western approach toward equal rights for women.  There have 
been numerous calls to ban the organization, including from 
the Islamic Party of Malaysia (PAS).  Pandith asked about 
SIS' relationship with GOM and civil society.  Zainah replied 
that the NGO has been subject to police harassment for 
criticizing the caning sentence of Kartika, a Muslim woman 
arrested by religious police for drinking beer (reftels). 
SIS is very concerned over rumors that members could face 
trial on sedition charges. 
 
¶4. (SBU) SRMC Pandith welcomed SIS's courageous approach to 
issues such as women,s rights and suggested that SIS try to 
penetrate the Malay youth demographic by using comics and 
graphic novels.  SIS members were interested in the idea and 
requested technological assistance and further contact with 
Pandith. 
 
VISIT TO MADRASAH SCHOOL 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) To get closer to grassroots Muslim life in Malaysia, 
SRMC Pandith visited the Al-Amin Madrasah School located in 
Bangi, a one hour drive from Kuala Lumpur in the shadows of 
the National University of Malaysia, on December 14.  Founded 
in 1989, this private school with 100 teachers and 893 
primary and secondary students is part of a network of 
madrasahs comprising 35 schools and 8,000 students and is 
chaired by Ustaz Megat Mohamed Amin.  Amin, who recently 
returned from a "life-changing" multi-regional International 
Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP) on secondary and elementary 
education in the U.S., was instrumental in establishing in 
2008 an English Language Access Microscholarship program for 
60 Muslim students to learn after-school English for two 
years at a madrasah in the conservative state of Kelantan. 
 
¶6. (U) During the discussions, a school board member noted 
that the madrasah taught the government-required curriculum 
in addition to Islamic courses.  SRMC Pandith complimented 
the team on its broad curriculum and encouraged sharing the 
model with other Muslim communities.  In response to Ustaz 
Amin's comment that the school could do better in encouraging 
interactions with non-Muslim communities, SRMC Pandith 
suggested the expansion of the madrasah's social 
entrepreneurship-based community development projects to 
include non-Muslim schools in the local community. 
 
POLITICIANS SHIFT CONVERSATION FROM ISLAM TO OBAMA, PALESTINE 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) SRMC Pandith, DCM Rob Rapson, and Poloffs met with 
politicians from each of the three predominantly Muslim 
parties over lunch: the United Malays National Organization 
(UMNO), the People's Justice Party (PKR), and the Islamic 
Party of Malaysia (PAS).  All three politicians agreed that 
Islam is compatible with democracy.  UMNO Member of 
Parliament (MP) Nur Jazlan stated that the ongoing 
"Islamization process" in Malaysia started "around 30 years 
ago."  (Note: this was a thinly veiled suggestion that it 
started after then-Islamist activist Anwar Ibrahim joined 
UMNO in 1982.  End Note.)  Jazlan stated that once the 
process started, UMNO and the government "could not turn back 
the clock" and therefore UMNO was forced to embrace 
Islamization.  Jazlan candidly stated if UMNO did not embrace 
the challenge, the party would be accused of being 
"un-Islamic."  Jazlan conceded that he is not happy with what 
is happening, but is unable to stop it due to political 
considerations.  PAS Youth Secretary General Kamaruzaman 
Mohamad, not a member of Parliament, added that PAS is 
committed to democracy until "we capture power." 
 
¶8. (SBU) PKR MP Yusmadi Yusuf welcomed President Obama's 
Cairo speech but expressed concern from PKR leaders, 
including party advisor Anwar Ibrahim, that Obama seems to be 
"speaking on behalf of Muslims," and that this slant is not 
going down well among them.  (Comment: post does not feel 
that this is an accurate assessment of Anwar's views.  End 
Comment.)  Yusmadi felt that President Obama should instead 
address the problems in the "Muslim world" as an outsider. 
He nonetheless stressed that Muslims in Malaysia welcomed the 
new administration which he felt "is genuinely concerned" 
about the "Muslim world" compared to the previous 
administration.  Yusmadi also suggested that the U.S. should 
formulate an economic model for Muslim countries which he 
claimed "would endear the U.S. among Muslims."  He cited 
Southern Thailand as a possible region to implement this 
economic model.  Kamaruzaman echoed Yusmadi's view that there 
is a genuine optimism among Muslims over U.S. policies after 
the Obama administration came to power, but pointed out that 
Muslims will always have problems with the U.S. so long as 
the Palestinian issue is not resolved.  He criticized the 
U.S. for being a staunch and uncompromising ally of Israel. 
Until the U.S. can become more of an "honest broker", said 
Karamuzaman, the U.S. will always be viewed with suspicion by 
Muslims. 
 
RELIGIOUS MINISTRY: TOLERATING RELIGION, IF DONE THEIR WAY 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) SRMC Pandith met with Minister for Religious Affairs 
Jamil Khir Baharom, who immediately reflected upon his 
positive experience attending graduate school in the U.S., 
and elaborating on the similarities between the U.S. and 
Malaysia.  Jamil noted that both countries are multi-racial 
and commented on how other races have the freedom to 
celebrate their religion in Malaysia.   The Minister then 
went on to explain that Malaysia practices Sunni Islam 
exclusively, noting that Shia and Sufism are not allowed in 
Malaysia.  According to Jamil, "it's better to have one 
school of thought instead of many." 
 
¶10. (SBU) The Minister noted that Islamic education is 
compulsory for all Muslims, starting with primary and 
secondary students with continuation in public universities. 
He recalled the poor Islamic education system in Malaysia 
prior to independence and felt privileged that the Federal 
Government took over the education system by outlining the 
school syllabus and having it standardized.  The teachings 
also differed from one village to another, which led to 
different schools of thought.  Jamil added that the Ministry 
of Higher Education collaborates with the Religious Affairs 
Department in setting up the syllabus, and now many Malaysian 
scholars study abroad, especially in Egypt and Jordan.  Jamil 
did not elaborate on other activities that the Ministry 
engages in, though he did say that one of them is to monitor 
sermons given after Friday prayers. 
 
ENERGIZING THE NEXT GENERATION OF GLOBAL MUSLIMS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶11. (U) At a round table discussion with Islamic scholars, 
academics, students, Youth Exchange and Study (YES) program 
alumni, and a local entrepreneur, SRMC Pandith emphasized her 
role as convener, facilitator, and intellectual partner 
listening to the next generation and encouraging initiatives 
for the common good.  She stressed the diversity of Islam and 
the desire to build relationships across Muslim communities 
over time and based on mutual interest and respect.  She 
noted the power of traditional and social media networking to 
spread information, expand engagement, and reach more global 
youth interested in positive change. 
 
¶12. (U) Faisal Hassan, President of the YES Alumni 
Association of Malaysia, spoke of his group's diverse 
activities including community service and development 
projects (promoting peace, building leadership skills, 
developing English-language programs), organizing a worldwide 
YES Alumni Conference in Malaysia in November 2009, 
participating in the AFS World Congress in Kuala Lumpur in 
November 2009, and networking with other alumni abroad to 
share best practices and experiences.  SRMC Pandith 
encouraged YES to expand its network even further through 
social media and to consider working with other entrepreneurs 
to "scale up" their activities and have an even greater 
impact around the world. 
 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP'S POSSIBILITIES AT THE GRASSROOTS LEVEL 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶13. (U) SRMC Pandith spoke about the power of 
entrepreneurship for Muslim communities at the roundtable, 
mentioning entrepreneurship not only in its traditional 
business context, but also in terms of innovation (technology 
and ideas) and social entrepreneurship (giving back through 
community development).  She stressed that examples of Muslim 
entrepreneurship successes highlight "the good side of Muslim 
communities around the world."  Malaysian entrepreneur 
Dhakshinamoorthy "Dash" Balakrishnan, CEO of Warisan Global, 
shared his personal experiences at the grassroots level in 
hiring over 800 Malaysian Muslim graduates to engage 
villagers in entrepreneurial projects making greater use of 
the Internet and to create markets for their cottage industry 
products.  He also noted the success during the recent Global 
Entrepreneurship Week that he organized.  He concluded that 
entrepreneurship has broken both mental and racial barriers 
and that partnership-based entrepreneurial activities have 
created stronger levels of trust between various communities 
in Malaysia. 
 
INTERVIEW WITH FEATURES REPORTER, BERITA HARIAN 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶14. (U) Following her roundtable with university students and 
faculty, SRMC Pandith held an exclusive interview with Berita 
Harian, one of KL's major Malay-language dailies with 
nationwide weekday circulation of nearly 200,000.  In the 
interview, SRMC Pandith explained why she had chosen to visit 
Malaysia, echoing President Obama's description in his Cairo 
speech, of Malaysia as a "progressive Muslim-majority 
country" and one that must not be ignored.  She also talked 
about why Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is putting an 
emphasis on grassroots and people to people connections. She 
also spoke about her position as the Special Representative, 
her interest in convening dialogues and facilitating 
networking among like-minded people who support the 
"diversity of Islam" and want to make a difference.  She 
mentioned how the U.S. sees its role as a convener and 
facilitator, and as an intellectual partner with Muslim 
communities around the world.  SRMC Pandith stressed that the 
U.S. is open to new ideas and mentioned her hope that 
proposals for undertakings between the U.S. and Malaysia can 
come from a renewed dialogue with Malaysians in partnership 
with the U.S. Embassy in Kuala Lumpur.  When asked whether 
public perception and treatment of Muslims in the U.S. had 
improved since 2001, SRMC Pandith replied that "As is the 
case in many societies around the world) there is still a 
need for education about diversity and mutual respect," but 
stressed that "Muslims in the United States have more freedom 
to practice their religion than anywhere else in the world." 
(Note: A feature article from this interview will be 
published shortly in Berita Harian's weekend edition. End 
note.) 
 
JAMAH ISLAH MALAYSIA (JIM): AN NGO WITH CONSERVATIVE IDEALS 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) At a December 14 dinner meeting with SRMC Pandith, 
President of the conservative Islamic NGO Jamaah Islah 
Malaysia (JIM) Zaid Kamaruddin and colleagues explained that 
the 10,000-member organization, many of whom are spread at 
all levels of the government strata, was dedicated to 
strengthening Muslim values in Malaysia.  He and fellow 
believers set up the NGO in 1982 after Anwar Ibrahim, who was 
then leader of the Muslim Youth Organization (ABIM) decided 
to join the ruling political party, UMNO.  Zaid and others 
thought the struggle for Muslim values had to remain outside 
the government.  Zaid said JIM sought to offer an alternative 
vision to what he called the "liberal western" system of 
government that Malaysia had adopted.  Democracy was a 
significant achievement, but Islamic government "by God" 
would be better.  In addition, materialistic western values 
meant citizens lacked ethical discipline, so democracy 
required extensive regulation and a robust police force to 
keep society under control. 

¶16. (SBU) In contrast, under Islamic rule citizens could be 
confident that rulers (who could be chosen through democratic 
elections, perhaps) would act within the bounds of behavior 
as laid out in the Koran and Sunnah, and citizens were 
law-abiding because of their strong religious beliefs.  Asked 
whether his description of Islamic rule was Utopian, Zaid 
answered that, on the contrary, such rule had existed under 
the Caliphs.  Realistically, Zaid concluded, Muslims in 
Malaysia could not expect to establish Islamic rule in the 
near term, nor was JIM advocating such a step, but there was 
a need to offer a competing vision to that of the west. 
 
¶17. (SBU) We asked Zaid about two current controversies in 
Malaysia with religious overtones:  the Catholic Herald's 
effort to overturn a law restricting the use of the word 
"Allah" to Muslims, and the pending caning of a Muslim woman, 
Kartika, for drinking alcohol, noting that these cases 
attracted attention outside of Malaysia.  Zaid said that the 
law restricting the use of "Allah" was not based on Muslim 
beliefs, but nevertheless a law was on the books and JIM 
would not risk alienating other Muslim groups by defending 
the Catholic Herald.  On the Kartika case, he said there 
should be no controversy:  she had broken Syariah law in 
Pahang state, and the required penalty was caning. 
 
¶18. (U) SRMC Pandith cleared this cable. 
KEITH