09PHNOMPENH883
EMBASSY PHNOM PENH'S NOMINATION FOR THE
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0012
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0883/01 3350015
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 010015Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1416UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000883 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/GWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO KWMN PHUM PREL
SUBJECT: EMBASSY PHNOM PENH'S NOMINATION FOR THE 
INTERNATIONAL WOMAN OF COURAGE AWARD 
 
REF: STATE 111471 
 
¶1.  Embassy Phnom Penh is proud to nominate Chen Reaksmey for 
the 2010 International Woman of Courage Award.  There are a 
number of Cambodian women who demonstrate courage and 
leadership in the pursuit of women's human rights and 
advancement.  Reaksmey stood out from the crowd due to her 
recent accomplishments, valor, and success in bringing vital 
information, hope, and dignity to an often neglected group of 
female drug addicts in Cambodia.  The Embassy is pleased to 
have the opportunity to recognize Reaksmey's work, courage 
and compassion. 
 
¶2. CANDIDATE: 
 
NAME: Chen Reaksmey 
JOB TITLE: Program Supervisor Korsang Setrey (Build Women) 
DOB: 25 May 1981 
COB: Cambodia 
CITIZENSHIP: Cambodian 
ADDRESS: House 48, Street 480, Phnom Penh, Cambodia 
TELEPHONE: 099-646-618 
EMAIL: hollis3387@yahoo.com 
PASSPORT: N0667559 
LANGUAGE: Khmer and some English 
 
Background: Reaksmey is a vibrant, positive, and passionate 
woman whose self-possession, easy smile, and enthusiasm 
immediately make a lasting impact on anyone who meets her. 
One would never guess that her background is marked with 
hardship and personal shame, or that her chosen profession is 
emotionally grueling and puts her in danger's way each and 
every day.  As program supervisor for a harm reduction NGO, 
Reaksmey provides clean needles, counseling, health, HIV/AIDS 
and other vital information to female drug users in Cambodia. 
 She has also presented to international conferences on the 
innovative peer outreach conducted by herself and her staff 
and the need to focus more energy and resources on female 
drug addicts in a country where sex workers and drug addicts 
are typically seen as criminals and shunned by society. 
Reaksmey is an emerging leader whose work helps to diminish 
the spread of HIV/AIDS, drug use and trafficking in Cambodia. 
 
Reaksmey comes from an impoverished family in provincial 
Cambodia.  By the age of 15 she was sent to Phnom Penh to 
find work to help support her family.  Reaksmey had only 
attended 2 years of school and could not read or write in her 
own Khmer language.  As is the case with many young, 
uneducated girls from the provinces, Reaksmey was forced to 
accept employment in the informal sex industry in order to 
provide for her family and survive in the city.  She worked 
as a beer girl and in a karaoke bar, became pregnant, and 
after her daughter was born began to use drugs in order to 
cope with her increasingly desperate situation. 
 
Reaksmey saw the hopelessness which surrounded her and was 
determined to create a better future for her daughter, 
herself, and anyone else she could reach.  She approached 
Korsang, a USG-supported harm reduction NGO which provides 
counseling, health, and other vital information to drug 
users, individuals with HIV/AIDS, and sex workers.  From 
client, to volunteer, to employee, Reaksmey picked up the 
pieces of her life, ceased using drugs, and extricated 
herself from the sex industry. 
 
Now a program supervisor at Korsang, Reaksmey demonstrates 
bravery, leadership and compassion in her daily ventures into 
the most dangerous areas of Phnom Penh to provide HIV/AIDS 
and STD awareness training, clean needles, and counseling on 
the dangers of drug use.  Reaksmey has been instrumental in 
the effort to focus more energy and resources on female drug 
addicts and has helped to establish an overnight shelter for 
addicts and their children.  Harm reduction projects continue 
to face substantial political, social and financial obstacles 
in Cambodia, where the stigma and social exclusion associated 
with drug use and HIV make work in the field demanding and 
dangerous. 
 
Reaksmey's work puts her in direct conflict with both regular 
citizens and government officials who do not understand the 
concept of harm reeducation and rehabilitation.  She has 
encountered intimidation from police, and Korsang's shelter 
has been moved five times due to the disapproval of the 
surrounding community.  However, Reaksmey's outreach efforts 
have resulted in improved social understanding, increased 
awareness of the need for humane and equitable treatment for 
drug users, and more services for female addicts and their 
often addicted children.  Reaksmey truly is a bright light, 
role model, and leader in an otherwise dark environment. 
Embassy Phnom Penh believes she embodies all of the necessary 
qualities - and more- to become the Department of State's 
 
2010 International Woman of Courage. 
 
¶3.  Reaksmey has been informed of her nomination. 
 
¶4.  Post point of contact is Political Officer Amy Canon at 
canonal@state.gov. 
RODLEY