09SANAA2227
SA'ADA, MONTH FIVE: IS SALEH SERIOUS ABOUT ENDING
Wed Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0782
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #2227/01 3501508
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 161508Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3400
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCS E C R E T SANAA 002227 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/ARP AMACDONALD AND INR JYAPHE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/16/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM PREF SA YM
SUBJECT: SA'ADA, MONTH FIVE: IS SALEH SERIOUS ABOUT ENDING 
THE WAR? 
 
REF: A. SANAA 2176 
     ¶B. SANAA 2190 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Stephen Seche for reasons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S) SUMMARY.  A week after ceasefire negotiations between 
the ROYG and the Houthis broke down, bombing continues apace 
in war-torn Sa'ada governorate.  President Saleh continues to 
send signs that he is still committed to a military end to 
the conflict and attempts at reaching a political solution to 
date have been less than serious.  Meanwhile, the civilian 
death toll has mounted, with locals alleging that a single 
Saudi airstrike in Razah district on December 13 killed 
dozens of people.  With Saudi Arabia's continuing involvement 
in the war and regional support for Yemen against the Houthis 
riding high during the Gulf Cooperation Council talks 
December 14-15, Saleh appears less likely than ever to accept 
anything but a full military defeat of the Houthi rebels. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
NEGOTIATIONS: ALL TALK? 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF) Despite earlier reports that President Saleh was 
seriously considering a political solution to the conflict, 
negotiations ) at a standstill since at least December 7 ) 
have been replaced by renewed military efforts to rout the 
Houthis (Ref A).  In a cycle that has been repeated 
throughout the five-year course of the war in Sa'ada, any 
mediator whom Saleh perceives as "too close" to the Houthis 
) from Presidential Advisor for Sa'ada Affairs Mohammed 
Azzan to former Minister of Local Administration Abdulkader 
al-Hillal ) is quickly discredited and pushed out of 
negotiations.  An animated Saleh used the occasion of a 
December 9 meeting with D/D CIA Steve Kappes to criticize 
al-Haq party chairman and Houthi mediator Hassan Zayd and 
vowed to continue the war until the Houthis are beaten or 
accepted the ROYG's five-point ceasefire proposal, long the 
ROYG's stated condition for ending fighting (Ref B). 
 
¶3.  (S) On December 14, however, presidential advisor Dr. 
Abdulkarim al-Eryani told the Ambassador that he believed 
that in early December, Houthi leader Abdulkarim al-Houthi 
had personally signed off on the five-point proposal, which 
was then given to Saleh.  (Note: Eryani said that he had not 
personally seen the proposal with Houthi's signature, but had 
been told about it.  End Note.)  In a December 16 meeting 
with the Ambassador, Deputy Prime Minister for Defense and 
Security Rashad al-Alimi said that although the ROYG would 
theoretically accept a signed ceasefire agreement from the 
Houthis, "The problem with the Houthis is that what they say 
on the outside is completely different than what they are 
thinking on the inside.  The Houthis will not really concede 
to a peace agreement while they believe they are strong. 
They are not yet ready to surrender because they are not weak 
enough."  He indicated that the ROYG needed to keep hitting 
the Houthis militarily in order to bring them to a point 
where they would submit to a political settlement, which 
Alimi confirmed was the real endgoal. 
 
FULL STEAM AHEAD 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF) With political talks on the back burner, the ROYG 
has once again turned its full attention to its military 
campaign in Sa'ada.  In its attempt to put a permanent end to 
the rebellion, the ROYG has turned to regular ground forces, 
heavy air force bombardment, tribal militias, intelligence 
and even special forces trained for counterterrorism 
missions.  President Saleh, addressing a group of "popular 
forces" in Dhamar City on December 15, praised both regular 
and irregular (tribal) recruits from Dhamar and Beidha 
governorates, and promised even the irregular troops that 
they would "have a place" in the official army camps after 
they completed their duties in Sa'ada, where they were soon 
to be sent.  (Note: The ROYG has long relied on irregular 
tribal militias as proxy fighters in the war against the 
Houthis.  End Note.)  One platoon from the ROYG's elite 
Counter Terrorism Unit (CTU) remains in Sa'ada City, trying 
to help the Ministry of Interior's Central Security Forces 
rid the governorate's capital of Houthi fighters (septel). 
Local media reported bloody street battles continuing in 
Sa'ada City as of December 15.  The National Security 
Bureau's (NSB) Colonel Akram al-Qassmi told PolOff on 
December 14 that NSB's officers were working "long hours" in 
nearly round-the-clock operations to get better intelligence 
 
on the Houthis. 
 
¶5.  (S) Yemen's strategy appears to be focused on taking 
advantage of Saudi involvement to trap the rebels between 
Saudi and Yemeni forces, according to NGA imagery and 
analysis from mid-December.  Although the Houthis are 
battered and war-weary after four months of nonstop fighting, 
they continue to register victories against Saudi and Yemeni 
forces.  Local media reports, confirmed by sensitive 
reporting, indicate that dozens of Saudi soldiers have been 
captured by the Houthis, who then use their uniforms and 
weapons.  While Deputy Prime Minister Alimi told the 
Ambassador that he hoped this could be "the beginning of the 
final stage" in the war against the Houthis and said that the 
rebels had "sacrificed a lot" in operations across the Saudi 
border and Sa'ada City, he acknowledged that the ROYG still 
had a ways to go before they could declare an end to the 
campaign. 
 
AMIDST MORE DEATHS, ACCUSATIONS FLY 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Civilian as well as military casualties continue to 
mount, according to local media reports, with a single 
airstrike in Razah district on December 13 allegedly taking 
as many as 70 lives and wounding up to 100 others.  Houthi 
media outlet almenpar.net has blamed Saudi warplanes for the 
attack, which the ROYG quickly took credit for, denying Saudi 
involvement.  Houthi and Iranian media reported that U.S. 
warplanes had directly bombed various regions of Sa'ada 
governorate in "over 28 air raids" in Razah on December 14 
and 15, a story later picked up by local and pan-Arab media. 
(Note: This is the first time that the Houthis have alleged 
direct U.S. involvement in the war.  Previous claims were 
limited to materiel and intelligence support to the ROYG and 
SAG.  End Note.)  On December 15, local media carried a 
Houthi statement alleging that 120 prisoners of war (NFI) 
were killed and 44 others injured in what they claimed were 
U.S. airstrikes on Houthi headquarters in northern Sa'ada. 
Al-Bayan and Reuters correspondent Mohammed al-Ghobari told 
PolOff on December 16 that the Houthis, feeling more 
desperate and crunched by Yemeni and Saudi forces, were 
making claims of U.S. involvement in the war to distract from 
their heavy losses in the first weeks of December. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Massive displacement of the local population 
continues across Sa'ada, Amran, Hajja and al-Jawf 
governorates, escalated by the pace and scale of Saudi 
bombing in northern Sa'ada.  The latest ROYG and UN estimates 
put the number of IDPs over 200,000 by January 2010, the 
highest to date in the five-year war.  (Note: UNHCR estimated 
that 175,400 IDPS were spread across Amran, Hajja, Sana'a, 
Sa'ada, Jawf governorates and the Saudi border area as of 
November 22.  Of those, 75,000 IDPs remained in embattled 
Sa'ada.  End Note.)  Minister of Planning and International 
Cooperation Abdulkarim al-Arhabi used a December 14 meeting 
with donors and the UN to beg donor countries to help the 
ROYG "cope with the humanitarian situation in Sa'ada." 
Security of and access to areas with IDP populations is still 
incredibly poor, Human Rights Watch's Gerry Simpson told 
PolOff on December 15. 
 
THE GULF'S GOT YEMEN'S BACK 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (S) Yemen joined Saudi Arabia in using the Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) summit in Kuwait on December 14-15 
to drum up support for its war against the Houthis. 
According to Kuwaiti al-Watan newspaper, the GCC countries 
discussed the need to use the "GCC Peninsula Shield," a 
multinational quick-reaction force, against the Houthi rebels 
and similar threats.  Islah Secretary General Abdulwahab 
al-Ansi told the Ambassador on December 15 that the ROYG was 
"playing the Houthi card and the Iranian card" with not only 
the U.S. but also the Gulf states, all of whom are concerned 
over Iranian expansionism.  Ansi, who was involved in 
mediation efforts in Sa'ada dating back to 2004, questioned 
Saleh's seriousness about ending the war at a time of 
increased Gulf support for the ROYG.  "Does he even want a 
solution in Sa'ada?"  Mohammed Naji al-Shaif, a Bakil tribal 
confederation leader with close ties to Saleh, told EconOff 
on December 15 that direct Saudi involvement in the Houthi 
conflict had come as a tremendous relief to Saleh.  With the 
Saudis involved and the conflict seemingly one of regional, 
not local concern, Saleh would seek to prolong, rather than 
shorten, the ROYG,s campaign in order to draw more Saudi 
 
 
military funding and deflect domestic political pressure, 
according to Shaif. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9.  (S) Despite earlier indications of Saleh's willingness to 
consider a political solution to the Houthi conflict, recent 
events suggest that the president, sensing a new wave of 
regional support and perhaps some Houthi blood in the water, 
has redoubled his commitment to a military rout of the 
rebels.  Even with what was allegedly a signed ceasefire 
agreement from Abdulmalik al-Houthi accepting all of the 
ROYG's required concessions, Saleh chose not to call an end 
to hostilities, either out of mistrust of the Houthis, or a 
belief that they are starting to weaken.  Instead, he and his 
regime have upped the anti-Iran rhetoric, sent more troops to 
the battlefield, sought to buy significant caches of new 
weaponry and embraced Saudi Arabia's ongoing involvement. 
Unfortunately for Saleh, facts on the ground appear to have 
changed very little as the entrenched insurgency continues to 
rage with Sa'ada's civilians caught in the crossfire.  END 
COMMENT. 
SECHE