09STATE127868
GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST CONSULTATIONS, DECEMBER 17
Tue Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7868 3490304
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 150303Z DEC 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 127868 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IS KPAL
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST CONSULTATIONS, DECEMBER 17 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  USUN may draw from para 
two elements when making its intervention during Middle 
East consultations in the Security Council on December 17. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin elements: 
 
I thank Special Coordinator Serry for his report. 
 
Advancing the cause of comprehensive peace in the Middle 
East remains among the United States' most important 
foreign policy endeavors.  Our commitment to this goal is 
unwavering, and it is only through negotiations that this 
objective can be realized. 
 
As Secretary of State Clinton said on November 25, we 
believe that through good faith negotiations the parties 
can mutually agree on an outcome which ends the conflict 
and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an independent and 
viable state based on the 1967 lines, with agreed swaps, 
and the Israeli goal of a Jewish state with secure and 
recognized borders that reflect subsequent developments. 
 
The most significant development since the Council 
discussed this matter in November has been the declaration 
by the Israeli government of a moratorium on new 
settlement construction in the West Bank.  As Special 
Envoy for Middle East Peace Mitchell has stated, while 
this moratorium falls short of a full settlement freeze, 
the steps announced by Prime Minister Netanyahu are 
significant and could have substantial impact on the 
ground.  They are more than any Israeli Government has 
done before, and can help move toward agreement between 
the parties that will ultimately lead to an end to the 
conflict and a two-state solution. 
 
It is important to underscore in this regard that a freeze 
on settlement activity is an Israeli obligation under the 
Roadmap, and that the Quartet has long called on all 
parties to uphold their Roadmap obligations.  United 
States policy on settlements remains unaffected and 
unchanged.  As President Obama has stated, America does 
not accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli 
settlements.  United States policy on Jerusalem also 
remains unaffected and unchanged.  The status of Jerusalem 
and all other permanent status issues should be resolved 
through negotiations. 
 
The United States disagrees with some Israeli actions in 
Jerusalem affecting Palestinians in areas such as housing, 
including the continuing pattern of evictions and 
demolitions of Palestinian homes.  We do not accept 
unilateral actions by the parties that could have the 
effect of preempting, or appearing to pre-empt, 
negotiations. 
 
[Optional Contingency Point on the December 11 Yasuf 
Mosque incident: We condemn the recent attack on a mosque 
in the West Bank in the strongest terms and call for the 
perpetrators to be brought to justice.  We understand that 
an investigation is under way.] 
 
Having said that, we see positive steps to improve the 
atmosphere for negotiations, such as the settlements 
moratorium, as a valuable contribution towards achieving 
the goal of a two-state solution.  That is why we also 
have urged the Palestinian Authority to continue and 
expand its ongoing security efforts and to take strong and 
meaningful action on incitement. 
 
Similarly, we call for Israel to reopen crossings, with 
appropriate monitoring and appreciation for security 
concerns, so that legitimate goods can enter Gaza 
consistent with UN Security Council Resolution 1860, thus 
alleviating the hardships and stress that civilians in 
Gaza face every day. 
 
We also continue to urge Arab states to take steps toward 
normalization of relations with Israel.  As direct 
negotiations resume, we seek to re-establish a 
multilateral track in which regional governments, 
including Israel, would meet to discuss issues they have 
in common, such as energy and water, to the benefit of 
everyone in the region.  The best approach is a mix of 
contacts and a variety of tracks, including high-level 
direct talks that establish the framework and set the 
tone, parallel talks with the U.S. about key issues, and 
lower-level direct talks where the details of issues are 
often worked out. 
 
We also continue to call on Hamas to accept the principles 
established by the Quartet that are the building blocks of 
an independent Palestinian state--renunciation of 
violence, recognition of Israel, and acceptance of 
previous agreements between the parties--and demonstrate 
that they are more interested in building a better future 
for the Palestinian people than in rhetoric. We also continue 
to call for the immediate release of Gilad Shalit. 
 
As Special Envoy Mitchell has made clear, despite the 
difficulties and the complex political circumstances in 
the region, we are committed to re-launching 
negotiations.  We will not be deterred by setbacks.  We 
are determined to stay the course in the cause of 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. 
 
Lastly, we congratulate the new Lebanese government on its 
vote of Parliamentary confidence.  We call upon all 
parties to fulfill the provisions of Security Council 
resolutions 1559, 1680, and 1701. 
 
End elements. 
CLINTON