09ZAGREB711
Zagreb Daily Report - December 04, 2009
Fri Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Zagreb
VZCZCXRO7933
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHVB #0711 3381507
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041507Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY ZAGREB
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9703
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS ZAGREB 000711 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL HR AF XT ECON
SUBJECT: Zagreb Daily Report - December 04, 2009 
 
¶1. (U) Prime Minister Reacts to Brammertz Report, Pledges to 
Continue Investigation:  Responding to ICTY Prosecutor Brammertz's 
report to the UN Security Council on December 3, in which he 
welcomed Kosor's initiative to set up a special task force to find 
missing documents, Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor told reporters that 
she was glad to see that Brammertz has recognized Croatia's latest 
efforts to locate the missing documents.  "Our task force is 
continuing its work," she said.  "Getting at the truth about the 
documents is primarily in Croatia's interest....It is in our 
interest to find out if they existed and if so, where they are now. 
If they disappeared, [we want to know] how that happened and who was 
the last person to hold them." 
 
¶2. (U) Croatian FM Emphasizes GoC Support for Afghanistan 
Initiative:  In Brussels for the NATO Ministerial, Croatian Foreign 
Minister Gordan Jandrokovic echoed comments a day earlier by PM 
Kosor that the GoC strongly supports President Obama's new policy on 
Afghanistan.  Without mentioning specific numbers, he added that, 
"We are looking for a way to reinforce the Croatian component, 
primarily its role of assisting in the training of the Afghan 
security forces and police for taking over their duties and assuming 
responsibility for the situation in the country." 
 
¶3. (U) Government Sets Date for New Shipyards Tender:  The Cabinet 
on December 3 announced its decision to publish the new round of 
tenders for Croatian shipyards on January 6.  No terms for the new 
tenders have been released, except that the price will once again be 
a symbolic one kuna.  The Government will continue to consult 
closely with the EU on the terms for the tender to ensure it meets 
the EU's criteria for opening of accession negotiations on the 
competition policy chapter.  The previous tender offer in October 
2009 failed to attract any bidders. 
 
¶4. (U) President Mesic Makes Farewell Visit to Macedonia:  On 
December 3, Mesic paid his fifth and final official visit to 
Macedonia as Croatian President.  Speaking of the name dispute, 
Mesic said that the issue could be solved without calling into 
question the Macedonian identity and without Greece feeling 
threatened. "That would open the way for Macedonia to Euro-Atlantic 
integration, which Croatia supports and is ready to assist Macedonia 
and all other countries in the region on that road."  Mesic said 
Greece should separate this bilateral issue with Skopje from 
Macedonia's EU and NATO membership negotiations so that Macedonia 
could join the two organisations. He drew a parallel with a 
Croatian-Slovenian border dispute and the agreement by the 
governments in Zagreb and Ljubljana to refer the case to 
international arbitration. 
 
¶5. (U) EU GAERC to Consider Beginning Drafting of Croatia Accession 
Treaty, Budget Amounts: The Swedish EU presidency has established a 
working group to draw up Croatia's accession treaty, now that 
Croatia has closed 15 negotiating chapters.  The EU's Committee of 
Permanent Representatives (COREPER) in Brussels will review the 
proposal today and forward it to Foreign Ministers for Monday's 
General Affairs and External Relations Council meeting.  Ministers 
are also expected to adopt a financial package for 2012 and 2013 
that would make Croatia a net beneficiary of the EU budget to the 
tune of EUR 2.2 billion (USD 3.3 billion). 
 
FOLEY