07HAVANA258
CUBA: HOW BELIEVABLE IS A FIDEL CASTRO COMEBACK?
Fri Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
US Interests Section Havana
VZCZCXRO8161
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHUB #0258/01 0751828
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 161828Z MAR 07
FM USINT HAVANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1454
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RUEHSW/AMEMBASSY BERN 0062
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN 0050
RUMIAAA/USCINCSO MIAMI FL
RUESDM/JTLO MIAMI FL
RUCOGCA/COMNAVBASE GUANTANAMO BAY CUC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HAVANA 000258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/16/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PINR CU
SUBJECT: CUBA: HOW BELIEVABLE IS A FIDEL CASTRO COMEBACK? 
 
 
HAVANA 00000258  001.3 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: COM Michael E. Parmly; Reasons 1.4 (b/d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  XXXXXXXXXXX 
passed us a document March 14 that describes Fidel Castro's 
declining health, as analyzed by a respected, retired Cuban 
doctor.  The document concludes by saying that Castro has a 
terminal condition, and will suffer an inevitable 
deterioration of his faculties until he dies.  But he is not 
about to die "immediately."  This contrasts with a flurry of 
news and public statements by key regime figures about Castro 
making a comeback, including his having spoken to Hugo Chavez 
on the phone while the latter was in Haiti.  We believe that 
a full comeback is unlikely, but that Fidel Castro is more of 
a presence behind the scenes -- and even "on stage" as a 
presence -- than he was a few months ago.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Media have reported increased activity on the part of 
Fidel Castro this past week: Speaking on the phone to Hugo 
Chavez during the Venezuelan's visit to Haiti; and receiving 
Colombian author and long-time sympathizer Gabriel Garcia 
Marquez.  Both Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque (in 
Europe) and Parliamentary Speaker Ricardo Alarcon stated 
publicly that Fidel Castro was making a comeback and would 
return to the GOC's helm.  Alarcon's statement included 
Castro's "winning reelection for president" in 2008.  Interim 
dictator Raul Castro has kept a low profile during the past 
few weeks. 
 
¶3. (C) XXXXXXXXXXX, on Wednesday evening March 14, passed COM and 
Pol-Econ Counselor a document XXXXXXXXXXX.  The 
document traces Fidel Castro's critical condition from its 
onset last July, through the various ups and downs with his 
local medical staff and with the visiting Spanish doctor, 
Garcia Sabrido.  Most of this repeats what has previously 
been reported, with one new development:  Castro has fired 
his long-time personal physician, Dr. Selman.  Informal 
translation of this document follows in Para 4. 
 
¶4. (C) Doctor's Statement: 
 
"The illness began in the plane from Holguin to Havana (Note: 
after a full day of July 26, 2006 activities.  End note).  As 
this was a short flight there was no doctor aboard and they 
had to land urgently once they knew of his bleeding.  He was 
diagnosed with diverticulitis of the colon. 
 
This illness is characterized by diverticulae in the large 
intestine, generally.  A diverticula is a protuberant sack in 
a segment of the intestine, not in itself necessarily 
dangerous.  Waste gets trapped in them, for example. 
Nevertheless, they can cause hemorrhaging, inflammation and 
infection, resulting in diverticulitis.  (Health Unit 
Comment:  Simple diverticulitis, without perforation, 
hemorrhaging or infection, is treatable.  End Comment.) 
 
The condition requires surgery when the diverticulae are 
gigantic, because they are more likely to become infected and 
burst. 
 
He had a perforation in the large intestine and needed to 
have a colostomy done; which he opposed, saying that they 
should splice out the infected part and reattach the 
intestine to his colon.  Dr. Selman, who was chief of the 
medical team, was in agreement, but the rest of the team 
opposed.  But Fidel Castro, capriciously, did not permit the 
colostomy. 
 
With the passage of time, as the colon was infected, the 
operation collapsed and the reattached part separated.  They 
had to operate again, but found a fistula.  It wasn't known 
at that time what he had, but normally a fistula in the 
abdomen has the effect of blocking the digestion of 
food--resulting in the loss of 40 pounds.  They began to feed 
him by IV serum, and they used a Korean-made device to treat 
the fistula, which didn't have much success.  That was when 
they called in the Spanish doctor, the one who said that they 
Cuban team had done what they could, but the correct 
treatment should have been a colostomy. 
 
At that point they removed Selman from the team, who is now 
working as a low-level doctor someplace else. 
 
XXXXXXXXXXX
 
HAVANA 00000258  002.3 OF 002 
 
 
this illness is not curable, and will not, in her opinion, 
allow him to return to leading Cuba.  He won't die 
immediately, but he will progressively lose his faculties and 
become ever more debilitated until he dies." 
 
¶5. (C) This report is consistent with our reporting that 
Fidel Castro probably came close to death in July, 2006, and 
then again around October.  Since then, as we have seen in 
video and audio broadcasts, Castro has been able to engage 
with Hugo Chavez and others for limited periods of 
conversation and other forms of carefully controlled 
activity.  He has not appeared live on TV or in any other 
public context during the entire period of his critical 
illness, which caused him to miss the September, 2006 
Non-Aligned summit and a large-scale celebration of his 
birthday and armed forces day in December, 2006. 
 
¶6. (C) Cubans react to news about Fidel Castro with 
resignation and wild speculation.  XXXXXXXXXXX 
told us March 15 that he thought last month's taped call-in 
by Castro to Hugo Chavez's radio show was fake and that he 
would die by May.  XXXXXXXXXXX, described the Castro illness as having a similar 
effect on the public as the Pope's 1998 visit:  Greatly 
raised expectation for change, followed by disappointment and 
reversion to the totalitarian norm. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment:  We are missing too many variables to be able 
to predict accurately how many more months Fidel Castro will 
live.  Frankly, we don't believe anyone, including Castro 
himself, can state that with certainty.  However, while he is 
still alive, even in a reduced capacity, his presence has a 
chilling and retardant effect on Cuban society.  The high 
expectations for change are still out there, but are mostly 
associated with the idea that the dictator has to die first 
before anything substantial will happen. 
PARMLY