09ANKARA386
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0728
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0386/01 0751518
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161518Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9052
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9533
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5510
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3680
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7172
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7038
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3625
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, MARCH 16, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
World Water Forum Kicks Off in Istanbul Today 
All papers highlight the 5th World Water Forum begins today in 
Istanbul.  Papers report this year's conference seeks to "raise the 
importance of water on the political agenda and support the 
deepening discussions towards the solution of international water 
issues in the 21st century."   Under the theme "Bridging Divides for 
Water," the forum will be held at the newly renovated Istanbul's 
Sutluce Culture and Conference Center.  Participants are mostly 
water and environment ministers from 180 countries.  Zaman says 
nearly 30,000 people, including more than 17,000 foreigners, were 
registered to attend the event.  Papers note that 25 heads of state 
will also attend, including the presidents of Iraq, Somalia and 
Tajikistan.  In addition, the prime ministers of Azerbaijan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Morocco, South Korea and Tuvalu, are among the 
participants of the forum. A Greek Cypriot and an Armenian 
delegation are also expected to participate in the forum. 
 
For a link to information regarding this year's World Water Forum, 
please visit : http://www.worldwaterforum5.org/index.php?id= 1878&L=0 
. 
 
Five Million People May Not Vote in March 29 Elections 
Papers report the High Election Board (YSK) said Turkish citizens 
without an "identification number" on their ID cards will not be 
allowed to vote in the March 29 municipal elections.  ID cards 
issued before 2001 do not have an identification number, which could 
impact up to five million voters.  In a rally over the weekend, 
Prime Minister Erdogan called on voters to have their ID number 
added onto their ID cards.  Opposition parties lashed out at the AKP 
government, saying the "untimely" decision should be put off until 
another election.  The parties claim the number of people to vote in 
the elections will drop by half if they fail to put ID numbers in 
their ID cards, report papers. 
 
The Turkish Government Announces 'Economic Stimulus Package' 
Media outlets report the Turkish government's new "economic stimulus 
package," intended to stem the effects of the global financial 
downturn, will commence after its publication in the Official 
Gazette Monday.  The USD 3.2 billion package, the fourth prepared by 
the AKP government, reduces tax rates in the automotive, household 
goods and housing sectors for three months to revitalize consumption 
and support the industrialists.  Special consumption taxes for cars 
and household equipment will be curbed for a three-month period, and 
the 'Value-added tax' in housing constructions will be reduced from 
18 to 8 percent.  Farming Minister Mehdi Eker said the new economic 
package was going to contain some measures for farmers as well. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report the IMF expects Turkey's economy to "shrink 
1.5 percent in 2009."  Meanwhile, mainstream Vatan reported Saturday 
that Goldman-Sachs predicted the Turkish economy will shrink by 7 
percent in 2009, adding the contraction might reach double-digit 
figures if the economic crisis deepens. 
 
Papers reported Sunday that Economic Minister Mehmet Simsek said 
Turkey is working to reach a "tentative" agreement with the IMF in 
"early April."  Analysts say the AKP government deliberately delayed 
finalizing a deal with the IMF, which would set tight spending 
norms, until after the elections.  On Friday in Eskisehir, Prime 
Minister Erdogan reiterated "the economic crisis will bypass 
Turkey," adding "Turkey will overcome this period with minimum 
damage." 
 
Talabani: "Iraq Will not be Disintegrated." (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah carries an exclusive interview with Jalal Talabani, 
conducted in Suleymaniye prior to the Iraqi President's travel to 
Istanbul for the 5th World Water Forum summit talks.  Talabani said 
Iraq "would not be disintegrated," and "it is in the Iraqi Kurds' 
interest to stay within Iraq."  "The civil war is over, and the 
 
ANKARA 00000386  002 OF 003 
 
 
Iraqi Kurds are part of Iraq," he said.  Talabani stressed the KRG 
President Massoud Barzani shares his views.  He said the "Greater 
Kurdistan" ideal was a "pipe dream left in poems."  "We, however, 
cannot carry on dreaming.  "How is it possible to divide Turkey, 
Iran and Iraq," in order to create an independent Kurdish state, 
Talabani emphasized.  On a question about the "mistakes" of the Bush 
administration on Iraq, Talabani said, "Bush is a hero who has 
liberated Iraq.  In Iraq, Americans made mistakes in a land they did 
not know; but in general, Bush's Iraq policy was friendly."  The 
Iraqi President also underscored that terrorism is "dying" in Iraq, 
and even the al-Anbar region is more secure today. 
 
Meanwhile, mainstream Sabah reports the KRG President Mesud Barzani 
told the London-based al-Aswat daily that he did not expect military 
threats from Turkey due to the relationship that has developed 
recently.  "Trade cooperation between northern Iraq and Turkey is 
growing," said Barzani, underlining more than 500 Turkish companies 
were working in northern Iraq. 
 
Former Naval Commander Admits 'Wrongdoings' in Prior Official 
Kurdish Policy 
Former Turkish Naval Forces commander Admiral Salim Dervisoglu told 
the Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak "Turkey's Kurdish problem cannot be 
solved with military methods." Dervisoglu noted, "We failed to take 
the necessary economic steps.  We could not integrate those people, 
we only tried to assimilate them."  He suggested that a "new policy" 
must be determined.  Dervisoglu said "Turkey is afraid that northern 
Iraq will become a center of attention," and "In order to relieve 
that fear, we must make our own geography a center of attention.  We 
must begin by eliminating the economic, social and cultural 
divisions in our country."  On the AKP government's initiatives 
regarding the Kurdish question, Dervisoglu said he approves many 
forward steps taken by the ruling government.  "Governments cannot 
take all steps swiftly, they must manage the psychologically 
surrounding the issue as well.  It's also important that a consensus 
is formed among the institutions in this process," said Dervisoglu. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Obama's Visit to Turkey and the 
Upcoming Armenian Genocide Resolution Issue 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Once again, as is the case 
every April in the U.S., the Armenian genocide debate has come up. 
This time the issue is a matter of uneasiness not only for Ankara, 
but also for the Obama administration and for the Yerevan 
administration.  President Obama is stuck between Turkey's growing 
regional importance and his campaign pledges to the Armenian lobby 
in the United States.  There are an increasing number of 
commentaries arguing that even President Obama does not know how to 
overcome this impasse.  Ankara, on the other hand, feels that 
Obama's visit to Turkey does not automatically rule out Washington's 
pronouncement of genocide on April 24.  Yerevan is stuck as well. 
The Armenian administration does not want to ruin the ongoing 
reconciliation process with Turkey, but is unable to present a 
different approach to the AGR issue due to the likely political 
ramifications.  While the Armenian administration focuses on 
regional realities that call for more cooperation with Turkey on 
every field, the Armenian Diaspora acts completely carelessly about 
Yerevan's realities.   My personal opinion is that once again on 
April 24 the importance of general conjuncture will prevail and the 
Armenian lobby will not get what it really wants.  It is equally sad 
to see the same uneasiness surround both the Turkish and Armenian 
nations every April; now is the time for the two nations to find a 
better way to address this issue." 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The timing of the Obama 
visit should not be a reason for false hopes regarding the Armenian 
genocide issue.  We cannot take Washington's favorable treatment of 
Ankara for granted and assume that President Obama will not agree 
with the Armenian lobby efforts.  First of all, it may well be a 
 
ANKARA 00000386  003 OF 003 
 
 
matter of political integrity for Obama since he made some pledges 
during his election campaign.  There is a good way to counter this 
process by paving the way for more dialogue and relationship with 
Armenia.  Opening Turkey the Armenia border before April 24 will be 
the best thing to do." 
 
TV News (CNN-Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- The Finance Ministry for the second time rejected the guarantees, 
i.e. shares in Star and Kanal D television channels, offered by 
Dogan Media Group in connection with the payment of a heavy tax fine 
of USD 534 million.  The Finance Ministry might freeze the assets of 
the group. 
 
- The Observer comments Turkey's rival political factions are in a 
row over academic freedom after state officials forced a science 
journal to scrap an article celebrating the work of Charles Darwin. 
 
 
- The Financial Times underlines the high costs of laying track 
across mountainous terrain for Turkey's first high-speed train. 
 
- The TGS announced four PKK militants were killed during the air 
raids on PKK's Zap, Cemko, and Zagros camps from March 11-13. 
Military activities continue in the Siirt, Hakkari and Sirnak 
provinces declared as "temporary security zone" until June 15. 
 
World 
 
- Iraq's PM Nuri al-Maliki says US troops will not be removed from 
areas that are not completely secure or where attacks could resume 
after the Americans leave. 
 
- In the aftermath of Israel's military offensive in Gaza and the 
February elections, Israelis and Palestinians maintain hawkish 
positions regarding the peace process. 
 
- Former Vice President Dick Cheney says that by jettisoning key 
elements of the Bush administration's approach to terrorism, 
President Obama had increased the risk of more attacks on the 
country. 
 
- Rioters clash with police in Northern Ireland following the 
arrests of three men on suspicion of killing two British soldiers 
last week. 
 
JEFFREY