09BAGHDAD649
PM Barzani Pledges Strong Support for Cultural Heritage
Thu Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #0649/01 0711347
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121347Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2125UNCLAS BAGHDAD 000649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SCUL SOCI PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: PM Barzani Pledges Strong Support for Cultural Heritage 
Institute 
 
(U) This is a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) Erbil reporting 
cable. 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) During a 2/19 meeting at his residence, Kurdistan Regional 
Government (KRG) Prime Minister Barzani told a visiting State 
Department delegation that he fully supports the establishment of a 
national cultural heritage preservation training institute in Erbil. 
 The PM said the KRG would cost-share by providing the institute 
with rent-free use of the former Erbil public library building, 
which the KRG would also renovate to the required U.S. standards. 
The PM emphasized that the establishment of such an institute was 
not simply good for the KRG but for all of Iraq.  Speaking more 
broadly about Iraq's relations with America, the PM observed that 
"this kind of cooperation" -- specifically cited in the Strategic 
Framework Agreement -- would play an increasingly important role, 
particularly as the security situation in Iraq improved and the 
SOFA's importance waned.  Acknowledging that U.S. funding for the 
project covered two years, the PM said he would propose to Baghdad 
that the KRG and the federal government form a "joint venture" to 
make the institute permanent.  In a follow-on meeting with Erbil 
Governor Nawzad Hadi, the governor confirmed that the library could 
be used by the institute and agreed to renovate the building to U.S. 
specs.  Hadi also made an important cost-saving decision:  he said 
he would instruct the Asayeesh, the Kurdistan Region's security 
service, to permit the institute to create separate dormitories in 
the institute building for men and women and allow people from any 
Iraqi province (read: Arabs) to live there -- a far less costly 
alternative to staying in local hotels.  End summary. 
 
Context:  ICHP Delegation Visits Erbil 
------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) A delegation led by the State Department's Special 
Coordinator for Iraq Cultural Heritage, Dr. John Russell, visited 
the Kurdistan Region February 16-20 for a series of discussions with 
KRG officials about establishing an Iraqi Cultural Heritage Project 
(ICHP) conservation and historic preservation institute in Erbil. 
In addition to Russell, the delegation included: 
 
-- Embassy Baghdad Cultural Heritage Officer Diane Siebrandt; 
-- U.S. National Park Service Chief Historical Architect Randy 
Biallas; 
-- Winterthur Museum Director of Preservation and Department 
consultant Lois Price; 
-- IRD ICHP Project Director Gordon Davis; 
-- IRD ICHP Erbil Institute Project Coordinator Brian Lione; 
-- Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH) Director 
General for Engineering and Restorations Faiza Hussain; and, 
-- SBAH Chief Engineer Salah Al-Mufti. 
 
 
Surprise:  PM Barzani Meets Delegation at His Residence... 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) After initially being told that KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan 
Barzani would be unable to see the delegation because of a visit to 
Erbil by the German Foreign Minister, the PM changed his mind and 
called the group to his official residence on 2/19 for an 
early-morning meeting.  Accompanied by KRG Foreign Relations 
Department Chief Falah Mustafa Bakir, the PM emphasized that the 
project had his "full support."  Acknowledging the size of the USG 
contribution to the project and noting his "strong personal 
interest" in establishing the institute in Erbil, the PM said the 
KRG would provide significant cost-sharing by renovating the former 
Erbil public library building to meet the required U.S. standards. 
"I will call the Erbil governor and tell him to do it.  Just tell 
the governor exactly what you need," Barzani emphasized. 
 
...Charms Baghdad Officials... 
------------- 
 
 
¶4.  (U) The Prime Minister emphasized that one aspect of the project 
Q4.  (U) The Prime Minister emphasized that one aspect of the project 
he "loved" was the fact that it would train officials from 
throughout Iraq and not just the Kurdistan Region.  Pausing to speak 
in Arabic to the SBAH officials and then translate into English for 
the rest of the delegation, Barzani said he would instruct 
"everybody" in the KRG to work closely with the SBAH in facilitating 
travel to Erbil by officials from other parts of Iraq.  "We want 
people from Baghdad to come here," Barzani emphasized, adding that 
the establishment of such an institute was not simply good for the 
KRG "but for all of Iraq!" 
 
...Hails the Strategic Framework Agreement... 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Obviously well-briefed by his staff, Barzani quizzed the 
delegation on the content and length of the courses that would be 
taught at the institute.  Referring to Russell's expertise and long 
involvement in preserving and protecting Iraqi cultural heritage, 
 
including in Duhok's Amedi district, the PM said it was "absolutely 
critical" for foreign experts to come and teach at the institute. 
"We have the money to build things, but what we need is capacity 
building for our people," he said.  The PM agreed with Russell's 
observation that well-trained Iraqi officials could help turn major 
cultural heritage sites into revenue-generating tourism 
destinations.  Speaking more broadly about Iraq's relations with the 
United States, the PM observed that "this kind of cooperation" -- 
specifically cited in the Strategic Framework Agreement -- would 
play an increasingly important role in bilateral relations, 
particularly as the security situation in Iraq continued to 
stabilize and the SOFA's importance waned. 
 
...and Pledges Cooperation with Baghdad to Keep It Going 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U) Acknowledging that U.S. funding for the project was for two 
years only and that Iraqis would have to keep the institute running, 
the Prime Minister said he would propose to Baghdad that the KRG and 
the federal government form a "joint venture" to keep the institute 
operating.  For its part, Barzani said, KRG support would not just 
be "for two years, but for the long haul."  The PM seconded the view 
of SBAH DG Faiza Hussain, who said that since each province in Iraq 
would benefit from the institute, each province should contribute a 
fixed amount of money annually to help cover the institute's costs. 
 
 
Follow-On Meeting with Erbil Governor:  "The PM Just Called" 
---------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) In a follow-on meeting with Erbil Governor Nawzad Hadi, the 
governor told the delegation that he had just been briefed by the 
Prime Minister and his staff.  Hadi said the former Erbil public 
library could be used as the ICHP institute and agreed to renovate 
the facility to meet the required standards.  "We promise to do 
everything that needs to be done," he said, noting that his chief 
engineer, Vian Rasheed, would be the point of contact in his office. 
 Acknowledging Russell's point that every State Department dollar 
spent on renovating the facility would be one less dollar for 
capacity building, Hadi stressed that he recognized how important 
the institute would be not only for Erbil and the Kurdistan Region, 
but for the entire country.  The governor put in a plea for training 
as many people as possible from Erbil, as the province had "a lot of 
cultural heritage sites" and working-level cultural heritage 
officials "needed capacity-building." 
 
¶8.  (U) The governor also made an important decision about security 
that will save the project a lot of money.  Speaking in Arabic to 
the SBAH officials, Hadi emphasized that "people from Baghdad and 
other parts of Iraq" (read: Arabs) would not face difficulties in 
traveling to and living in the Kurdistan Region.  Moreover, Hadi 
said he would instruct the Erbil Asayeesh, the Kurdistan Region 
security service, to permit the institute to create separate 
dormitories in the institute building for men and women and allow 
people from any Iraqi province to live there -- a far less costly 
alternative to staying in local hotels. 
 
Comment:  Hard to Top 
--------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) As meetings with KRG officials go, the upbeat, positive 
sessions with the Prime Minister and governor would be hard to top. 
Barzani and Hadi expressed strong support for the project and the 
delegation believes the old Erbil library building would be an 
excellent location for the institute.  The State Department's 
contractor for the project, IRD, will be following up with the PM's 
office and the governor's office to confirm, in writing, the KRG's 
willingness to cost-share. 
Qwillingness to cost-share. 
 
BUTENIS