09BEIJING545
March 3 MFA Press Briefing: Bosworth Visit, Afghanistan,
Tue Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7795
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0545/01 0621035
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031035Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2627
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0497
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6839
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000545 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KS KN AF FR EU IN CH
SUBJECT: March 3 MFA Press Briefing: Bosworth Visit, Afghanistan, 
Dalai Lama, Relics Auction 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 3 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- U.S. Special Representative for North Korea Policy Amb. Bosworth 
will meet both FM Yang Jiechi and VFM Wu Dawei this week.  China 
hopes to exchange views on issues of common interests.  The 
spokesperson reiterated China's hope that recent difficulties are 
temporary. 
 
-- As a close neighbor of Afghanistan, China hopes the political 
situation there remains stable and reconstruction and development 
efforts are peaceful. 
 
-- China's message to the Dalai Lama has been consistent and clear, 
and the door for talks is "always open."  Talks will not go forward 
until the Dalai Lama stops advocating "independence disguised as 
semi-independence." 
 
-- China opposes the auction of Chinese cultural relics in France 
and hopes they are returned.  These relics belong to China and were 
"looted in war." 
 
Amb. Bosworth's Visit, Six-Party Talks 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the regularly-scheduled March 3 MFA press briefing, MFA 
spokesperson Qin Gang announced that U.S. Special Representative for 
North Korea Policy Amb. Stephen Bosworth arrives in Beijing March 3. 
 Amb. Bosworth will meet both Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi and the 
head of China's delegation to the Six-Party Talks, Vice Foreign 
Minister Wu Dawei.  The spokesperson said China hopes to take this 
opportunity to exchange views on issues of common interests, jointly 
promote the Six-Party process, including the denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula.  The spokesperson noted that there had been some 
new developments, but reiterated China's hope that the difficulties 
are temporary.  The spokesperson said all six parties should "work 
together" in a balanced, cooperative way and keep common interests 
in mind so that the Six-Party process can move to the next phase. 
 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
 
¶3. In answer to a question about China's contributions to efforts in 
Afghanistan, the spokesperson said as a close neighbor of 
Afghanistan, China hopes the political situation there remains 
stable and reconstruction and development efforts are peaceful. 
 
Tibet and the Dalai Lama 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. The Tibetan people live peacefully and a peaceful life is their 
common aspiration, the spokesperson said.  China's message to the 
Dalai Lama has been consistent and clear, he stated.  The door for 
talks is "always open."  For example, there were three separate 
occasions when the PRC Government met with the Dalai Lama's 
representatives last year.  This underscored China's sincerity and 
good will.  The talks will not go forward until the Dalai Lama stops 
advocating "independence disguised as semi-independence," the 
spokesperson said. 
 
Auction of Chinese Relics in France 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. China opposes the auction of Chinese cultural relics in France 
and hopes they are returned, stated the spokesperson.  These relics 
belong to China and were "looted in war." 
 
Chinese Toys, Protectionism 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6. Questioned about India's recent decision to lift a ban on Chinese 
toy imports, the spokesperson responded that China is a major toy 
producer and exporter, and places great importance on the safety of 
its products.  All exports are "strictly examined" and China hopes 
"relevant countries" will contact Chinese authorities when questions 
arise, so that China can investigate the producer or manufacturer. 
China has "repeatedly and unequivocally" urged all countries to work 
together as they face the Global Financial Crisis to address 
concerns and avoid the "mistake of protectionism." 
 
Airbus Order Cancellation 
------------------------- 
 
¶7. The Civil Aviation Administration of China "never made the 
decision" to cancel a recent order of Airbus aircraft, according to 
the spokesperson.  Airbus has also clarified this issue, saying this 
was a false report. 
 
Oasis Band Performance Cancelled 
-------------------------------- 
 
BEIJING 00000545  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶8. When asked whether an Oasis band member's past participation in a 
"Free Tibet" concert was related to the cancellation of the British 
rock group's scheduled performance in China, the spokesperson said 
the organizer cancelled the performance because of 
"economic issues."  The Ministry of Culture has asked the organizer 
for more information on the cancellation. 
 
Expansion of Chinese State Media 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9. In response to a question about the growth of Xinhua and CCTV 
internationally, the spokesperson said it is up to the companies to 
determine their international operations.  The PRC Government hopes 
these media outlets can "go global" and increase "mutual 
understanding" and "friendly exchanges," while presenting a 
"peaceful image" of China on the world stage. 
Piccuta