09BEIJING807
MARCH 26 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: MILITARY POWER REPORT, TIBET,
Thu Mar 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0468
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0807/01 0851052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261052Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3110
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0531
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000807 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR PHUM EINT CH KS KN JA RS AF FR TW
 
SUBJECT: MARCH 26 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: MILITARY POWER REPORT, TIBET, 
TAIWAN AND WHA, NORTH KOREA 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 26 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The recently released China Military Power Report "contains gross 
distortions of fact" and China has expressed its "resolute 
opposition" and "made representations" to the United States. 
 
-- The "Dalai Clique premeditated and coordinated" the Lhasa riots 
of March 14, 2008 while Chinese law enforcement carried out their 
duties "with restraint and in a civilized manner" and did not use 
"lethal weapons." 
 
-- Responding to a question on Taiwan's participation in the World 
Health Assembly, the spokesman said that China and Taiwan "can have 
practical coordination and make arrangements." 
 
-- The spokesman has "seen reports" that North Korea has begun 
assembling a missile for a potential test launch. 
 
China Military Power Report 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The recently released China Military Power Report from the U.S. 
Defense Department "continues to play up the fallacy of the 
so-called China military threat theory," said spokesperson Qin Gang 
at the March 26 regular MFA press conference.  The report "contains 
gross distortions of fact" and China has expressed its "resolute 
opposition" and "made representations" to the United States.  The 
United States "must stop its 
Cold War mentality and bias" as well as "stop issuing the so-called 
report" to avoid "further damaging" the bilateral and military 
relationships.  China is dedicated to "peace and stability," and it 
is the "sacred duty" of the Chinese military to safeguard the 
territorial integrity and "maritime interests" of China, said Qin. 
Asked if China would release its own report on the United States 
military, Qin said that the "expansion of the U.S. military around 
the world is well known" so no report is necessary. 
 
Tibet 
----- 
 
¶3. It is "obvious" that the "Dalai Clique" learned its editing 
skills from the Western media, said Qin, when asked about a video 
circulating on the Internet purporting to show police brutality in 
Tibet.  The "Dalai Clique premeditated and coordinated" the Lhasa 
riots of March 14, 2008, said Qin.  Chinese law enforcement carried 
out their duties "with restraint and in a civilized manner" and did 
not use "lethal weapons."  Qin asked reporters whether they had 
forgotten the "violent crimes, social damage and loss of life" 
associated with the riots.  The "Dalai Clique's purpose in releasing 
this footage is clear," said Qin.  "You talk about this footage but 
still don't notice the innocent civilians who were beaten to death" 
or "the five Chinese girls who lost their lives."  The "Dalai 
Clique" is still trying to "deny the facts" and carry out separatist 
activities, yet these efforts "will get nowhere."  Qin instructed an 
attendant to hand the reporter two DVDs on Tibet and urged the 
reporter to "put these on the Internet too."  Tibet is "open" and 
will welcome foreign journalists "depending on local capacity." 
Pressed on whether the MFA believes the Internet footage to be 
false, Qin said that relevant Tibet Autonomous Region authorities 
had already commented on the issue. 
 
Taiwan and WHA 
-------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about the possibility of admitting Taiwan into the World 
Health Assembly (WHA), Qin cited President Hu Jintao as saying "a 
reasonable arrangement could be made" as long as the one China 
policy is upheld.  "The two sides can have practical coordination 
and make arrangements," said Qin.  China encourages the United 
States to oppose Taiwan independence, uphold the joint communiques 
and take concrete action to improve cross-Strait relations. 
 
North Korea Launch 
------------------ 
 
¶5. The spokesman has "seen reports" that North Korea has begun 
assembling a missile for a potential test launch.  Asked whether 
China has been informed by North Korea of its intent to conduct a 
missile test, Qin noted that North Korea has already "informed 
relevant international organizations."  China hopes that "all 
relevant parties will exercise restraint and be calm." Relevant 
parties should take steps "conducive to the Six-Party Talks and 
peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula."  Asked about reports 
that North Korea may be facing food shortages, Qin said that "it is 
up the North Koreans" to say whether they are short of food.  As "a 
good neighbor," China provides food assistance within its ability to 
North Korea. 
 
 
BEIJING 00000807  002 OF 002 
 
 
Afghanistan Conferences 
----------------------- 
 
¶6. China will "keep an open mind to any proposals conducive to peace 
and stability" during the upcoming Shanghai Cooperation Organization 
meeting on Afghanistan in Moscow and the UN meeting on Afghanistan 
at the Hague.  China and Russia are "important players in the 
region" and China is "ready to play its due role." 
 
Relations with France 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. China "attaches great importance" to relations with France, said 
Qin.  However, "difficulties" in the relationship are not caused by 
China.  China hopes that France will recognize China's core 
interests and concerns and make positive responses to improve 
relations.  China welcomes the visits of former French leaders who 
"have long been dedicated" to the bilateral relationship.  China is 
"ready to work with people who are supportive of friendship between 
the two countries." 
 
PICCUTA