09BERLIN257
MEDIA REACTION: MISSILE DEFENSE, IRAN, MIDEAST,
Wed Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 041238Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3469
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000257 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM US IR RS CU AF CE XG IS SY GZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: MISSILE DEFENSE, IRAN, MIDEAST, 
AFGHANISTAN, PAKISTAN, ECB 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   U.S.-Russian Relations, Iran 
¶3.   Clinton Trip to Mideast 
¶4.   U.S.-Cuban Relations 
¶5.   Future Strategy on Afghanistan 
¶6.   Attack On Sri Lankan Cricket Team 
¶7.   ECB's Reaction to Financial Crisis 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused on the ruling of an Austrian court against the 
Minister President of Thuringia, Dieter Althaus (CDU), the ruling of 
the Constitutional Court on electoral voting machines, and President 
Obama's rapprochement with Russia.  Headlines in the press centered 
on the Althaus case.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast Heute and 
ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened with reports on 
Althaus. 
 
¶2.   U.S.-Russian Relations, Iran 
 
Under the headline "Washington takes Moscow seriously," S|ddeutsche 
Zeitung comments: "The U.S. President does not simply throw out 
problems left by his predecessor.  He exploits the missile defense 
shield... as a means to exert pressure on Moscow.....  If we are not 
mistaken, Obama's first steps in foreign policy make clear that the 
new U.S. government will not be shy in pursuing its policy in the 
world.  It knows about the powerful tools it has and indicates that 
it plans to use them." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine opines that "the Great Bargain" between 
Washington and Moscow, in which the U.S. would abandon its missile 
defense project if Russia helps Washington prevent Iran from 
building a nuclear weapon "sounds plausible but is in reality 
complicated" because "as long as negotiations take place in the 
framework of the UN, the Chinese have a say as well and will not 
allow Washington and Moscow to outvote them.  America must also take 
its allies in Europe into consideration, particularly Poland and the 
Czech Republic, which have decided in favor of the deployment 
against enormous opposition.  This is all about the reliability of 
Washington's promises." 
 
FT Deutschland describes "the offer to Russian President Medvedev as 
a smart move because it puts the ball in the Kremlin's court. 
Obama's message is that if it is possible to prevent Iran from 
building a nuclear bomb, then missile defense, which is unpopular in 
Moscow, would no longer be necessary.  To reach this goal, Russia 
can contribute a great deal.  By this move, the new U.S. government 
kills several birds with one stone.  It says goodbye to a project 
that has never been dear to the Democrats.  The shield is expensive 
and it has never been clear whether it technically works.  Obama 
also weakens the criticism of the Russians....  The U.S. President 
turns the table:  Americans are no longer a threat to the security 
in Europe, but it is up to Russia to contribute something to the 
world's security.  Obama's proposal helps to focus on America's 
greatest foreign political problem: Iran's nuclear armament." 
 
Handelsblatt's front-page editorial notes:  "Has the building of a 
missile defense shield so close to Russia ever been a good idea? 
Probably not.  Technically, it is dubious, and politically, it 
stirred up many bad feelings.  The cost-benefits ratio has never 
been in balance.  The fact that the U.S. President now rectifies 
this wrong policy is right.  But:  Is it realistic to hope in return 
for Russian cooperation in the dispute with Iran?  Probably not.... 
Abandoning the missile project will not suffice.  Obama will have to 
put a few more ideas on the table before the NATO summit in April." 
 
¶3.   Clinton Trip to Mideast 
 
 
All media reported on Secretary of State Clinton's visit to 
Jerusalem, where she underscored the goal of a two-state solution. 
ARD-TV's Tagesschau stated that "she wanted to explore chances for 
creating peace in the Middle East," while many conservative parties 
currently in negotiations over forging a new Israeli government have 
so far rejected U.S. calls for a two-state solution.  The newscast 
quoted her as saying: "During the conference, I emphasized President 
Obama's and my commitment to working to achieve a two-state solution 
to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine reported that "Secretary of State Clinton 
announced in Jerusalem on Tuesday that her government would send two 
envoys to Damascus for talks.   The representatives of the State 
Department and the White House are supposed to clarify bilateral 
topics, Clinton said during her first visit to Israel." 
 
¶4.   U.S.-Cuban Relations 
 
Under the headline: "Little Brother Steps Out Of Big Brother's 
Shadow," Sueddeutsche reported; "Cuba's President Ral Castro is 
depriving Foreign Minister Prez Roque and economic reformer Lage - 
and further loyal supporters of Fidel - of their power.  This can be 
interpreted as an indication that 77-year-old Ral Castro is 
breaking with the legacy of seriously-ill Fidel Castro to expand his 
own power base. The former German Ambassador to Cuba, Bernd Wulffen, 
an expert on domestic political life in Cuba said: 'This firing of 
leading Fidelistas is a revolt against the image of the little 
brother.'  Wulffen thinks that the reshuffle is an indication that 
Ral Castro wants to initiate economic reforms, for instance, a 
restructuring of the currency and subsidy system." 
 
FAZ reported under the headline: "No Use For The Men Of The 
Future"that" Ral Castro struck, and replaced his brother's 
followers with officers who are loyal to him.  With this team, he 
wants to defy the crisis - and Obama's attempts to open up the 
country.  The Cuban president is really interested in removing all 
bureaucratic obstacles for economic activities.  But the main thing 
is that Ral has now surrounded himself with loyal supporters at all 
levels of government.  But it remains open what his future goals 
are, while Barack Obama is likely to prepare a softening of the U.S. 
embargo policy towards Cuba." 
 
Sueddeutsche wondered: "What could this government reshuffle mean? 
Possibly two things: On the one hand, Ral Castro is trying to show 
some promise as a reformer...but, on the other hand, economic 
liberties only sluggishly reach the people, while political 
liberties do not reach them at all.  Ral Castro is still no 
Gorbachev.  But some day in the future, even the most patient Cubans 
could become impatient if the standard of living does not improve. 
U.S. attempts to improve relations with Cuba are threatening because 
all the Castros and their comrades are taking advantage of the 
specter of the 'American Empire.'  The threat from the North is used 
as a justification for all kinds of harassments.  But this could 
change with new President Obama.  The Congress of the Communist 
Party in the fall is likely to send the first signals.  Fidel and 
Ral Castro should try to open Cuba, as former Chinese leader Deng 
Xiaoping did.  And Obama could do nothing better than to give up the 
stubborn resistance of the great United States against the small 
Cuba during Castro's lifetime." 
 
In the view of Handelsblatt: "What Ral Castro has now done to 
everybody's surprise can hardly be described as a reshuffle.  Castro 
II, the little brother of Castro I, has used an axe at the Cabinet 
table and cut those trees which his brother planted and raised.  It 
is a kind of liberation from a stalemate situation, a move of 
77-year-old Ral who wanted to free himself from the shadow of his 
brother Fidel.  After one year, the new leader has declared an end 
to the period of grace for the old Cabinet and the leading figures 
of Fidel's mercy and took advantage of his own power base.  In 
contrast to domestic policy a new wind will now be blowing in 
foreign policy.  New Foreign Minister Rodriguez is a cool-headed guy 
with a lot of experience in the international arena.  His nomination 
looks as if Ral Castro is now extending his hand to the arch enemy 
on the other side of the Streets of Florida." 
 
Die tageszeitung editorialized: "This is the thus far most visible 
break with Fidel Castro's policy  Cuba's President Ral Castro is 
now removing the most important political personalities whom Fidel 
Castro had built up.  The new direction of the government reshuffle 
is economic opening with a simultaneous political consolidation. 
For Havana, the nonsensical U.S. embargo policy was a welcome reason 
to keep everything as it is.  But the reverse is also true that in 
hardly any other country on the U.S. government's list of opponents 
could the open diplomacy that Obama proclaimed so quickly create a 
positive dynamic as in Cuba.  This is a chance that Obama should 
use." 
 
¶5.   Future Strategy on Afghanistan 
 
Under the headline "Karzai Opens The Bag Of Tricks," Berliner 
Zeitung comments: "The color has been wearing off after five years. 
The difficult security situation around Kabul, the increasing terror 
in the provinces, corruption and particularly the rise in crime is 
greatly frustrating many people.  Just to promise things, like in 
2004, is no longer enough.  To win the elections, Karzai must allow 
more people to benefit from being in power.  This might help him 
remain in power, but it will not improve the government and it is 
even counterproductive for the efforts to establish a more effective 
administration." 
 
¶6.   Attack On Sri Lankan Cricket Team 
 
Under the headline: "Attack On A Holy Institution," Sueddeutsche 
Zeitung reported; "In Pakistan, the front state in the fight against 
international terrorism, nothing seems to be safe any longer - not 
even the national sport cricket, the love of all Pakistanis.  The 
shock in the region sits deep.  It is the first time ever that 
terrorists have attacked a cricket game.  It was to have been the 
first international meeting on Pakistani soil since the 
assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.  That is why 
the meeting was celebrated [everywhere].  And Sri Lanka's cricket 
association was praised for its courage.  This was probably the last 
time for a long time coming that an international team will dare 
tour Pakistan." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine noted under the headline: "Shots Into The 
Heart," that "the attack on the Sri Lankan cricket players hits 
Pakistan at a sensitive point.  Islamabad has tried in vain to 
present itself as a vigorous opponent to terrorists.  Now the 
government must again wonder whether it is taking enough measures 
against the terrorists in its own country.  For weeks, the 
government has tried to prove to the increasingly worried 
international community that it is taking serious action against the 
terrorists in the country, but now skeptics will feel confirmed in 
their view that Islamabad's measures are insufficient, and partly 
even counter productive.  The most well-known terrorist leaders in 
Pakistan are still not behind bars.  At the same time, government 
forces have given up their efforts to regain control in the 
northwestern part of the country." 
 
"Terror Attack On Sri Lanka's Cricket Team," Die Welt reported: 
"Because of the popularity of cricket in South Asia this attack is 
of high symbolic significance and is comparable with a terror attack 
on a national soccer team in Europe." 
 
¶7.   ECB's Reaction to Financial Crisis 
 
In view of the upcoming meeting of the European Central Bank, 
Financial Times Deutschland judged: "In view of the seriousness of 
the crisis, the central bankers should now fully understand the 
seriousness of the crisis and signal their willingness to use all 
possible means to prevent the financial crisis and the recession 
from ending up in a depression.  If it does not take action, it will 
worsen the situation on a short term basis, and, in the long run, 
will lose its credibility. But both things would be fatal.  Over the 
past few weeks, the ECB has dangerously underestimated the financial 
crisis and the recession.  It confused the markets with 
contradictory signals, after long being praised for its ability to 
communicate.  Now the ECB must prove that it is not blind on the 
deflation eye. " 
 
 
 
  KOENIG