09BEIRUT322
Lebanon: Media Reaction - March 20, 2009
Fri Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
O 201231Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4483
NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 
USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA PRIORITYUNCLAS BEIRUT 000322 
 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA - LAWSON, NEA/ELA - IRWIN, NEA/PPD, R, 
INR/R/MR, INR, NSC - SHAPIRO, MCDERMOTT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL KMDR OPRC KPAO KISL KPAL LE
SUBJECT:  Lebanon: Media Reaction - March 20, 2009 
 
Atmospherics: 
------------- 
 
Outlets reported extensively on a parliamentary legislative session 
yesterday. Parliamentarians voted for a law to lower the voting age 
to eighteen.  The move was commended by all outlets as an "historic" 
step. Major outlets speculated that the law would not have passed if 
it was not for the upcoming parliamentary elections.  Although the 
draft bill was passed by parliament unanimously, amending the law 
could require up to four months.  Citizens aged eighteen are not 
expected to vote before the 2010 municipal elections. 
 
Another law that failed to pass was one that called for 
parliamentary consensus to introduce any amendments on the issue of 
settling Palestinians in Lebanon.  Pro-Hariri outlets accused the 
"Change and Reform Bloc," which is the biggest Christian 
parliamentary bloc, of being responsible for the failure to pass the 
draft.  The bloc denied the allegations, insisting that 
parliamentarians voted for the law.  The issue of settling 
Palestinians in Lebanon is a sensitive issue to the Christian 
community in particular. 
 
Selected Headlines: 
------------------- 
 
"The Parliament Passes the Law on Lowering the Voting Age to 
Eighteen and Aoun's Parliamentarians Evade an Amendment that 
Confirms Refusal to Settlement (of Palestinians)" Pro Hariri 
Ash-Sharq 
 
"The Age Eighteen with the Consensus of Ninety-Eight 
Parliamentarians on the Eve of the Parliamentary Battle. Berri: A 
Valuable Gift in March for not Bolstering the Month of Divisions." 
Moderate anti-Syrian An-Nahar 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"European Satisfaction over the Lebanese Tranquility and Aspirations 
for an Open American Approach.  The Projets for Solutions in the 
Region Await the Completon of the Electoral Tours in It," an 
editorial by Rosanna Bou Monsef in moderate anti Syrian An-Nahar: 
 
"Despite the signals that were directed by the American 
Administration towards the Middle East region since President Barak 
Obama took office in the United States...such as appointing George 
Mitchell...and opening the doors for dialogue with Syria...and the 
announcement of intentions to adopt a new approach toward Iran, 
diplomatic observers consider that for the course to become clear, 
it requires a number of elements that are not available today. 
There is on the one side the probability of forming the new Israeli 
cabinet...  and on the other side it is necessary to wait for the 
outcome of the Lebanese parliamentary elections which, despite their 
internal nature, could bring a new balance to the reality of forces 
in the region or could confirm the already existing balance.  There 
is also the outcome of the Iranian elections, which follow the 
Lebanese elections immediately.  That is because the forces that 
will be sorted (out) by the elections and the changes in the region 
will have a strong impact on the nature of the American approach, 
and could reveal... with whom the dialogue will be opened in the 
next phase.  In addition, Obama is still exploring his approach to 
the affairs of the region, and the European countries and others are 
making sure that his approach to the peace process will be open and 
built on an understanding of the nature of each crisis, and the 
nature of each country...  in order to avoid having any initiative 
or approach bring opposite results, such as with many American 
approaches previously...  The American solutions did not reflect a 
deep understanding of the crises and the (way) of approaching them 
caused disasters for the Americans and for several countries in the 
region and the world.  The Europeans are more eager than ever...to 
have Europe as a partner in any approach that Washington will adopt 
and to avoid Washington proposing any unilateral approach, although 
the region awaits American action primarily..." 
 
"European Capitals Anticipate the Victory of the Opposition in the 
Elections by Opening Up to Them?  London and Hizballah: A Look, a 
Smile, and a Hello...In Anticipation of the Meeting," an editorial 
by (pro-Hizballah) Imad Marmal in Arab nationalist As-Safir: 
 
"European politics continue to regain some of their independence and 
radiance in the Middle East after a long phase of American hegemony 
over them, which made the Europeans...turn into pawns on a chess 
board which used to be controlled by the mood of the former American 
president, George Bush...   The Europeans have indeed benefited from 
Obama's new strategy which is based on opening up to the 'axis of 
evil' and having a dialogue with it...  As an expansion of this 
course, it was clear that international and regional changes would 
reach Lebanon and that the European openness towards Damascus and 
Tehran would be completed by reaching out a hand to 
Hizballah...especially since Hizballah is now looked at as a major 
player in the region and one of the architects of the balance of 
powers in it.  Also, it is natural for Hizballah to become one of 
the beneficiaries of the proceeds of the American failure in the 
Middle East...  And, because some March 14 forces were promoting the 
dangers of a victory in the elections by the Hizballah-led 
opposition and the impact of such a victory on Lebanon's 
relationship with the international community, the response came 
from the heart of that community, meaning the Europeans, who hurried 
into organizing their relations with Hizballah months before the 
elections, which indicates that they were acting according to the 
principal that the opposition had serious chances of winning on June 
7, and, therefore, there should be a preemptive opening of the lines 
(of communication) with it as of now in anticipation of all 
possibilities...  But Hizballah, despite welcoming the flexible 
European language,...does not seem in a hurry to normalize its 
relations with the concerned capitals.  There is information that no 
contacts or meetings occurred at any levels between Britain and 
Hizballah...  According to information, the British Ambassador to 
Beirut, Francis Mary Guy, before the diplomatic window on Hizballah 
was opened officially, tried to arrange a meeting with any 
personality that the Party was prepared to delegate, suggesting that 
the meeting be a secret, but her request at that time was rejected 
completely." 
 
Sison