09BRASILIA251
BRAZIL:  NINTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT,
Mon Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO6580
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0251/01 0611114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021114Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3675
INFO RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 7332
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 9146
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 3616
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON 0472
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHEFHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 BRASILIA 000251 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP MARK TAYLOR AND BARBARA FLECK, WHA/PPC FOR 
SCOTT MILLER, WHA/BSC FOR CAROLINE CROFT AND BENJAMIN CHIANG, INL, 
DRL, AND PRM.  USAID. 
 
E.O 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB BR
 
SUBJECT:  BRAZIL:  NINTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT, 
PART 3 OF 3 
 
REFS:  08 STATE 132759, 08 Brasilia 35, 08 Brasilia 56, 08  Brasilia 
471, 08 Brasilia 594, 08 Brasilia 760, 08 Brasilia 941, 08 Brasilia 
962, 08 Brasilia 1506, 08 Brasilia 1588, 08 Brasilia 1608, 08 
Brasilia 1686, Brasilia 79, Brasilia 102, 08 Recife 46, 08 Rio 172, 
08 Rio 347, 08 Sao Paulo 117, 08 Sao Paulo 276, 08 Sao Paulo 412, 08 
Sao Paulo 432, 08 Sao Paulo 620, 08 Sao Paulo 678, Sao Paulo 18. 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS, Continued 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
(NOTE:  Answers correspond to questions in ref A, para. 25.  END 
NOTE) 
Section K: 
---------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) While adult prostitution is legal (an adult is defined by 
Brazilian law as a person 18 years of age or older), various 
associated activities, such as operating a brothel and pimping, are 
illegal.  The degree to which these laws are enforced varies from 
place to place in Brazil based on local levels of corruption, police 
commitment, and official concern or indifference.  While no specific 
law addresses sex tourism, it is punishable under other criminal 
statues such as those covering pedophilia or corruption of minors. 
New legislation, Law 11,829, approved by President Lula on November 
25, 2008, amends Articles 240 and 241 of the Statute of Children and 
Adolescents to criminalize the acquisition, production and 
possession of child pornography; increase penalties for child 
pornography producers who are public office-holders, relatives, 
domestic employees, and in certain other relationships to the 
victim; and criminalize the sale and distribution of child 
pornography.  Penalties under Article 240 (producing child 
pornography) are four to eight years imprisonment and a fine, 
increased by one third for a public official or anyone pretending to 
be one, certain relatives, or people living with or hosting the 
child.  Article 241 (selling or exhibiting child pornography) 
carries a penalty of four to eight years imprisonment and a fine. 
Article 241-A (distribution of child pornography) is punishable by 
three to six years imprisonment and a fine; Article 241-B 
(acquisition, possession and storage of child pornography) is 
punishable by one to four years imprisonment and a fine; Article 
241-C (simulating child pornography by adulteration, montage, etc. 
of images) is punishable by one to three years imprisonment and a 
fine; Article 241-D (enticing, instigating, etc. a child or 
adolescent to perform a lewd act) is punishable by one to three 
years imprisonment and a fine.  The new child pornography went from 
legislative concept to signed bill in eight months with the help of 
Mission's Resident Legal Adviser.  President Lula signed the bill at 
the World Congress III Against Sexual Exploitation of Children and 
Adolescents in Rio de Janeiro before an international audience of 
law enforcement and judiciary professionals and others. 
 
Section L 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) To date, there have been no reported TIP-related incidents 
involving Brazilian peacekeeping troops. 
 
Section M: 
---------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Brazil has an identified child sex tourism problem.  The 
GOB actively extradited foreigners involved in child sex tourism. 
Few foreign pedophiles are prosecuted in Brazil.  According to ICE, 
typical reasons are that the pedophiles are able to flee the 
country, information from victims is not passed along to law 
enforcement officials by NGOs, or authorities are unable to locate 
the victims.  Information regarding the number of foreigners 
prosecuted or deported to their country of origin was not available. 
 Sex tourists came mostly from Europe and the United States.  Brazil 
does not have a child sexual abuse law with extraterritorial 
coverage like the U.S. Protect Act, but the GOB worked with foreign 
governments with extraterritorial laws to extradite and prosecute 
citizens.  Article 7 of the Brazilian Penal Code establishes that 
any crime committed outside of Brazil by a Brazilian is subject to 
the laws of Brazil.  Brazilian authorities cooperated in 2008 with 
the USG in pending pedophile extradition cases against three U.S. 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  002 OF 010 
 
 
citizens.  Federal and state police monitored the Internet to detect 
on-line recruitment by pedophiles. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Article 244-A of the Statute of Children and Adolescents 
(Federal Act. 8.069/1990) prohibits sexual exploitation of children 
and adolescents and mandates a prison penalty from 4 to 10 years 
plus a fine. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Article 241 of the Statute of Children and Adolescents 
(Federal Act. 8.069/1990) prohibits pedophilia and mandates a prison 
penalty from 2 to 6 years plus a fine. 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------ 
 
(NOTE:  Answers correspond to questions in ref A, para. 26.  END 
NOTE) 
 
Section A: 
---------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Several government programs assisted victims of 
trafficking, although efforts often were inconsistent.  The GOB 
funded the Sentinela shelter network.  The Brazilian MOJ and the 
UNODC continued to fund victims' assistance centers in Sao Paulo, 
Rio de Janeiro, Goias, and Ceara states in partnership with the 
respective state governments.  In 2008, a center was added in Belem, 
the capital of Para, to address Suriname cases and give assistance 
to the victims, especially in urgent cases.  In 2009, UNODC stated 
that the SNJ is in the process of signing an agreement with the Acre 
state government to arrange a center in Rio Branco, Acre, to open a 
new center to handle urgent Suriname cases.  State offices work with 
and provide assistance to victims. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) With funding from the GOB, USAID, universities, and the 
Organization of American States, victims assistance was expanded, 
and there are now over 46 sites throughout Brazil. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Figures on the amount spent by the GOB to fund these 
specialized facilities were unavailable. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The government maintained a witness protection program, 
PROVITA (National Program of Victims and Witness Protection) 
operated by the Office of Legal Assistance for Grassroots 
Organizations (GAJOP), an NGO working in coordination with 
government authorities.  Although the program operated in all 
states, lack of resources limited its effectiveness. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Brazilian authorities granted TIP victims the same 
protections that other at-risk witnesses received. NGOs and shelters 
received GOB and/or local funding to provide shelter and other 
benefits to victims of TIP.  Child victims were referred to 
Sentinela centers for psychological and social assistance.  The 
Sentinela team also referred child victims to legal and health 
services, and gave temporary shelter for 24 hours, after which the 
children were referred to families or to an alternate shelter. 
Notwithstanding the laudable efforts to assist and protect TIP 
victims, the strict protection of victims' anonymity actually 
hampers the government's ability to prosecute TIP cases.  Criminal 
prosecutions cannot occur if police do not know victims' identities, 
which intermediaries such as NGOs and others, who see their role as 
solely protecting victims, do not provide to law enforcement. 
 
Section B: 
---------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The government funded programs carried out by NGOs to 
assist TIP victims.  Through the Sentinela Centers and NGO 
assistance, the GOB provided medical help, shelter, and financial 
assistance to repatriated TIP victims.  The Sao Paulo state TIP 
office at the international airport assisted trafficked persons on 
arrival.  Based on bilateral agreements with a number of Brazil's 
neighbors and a multilateral agreement between the Mercosul member 
states, foreign trafficking victims have the same access to victim 
care facilities, as do domestic trafficking victims.  The government 
provides victims with counseling, clothing, witness protection, and 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  003 OF 010 
 
 
schooling for children. 
 
¶12. (SBU) ASBRAD, responsible for the Assistance Post for Deported 
and Non-admitted Persons, based at Guarulhos International Airport 
in Sao Paulo and working in cooperation with the MOJ and government 
of the state of Sao Paulo, provided assistance to Brazilian women 
and girls who were deported back to Brazil or refused admission 
overseas.  Ten percent of the cases demonstrated signs of human 
trafficking.  The organization purchased airfare to return victims 
to their homes, assisted them in filing charges against traffickers, 
and helped them locate police protection. 
 
Section C: 
---------- 
 
¶13.  Information to be provided. 
 
Section D: 
---------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) The Government in some cases grants residency status to 
trafficking victims.  The ILO implemented law enforcement and 
prosecution programs, and provided specialized training related to 
TIP for sexual exploitation and forced labor. 
 
¶15. (SBU) NGOs worked with Sentinela and the Program of Integrated 
and Reference Actions against Trafficking (PAIR).   PAIR assisted 
sex trafficking victims.  Catholic Relief Services and other 
religious organizations assisted trafficked slave labor victims. 
According to the CRS website, "CRS Brazil is working to eradicate 
slave labor through the regional program Trails to Liberty (Trilhas 
da Liberdade).  Trails to Liberty operates in the Northern states of 
Maranhao, Para, Piaui, and Tocatins, areas where recruitment of 
workers into slavery is most prevalent.  CRS works in tandem with 
national campaigns to raise public awareness and to encourage 
victims and the families of victims to report abuses to local and 
federal authorities.  In addition, it links government programs 
intended to eradicate slave labor in Brazil with local civil society 
and church organizations.  Trails to Liberty is supported by the 
U.S. Department of Labor and is being implemented through 
partnerships with various government and non-government 
organizations including Reporter Brasil, Caritas, the International 
Labor Organization, and the Brazilian Ministry for Agrarian 
Development." 
Section E: 
---------- 
 
¶16. (U) Information to be provided. 
 
Section F: 
---------- 
 
¶17. (U) Information to be provided. 
 
 
Section G: 
---------- 
 
¶18. (U) Information to be provided. 
 
 
Section H: 
---------- 
 
¶19. (SBU) The Sentinela program had a screening process for victims. 
 The Tutelary Councils and the Police Division for Children and 
Adolescents' Protection referred victims to the Sentinela Centers. 
In addition, state offices referred victims to NGOs that provided 
victim services and protective custody.  The government does not 
have a mechanism to screen for trafficking victims in the commercial 
sex trade because prostitution is legal and unregulated.  As a 
result, law enforcement officials do not have systematic access to 
commercial sex workers. 
 
Section I: 
---------- 
 
¶20.  (SBU) In general, the rights of victims were respected. 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  004 OF 010 
 
 
Victims were not usually detained, jailed, fined, or prosecuted for 
violations of law.  NGOs alleged that police often dismissed cases 
involving TIP victims of sexual exploitation.  The Federal Police 
have sought to improve their ability to identify TIP victims of 
sexual exploitation and process their cases through enhanced 
training of its officers.  According to UNODC some victims 
experience discrimination or prejudicial treatment due to the fact 
that they were prostitutes prior to being trafficked and therefore 
those providing assistance do not consider them victims. 
 
Section J: 
---------- 
 
¶21.  (SBU) The GOB encouraged victims to assist in TIP 
investigations and prosecutions, and victims could seek legal action 
against Brazilian traffickers.  Victims who were trafficked 
internationally for sexual exploitation could file suit, and they 
could seek legal redress through the Nucleos de Enfrentamento ao 
Trafico de Pessoas (Posts to Confront TIP) and the Special 
Secretariat of Human Rights in order to get prosecutors to seek 
punishment in their behalf.  Legally, if a victim was a material 
witness in a court case against a former employee, the victim could 
obtain other employment or leave the country.  However, in slave 
labor cases, landholders who abused laborers often used threats to 
prevent the victims from seeking legal redress. 
 
Section K: 
---------- 
 
¶22.  (SBU) The GOB provided specialized training to assist GOB 
officials in recognizing trafficking for all victims, and under the 
Brazilian Constitution all victims are equal. The MOJ and Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs worked together to train diplomats that see a 
high volume of TIP cases.  The GOB urged its embassies and 
consulates to develop ongoing relationships with NGOs that assist 
TIP victims. 
 
¶23.  (SBU) The Federal Police and the Federal Highway Police 
continue specialized TIP training for their officers.  The training 
is intensive and other GOB ministries, NGOs, civil society groups, 
international organizations, and USAID provide instruction and or 
sponsorship for the seminars.  USAID's participation is ensured 
through March 2009. 
 
Section L 
--------- 
 
¶24. (U) Information to be provided. 
 
Section M 
--------- 
 
¶25.  (SBU) The Global Alliance Against Trafficking in Women (GAATW), 
the Foundation Against Trafficking in Women, and the International 
Human Rights Law Group provided assistance to trafficked persons. 
Since 1999, these NGOs have defined Human Rights Standards (HRS) for 
the treatment of trafficked persons with the assistance of 
international TIP agreements.  The HRS attempt to promote the 
respect of human rights for TIP victims, including those involved in 
involuntary forced labor schemes.  The HRS were also used as a guide 
to provide assistance to female TIP victims and take legal action 
against traffickers.  The USG worked with a number of local 
organizations to improve shelters, strengthen emergency health and 
rehabilitation services, and train law enforcement and judicial 
agencies. 
 
¶26.  (SBU) With USAID assistance, Partners of the Americas 
strengthened social service delivery networks to assist TIP and 
sexual exploitation victims and improve shelter facilities; foster 
family re-integration; combat sex tourism; and develop economic 
alternatives for rescued TIP victims.  Eight shelters in the cities 
of Manaus, Sao Luis, Natal, Fortaleza, Sao Paulo, Foz do Iguacu and 
Rio de Janeiro received assistance.  Over 1,500 professionals 
including psychologists, social assistants, and teachers received 
training in 2006.  USAID and Partners support for the program ended 
in 2007. 
 
---------- 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  005 OF 010 
 
 
PREVENTION 
---------- 
 
(NOTE:  Answers correspond to questions in ref A, para. 27.  END 
NOTE) 
 
Section A: 
---------- 
 
¶27. (SBU) The GOB continued several anti-trafficking campaigns.  The 
Special Secretariat for Human Rights conducted anti-trafficking 
information campaigns using TV, Radio, Internet, banners, and 
car-stickers, among other media.  The National Secretariat for 
Justice continued to lead a governmental public awareness campaign 
to deter international traffickers and increase awareness among 
potential victim populations.  In conjunction with the UNODC, the 
GOB conducted a campaign that included radio ads and large posters 
stating "first they take your passport, then your freedom" in 
airports around the country. The second phase of the campaign, which 
included the creation of a separate database and police and 
prosecutor training, began in late 2006.  According to ICE, in 2008 
the Federal Police created a central database to collect and analyze 
allegations of child exploitation and all other human rights 
violations including child pornography, TIP, and forced labor.  As 
of 2009 the Brazilian Government had created a separate fund for 
this program's purpose and they are in the process of determining 
who should manage the design and coordination of the project 
database.  The GOB's November 2008 law enforcement training seminar 
in Brasilia included training on screening for victims on the 
borders. 
 
¶28.  (U) In 2008, the MOJ, in partnership with UNODC, initiated an 
awards program for university students to recognize the best ideas 
to combat TIP.  The program was one of the goals of the National 
Plan to Combat TIP.  On December 10, 2008, the MOJ presented the 
first winners of the Libertas Prize with cash awards for monographs 
on TIP.  USD equivalent value for the prizes were: in the graduate 
student category, 4000 for first place, 2800 for second, 2000 for 
third; and in the undergraduate category, 2000 for first, 1200 for 
second, and 800 for third.  All six winners were women, and their 
essays dealt with migration, prostitution, slave labor, trafficking 
in women, juridical-penal aspects, and international relations. 
 
Section B: 
---------- 
 
¶29. (SBU) Brazil's coasts and borders are extensive, and 
particularly in remote areas monitoring those borders was difficult 
for the GOB.  Brazil's federal police maintained immigration and 
border control services.  Border agents were beginning to screen 
potential victims at border crossings.  In 2006, (Sao Paulo) and 
2007 (Rio) the MOJ established offices in Brazil's international 
airports in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro to coordinate with the 
Federal Police to identify possible trafficking victims and assist 
repatriating TIP victims. 
 
¶30. (SBU) Since December 2006, the Guarulhos Airport office (located 
in Sao Paulo) has attended to deported persons and non-admitted 
individuals.  Training sessions regarding TIP were conducted at the 
airport, and were attended by persons involved in various aspects of 
airport security.  Attendees included employees of the Federal 
Police, the National Airport Infrastructure Agency, National Health 
Surveillance Agency, Civil Police, Military Police, and staff from 
national airline companies. 
 
Section C: 
---------- 
 
¶31.  (SBU) As directed by the National Policy to Confront 
Trafficking in Persons and detailed in the National Work Plan to 
Combat Trafficking in Persons, the MOJ chairs the interagency group 
of 15 federal ministries and agencies involved in the fight against 
TIP.  It is also responsible for outreach to NGOs and International 
Organizations and coordinating their participation in the 
implementation of the work plan.  The Ministry of Exterior Relations 
in consultation with the MOJ is responsible for coordinating all 
international and multilateral TIP matters. 
 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  006 OF 010 
 
 
¶32. (U) ILO Brazil has a national partnership with 200 companies 
that signed a National Pact against Forced Labor; 40 signed in 2008. 
 These companies agree not to do business or lend credit to 
companies or suppliers listed on the dirty list of companies known 
to use forced labor within their supply chain.  On March 18 a 
National Seminar will be held to discuss the monitoring and progress 
as well as what type of evidence is needed to break contracts with 
companies found to be using forced labor supply chains.  In 2009, 
the ILO plans to meet with U.S. corporations that may have Brazilian 
slave labor in their supply chains to ensure awareness and seek 
cooperation through the National Pact.  Per the ILO, they have seen 
positive results from many companies that are now aware of slave 
labor and no longer willing to do business with known slave labor 
users. 
 
¶33. (SBU) ILO currently has funds through July to focus on these 
issues.  They are studying ILO Conventions for migrant rights, 
supporting migration council, and looking at legalization of regular 
migrants, how are they brought into Brazil and are their rights 
respected.  In partnership with G/TIP and the civil police they are 
creating a national database.  As it is easier to convict on charges 
other than TIP, TIP cases are often prosecuted on other grounds. 
The goal is to provide the necessary data so that authorities can 
prosecute under TIP laws. 
 
¶34. (U) In Sept 2008, the National Commission to Eradicate Forced 
Labor (CONATRAE) approved the second National Plan to Eradicate 
Forced Labor, with efforts planned over the next two years.  The 
CONATRAE has existed since 2004 and its composition includes 
governmental agencies, NGOs and international organizations. 
 
Section D: 
---------- 
 
¶35. (SBU) The National Work Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons 
was released publicly at a high-profile ceremony and press event in 
January 2008.  The plan was subsequently disseminated by publication 
in the public record, press releases, and brochures. 
 
¶36. (SBU) The MOJ, in coordination with the Special Secretariat for 
Women's Affairs, and the Special Secretariat for Human Rights, is 
responsible for leading the GOB's effort to implement its national 
anti-TIP work plan.  Overall, the following branches of government 
were involved in the development of the national anti-TIP plan and 
are now involved in its implementation:  the MOJ, the Special 
Secretariat for Human Rights, the Secretariat for Women's Affairs, 
the Secretariat for the Promotion of Racial Equality, the 
President's Civil House, the Ministry of Social Development and the 
Fight Against Hunger, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Labor, 
the Ministry of Agrarian Development, the Ministry of Education, the 
Ministry of Exterior Relations, the Ministry of Tourism, the 
Ministry of Culture, and the Attorney General. 
 
¶37. (SBU) The GOB acknowledged domestic and international human 
trafficking within the country.  As a result, the President of 
Brazil signed the National Policy to Confront Trafficking in Persons 
(PNETP) in October 2006, with the goal of preventing trafficking in 
persons.  A working group was established to develop a national plan 
to fulfill that policy, including members from every major element 
of the federal government, to be coordinated by the Special 
Secretariat for Women's Affairs, the Special Secretariat for Human 
Rights, and the MOJ.  A written work plan was released publicly in 
January 2008 and implementation has begun under the overall 
leadership of the MOJ. 
 
¶38. (SBU) In 2008, the government inaugurated five Posts to Confront 
Trafficking in Persons ("Nucleos de enfrentamento ao trafico de 
pessoas"), located in states with significant trafficking risks, 
including Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo, Pernambuco, Para, and Goias. 
Their purpose is to prevent trafficking, assist victims, and 
identify perpetrators.  They are located in neighborhoods with a 
high crime rate, and include a social worker, a psychologist and a 
legal adviser. 
 
¶39.  (SBU) The GOB, NGOs, and international organizations continued 
to work together in a close and cooperative effort to combat TIP. 
NGOs and other elements of civil society were welcome and productive 
participants in the working group that formulated and drafted the 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  007 OF 010 
 
 
national anti-TIP work plan that was released in January 2008 and 
they are now involved in the implementation phase of that plan. 
 
 
¶40.  (SBU) The National Commission for the Eradication of Slave 
Labor (Conatrae) coordinated government efforts to end forced labor, 
and received in November the continued support of the UN and the 
ILO.  The group's enforcement arm, the Special Group for Mobile 
Inspection, had responsibility for locating and freeing victims of 
forced labor.  The mobile unit worked in conjunction with federal 
police officers who always accompanied labor investigators to 
provide protection.  Mobile teams levied fines on estate owners 
using forced labor and required employers to provide back pay and 
benefits to workers before returning the workers to their 
municipalities of origin.  Although mobile units enjoyed some 
success in freeing workers in forced labor conditions, inspectors 
also faced resistance.  CONATRAE, a group composed of various law, 
labor, and agricultural NGOs, pointed to the increasing numbers of 
civil actions against employers of slave labor and the dirty list of 
employers as successes, and examples of the strides made during the 
past several years. 
 
¶41. (SBU) There was strong cooperation between NGOs, international 
organizations, and the GOB to combat sexual exploitation and 
trafficking of children.  NGOs, international organizations and 
governmental organizations were networking to combat sexual 
exploitation and trafficking in persons.  Each month, the Special 
Secretariat of Human Rights coordinated a meeting of the 
Inter-sectoral Commission to Combat Sexual Exploitation, with 
representatives of different ministries, Federal Police, Federal 
Highway Police, international organizations, and NGOs working 
together to define strategies and priorities. 
 
¶42.  (SBU) Moreover, the Ministry of Education continued to work in 
partnership with the Special Secretariat of Human Rights on the 
"School that Protects" program to train teachers to prevent violence 
against children (including sexual violence and trafficking) and to 
assure that child victims of violence returned to school. 
 
Section E: 
---------- 
 
¶43. (U) In 2008 several state governments joined with federal 
agencies including the SNJ, the Economic Development Secretariat, 
the Tourism Ministry, the Federal Public Ministry, the Sao Paulo 
State Secretariat of Justice, the Sao Paulo Municipal Human Rights 
Council, and others in the Cooperation Agreement to Combat Sex 
Tourism program whose purpose is to prevent sex tourism by specific 
actions timed to major events throughout the year such as the 
Formula One race in Sao Paulo and the annual carnival celebrations. 
 
 
¶44.  (SBU) The Ministry of Tourism, continued efforts to broaden the 
campaign "Quem ama, protege" (he who loves, protects) to many 
countries in South America (Brazil, Chile, Argentina, Bolivia, 
Colombia, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela, Ecuador, Suriname and 
Guyana).  Focusing on the prevention of sexual exploitation of 
children and adolescents in the tourism sector, this campaign will 
be broadcast in Portuguese, Spanish, English and Dutch. 
 
¶45.  (SBU) The Ministry of Tourism and the Special Secretariat for 
Human Rights supported the World Vision campaign to combat 
commercial sexual exploitation of children and adolescents.  The 
slogan: "Abuse a child in this country and go to jail in yours," was 
part of the campaign in Rio de Janeiro, Recife, Fortaleza, Belo 
Horizonte, Sao Paulo, Salvador, Belem e Manaus. 
 
¶46.  (SBU) The Special Secretariat for Human Rights together with 
the UNICEF and Petrobras continued a campaign to combat commercial 
sexual exploitation on the highways.  Its main objective was to 
raise awareness of commercial sexual exploitation of children and 
adolescents among truck drivers.  In addition, the Federal Highway 
Police intensified efforts to patrol and monitor truck stops and 
roadside business establishments with the stated intention of 
attacking and diminishing commercial sexual exploitation.  Federal 
Highway Police training and operations placed a special emphasis on 
combating the commercial exploitation of children and adolescents 
along the nation's highways. 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  008 OF 010 
 
 
 
¶47.  (SBU) Every year during the Carnival season, a number of 
Ministries including the Ministries of Justice, Tourism, and Women, 
and the National Human Rights Secretariat launch anti-sex 
trafficking and tourism campaigns.  The 2008 campaign included 
public service messages on television, radio, and over the Internet, 
not to mention ads placed in magazines, newspapers, and on public 
billboards. 
 
¶48. (U) According to the Special Secretariat for Human Rights, 
Disque Denuncia 100, the hotline to report abuse and sexual 
exploitation of children and adolescents, calls related to sex 
tourism numbered 11,365 in the 2007-08 period, while in the previous 
two year period there were 3,551 such calls.  The total for calls of 
all types in November 2008 was 2500 per day.  In the five and a half 
year period from May 2003 to October 2008 57.84 percent of calls 
concerned sex abuse, 40.37 percent commercial sex exploitation, 1.79 
percent pornography, and 0.79 percent trafficking in children and 
adolescents.  (Source: Special Secretariat of Human Rights, cited in 
Folha de S. Paulo, 11/26/08 and 1/16/09.) 
 
¶49. (SBU) In addition, USAID-supported campaign activities directed 
towards marine transportation workers were implemented along with 
labor unions and employer organizations.  This program is ongoing 
and was expanded to five neighboring countries.  Campaigns directed 
towards the general population included mobilization for the 
National Day against Sexual Exploitation (May 18) and its 
repercussion countrywide. 
 
¶50. (SBU) The Sentinela program, a nationwide Ministry of Social 
Development project, assisted TIP victims of commercial sexual 
exploitation and TIP, and distributed information about sex tourism 
and underage prostitution.  A number of local and international 
NGOs, organizations, and groups worked with local schools throughout 
the country to teach children and adolescents about trafficking 
dangers. 
 
Section F: 
---------- 
 
¶51. (SBU) There was strong cooperation between NGOs, international 
organizations, and the GOB to combat sexual exploitation and 
trafficking of children.  NGOs, international organizations and 
governmental organizations were networking to combat sexual 
exploitation and trafficking in persons.  Each month, the Special 
Secretariat of Human Rights coordinated a meeting of the 
Inter-sectoral Commission to Combat Sexual Exploitation, with 
representatives of different ministries, Federal Police, Federal 
Highway Police, international organizations, and NGOs working 
together to define strategies and priorities. 
 
Section G: 
---------- 
 
¶52.  (SBU) Brazil has a sizable peacekeeping (PKO) contingent in 
Haiti and a few troops assigned to other UN peacekeeping missions 
elsewhere in the world.  The Government of Brazil has a generic 
troop training plan for all military personnel deploying to PKOs (UN 
tasks, Rules of Engagement (ROE), law of war, etc.) and they 
coordinate that with mission-specific training.  The Brazilian 
military does not have training related to TIP for peacekeeping 
personnel. 
 
---------- 
TIP HEROES 
---------- 
 
¶53.  (SBU) Post would again like to nominate Mr. Leonardo Sakamoto 
and the Non-Governmental Organization that he heads, Reporter 
Brasil, as TIP Heroes for 2008.  Mr. Sakamoto and his organization 
continued their extraordinary efforts to raise GOB and public 
awareness of the existence of various forms of Trafficking in 
Persons in Brazil, especially forced labor, through a series of 
press articles, instructional seminars, involvement in GOB anti-TIP 
training activities, and numerous public speaking engagements - 
including Mr. Sakamoto's address to participants in an anti-slave 
labor workshop and hearing held by a U.S. Congressional subcommittee 
in late 2007.  In addition, Reporter Brasil, represented by Mr. 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  009 OF 010 
 
 
Sakamoto, served as one of the key civil society participants in the 
drafting and implementation of the GOB's new anti-TIP National Work 
Plan.  Sakamoto and his staff have tirelessly chronicled the 
practice of forced labor in Brazil, promoted the establishment and 
use of the "Dirty List" of those individuals and businesses that use 
forced labor, and fearlessly denounced the wealthy and influential 
who appear on that list to ensure that they cannot continue to 
exploit workers with impunity.  Mr. Sakamoto and his staff put in 
long hours, travel throughout Brazil constantly, and carry out their 
work under harsh conditions in remote parts of the country and at 
considerable risk from those opposed to their work.  (NOTE:  Name 
checks at post revealed no derogatory information on Mr. Sakamoto. 
END NOTE) 
 
-------------- 
BEST PRACTICES 
-------------- 
 
¶54.  (SBU) Post would like to draw attention to the Government of 
Brazil's use of the "Dirty List" to hit individuals and businesses 
that utilize slave/forced labor where it hurts - in the pocketbook. 
Specifically, the GOB provides the "Dirty List" to private banking 
associations that in turn deny perpetrators credit so as not to have 
their good names and reputations sullied by association with those 
who make use of slave labor in their industrial or agricultural 
activities.  Ministry of Labor officials measure the success and 
effectiveness of the program by the high number of law suits being 
brought against the Ministry by those found guilty of using 
slave/forced labor in an effort to have their name or their 
company's name removed from the list. 
 
---------------------- 
ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS 
---------------------- 
 
Mission Points of Contact on TIP 
------------------------------- 
 
¶55.  (SBU) Mr. Peter G. Tinsley, Labor Attache, U.S. Embassy 
Brasilia, is the Mission's TIP Coordinator.  His contact information 
is as follows: 
 
Name:  Peter Geoffrey Tinsley 
Title: Labor Attache 
Telephone Number: (55)(61) 3312-7343 
Fax Number: (55)(61) 3312-7650 
E-Mail Address:  TinsleyP@state.gov 
Note that Mr. Tinsley will depart post in summer 2009. 
 
Karine Moreno-Taxman, Resident Legal Adviser, is vice-chair of the 
Mission's TIP Working Group. 
Telephone: Number: (55-61) 3312-7125 
Fax Number: (55)(61) 3312-7650 
E-mail address: TaxmanKM@state.gov 
 
Production of the Ninth Annual TIP Report for Brazil was supervised 
by: 
 
Dale Prince, Political Officer 
Telephone (55-61) 3312-7355 
Fax Number: (55-61) 3312-7650 
E-Mail address: princed@state.gov 
 
Hours Spent on Report 
--------------------- 
 
¶56. (SBU) Lisa Kubiske, Deputy Chief of Mission, two hours, 
editing. 
 
Stephen M. Liston, Political Counselor, two hours, reviewing and 
editing. 
 
Dale T. Prince, approximately 138 hours total reading instructions, 
researching, interviewing, drafting, editing, and checking facts. 
 
Meribeth Culver, PAS, 30 hours researching, interviewing, drafting, 
and checking facts. 
 
 
BRASILIA 00000251  010 OF 010 
 
 
Daniel Parrilha, four hours, researching. 
 
Brian Heslop, intern, 10 hours total, researching, checking facts. 
 
James Story, Pol-Econ chief, Sao Paulo, two hours, editing. 
 
David Brooks, Political officer, Sao Paulo, two hours, reviewing and 
editing. 
 
Mariluz Hogan, ICE Attache, two hours, information sharing and 
fact-checking. 
 
Ernest Baca, ICE Attache, two hours, reviewing. 
 
Karine Taxman-Moreno, Resident Legal Adviser, 10 hours, information 
sharing and editing. 
 
David Brassanini, FBI Legal Attache, two hours: collection, 
verification and sharing of law enforcement facts. 
 
Alisson Nascimento, USAID At-Risk Youth Program, one hour, gathering 
information, checking facts. 
 
SOBEL