09JAKARTA378
INDONESIA -- ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 2009
Wed Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO8807
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDT RUEHGI RUEHJS RUEHKUK
RUEHLH RUEHPB RUEHPW RUEHROV
DE RUEHJA #0378/01 0630817
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 040817Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1705
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 2030
RUEAWJB/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC//COMMAND CENTER
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 19 JAKARTA 000378 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS, G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM EAP/RSP; NSC 
FOR EPHU 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF ELAM EAID ID
SUBJECT: INDONESIA -- ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 2009 
 
REF:  A) STATE 132759 
      B) JAKARTA 105 
 
¶1.  (U) This message was coordinated with Consulate General Surabaya 
and Consulate Medan. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) OVERVIEW:  The past year did not witness significant 
change in overall trafficking patterns in Indonesia.  There is a 
continuous trend of Indonesians seeking work abroad as high 
unemployment and poverty pushes workers overseas.  Cases of severe 
abuse of Indonesians trafficked abroad continued unabated.  END 
OVERVIEW. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Indonesia passed all the implementing 
regulations required under the comprehensive 2007 anti-trafficking 
law.  For the third year in a row, police arrests increased, up 15 
percent in 2008 over 2007.  However, prosecutions dropped 32 percent 
and convictions fell 15 percent.  Police and the Manpower Ministry 
continued to shut down manpower brokers involved in trafficking 
although protection of migrant workers remained weak. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Jakarta police intensified cooperation with RSO Jakarta in 
investigating trafficking syndicates to the United States, resulting 
in efforts which addressed trafficking across the board.  The 
Department of Justice's Office of Overseas Prosecutorial Development 
Assistance and Training (DOJ/OPDAT) also conducted training, for the 
first time integrating the full range of GOI agencies involved in 
fighting trafficking. Progress continued in fighting 
trafficking-related corruption, including the arrest and prosecution 
of several immigration officials.  Law enforcement and increased 
awareness pushed traffickers to target victims from more isolated 
areas. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Manpower Minister gave prominent public attention to 
trafficking by meeting with victims in Malaysia and by holding talks 
with counterparts on preventing trafficking in border areas between 
Indonesia and Malaysia.  The media and public information campaigns 
gave widespread attention to trafficking with a barrage of publicity 
across the country.  Provincial and local governments significantly 
increased efforts and resources to fight trafficking nationwide. 
Overseas, Indonesian embassies and consulates were very proactive in 
rescuing and assisting victims, with strong leadership from the 
Foreign Ministry. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) However, some serious roadblocks to fighting trafficking 
remained in place.  The GOI showed little political will to 
renegotiate an MOU with Malaysia which ceded basic workers' rights 
to hold their travel documents.  Exploitation of workers by manpower 
placement companies continued to be widespread despite police and 
Manpower Ministry action, due to insufficient regulation.  The 
decentralized approach to rescuing, treating and reintegrating 
victims has hindered implementation of the law due to lack of 
central direction and funding to assist victims.  The national 
budget for trafficking remained far below needs.  There was little 
progress in stopping officials from abetting trafficking in 
prostitution.  No action was taken to protect women and children 
entrapped in debt bondage as domestic servants within Indonesia, 
although the GOI publicly recognized this as a major issue in 2008. 
Domestic servants have fallen into a crack in the law enforcement 
system with no authorities taking action to protect them from 
trafficking. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Indonesia needs to take the following actions to make 
further headway in curbing trafficking: 
 
--Greatly accelerate efforts to combat the corruption that feeds 
trafficking, particularly among law enforcement officials and 
manpower officials. 
 
--Increase GOI funding for law enforcement against traffickers and 
for rescue, recovery and reintegration of victims. 
 
--Increase efforts to regulate recruiters.  Not only should the GOI 
actively monitor recruiters and investigate complaints but it should 
set standards for the terms of recruiting agreements such as the 
levels of fees charged to the workers. These high fee agreements can 
sometimes lead to debt bondage. 
 
--Pursue better cooperation with receiving countries in combating 
trafficking. 
 
--Better protect domestic workers within Indonesia, particularly 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  002 OF 019 
 
 
children, through enforcement of existing laws. 
 
 --Ensure that the newly formed task forces are functional, 
well-funded and that the coordination from a local to national level 
is effective.  In particular, at the national level, there should be 
a greater sharing of responsibility between national departments and 
agency members of the National Task Force.  Currently, the Ministry 
of Women's Empowerment is bearing a disproportionate burden of 
implementing trafficking activities in Indonesia and does not have 
to resources or capacity to effectively bear this burden.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
SOURCES 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The U.S. Mission in Indonesia received information from 
the following sources:  the Indonesian National Police (INP) which 
provided a report in February 2008, "Law Enforcement Against 
Trafficking in Persons" as well as detailed data on investigations 
and arrests; the Ministry of Women's Empowerment which provided 
comprehensive information of national efforts; the Attorney 
General's Office (AGO); the Manpower and Transmigration Ministry 
(the Manpower Ministry); the Department of Foreign Affairs, Office 
of Overseas Manpower Protection; and a number of local government 
offices.  International and domestic NGOs also provided information, 
in particular the American Center for International Labor Solidarity 
(ACILS), International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the 
International Labor Organization (ILO). 
 
¶9.  (U) The report text follows the general outline of themes and 
questions provided in ref A instructions. 
 
¶10.  (U) The Jakarta Mission point of contact on the TIP issue is 
Deputy Political Counselor and Labor Attache Stanley Harsha, tel. 
(62) 21-3435-9146, fax (62) 21-3435-9116. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Report text follows: 
 
----------------------------------------- 
¶I.  OVERVIEW OF INDONESIA'S ACTIVITIES TO 
    ELIMINATE TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
The past year did not witness significant change in overall 
trafficking patterns in Indonesia.  There is a continuous trend of 
Indonesians seeking work abroad as high unemployment and poverty 
pushes workers overseas.  Cases of severe abuse of Indonesians 
trafficked abroad continued unabated. 
 
INDONESIA FACES SIGNIFICANT TRAFFICKING CRIMES 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
Indonesia, a developing country and emerging democracy with the 
world's fourth largest population, is a place of origin for a 
significant number of internationally trafficked women and children, 
and to a lesser extent men.  Indonesia is also a transit and 
destination country for international trafficking, although foreign 
victims are very small in number relative to Indonesian victims. 
Very significant incidents of trafficking occur within Indonesia's 
borders, including for prostitution.  Different regions of the 
country are identifiable as sending, transiting and/or receiving 
areas for internal as well as international trafficking.  There were 
no reports during this period of trafficking in territory outside of 
GOI control. 
 
SOURCE REGIONS 
-------------- 
 
All provinces of Indonesia are both sources and destinations. 
Primary origin areas include: Java, West Kalimantan, Lampung, North 
Sumatra, South Sumatra, Banten, South Sulawesi, West Nusa Tenggara 
and East Nusa Tenggara.  One NGO reported a small number of persons 
(seven documented) trafficked from Aceh Province, a disturbing new 
development given the large number of children in Aceh affected by 
earlier conflict and the 2005 tsunami. 
 
TRANSIT AREAS 
------------- 
 
Primary transit areas are:  Jakarta, Surabaya, Bali, Batam, North 
Sumatra, West Sumatra, border areas of Kalimantan and various 
islands in eastern Indonesia.  Domestic routes varied. 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  003 OF 019 
 
 
 
DESTINATIONS 
------------ 
 
Primary domestic destinations are:  Java, Bali, North Sumatra, East 
Kalimantan and Papua.  A disturbing trend in recent years has been 
an increase in trafficking of young girls, many under age 18, from 
North Sulawesi, West Kalimantan, and Papua, where they were sexually 
exploited in areas with rich extractive industries, according to 
NGOs. A Manado-based NGO reported that more than 80 girls were 
trafficked from North Sulawesi between January and September 2007, 
an average of two girls per week. In 2008, NGOs in Timika, Papua 
province, located near a large mine, NGO research found between 
100-200 women and girls trafficked to bars and a red light district. 
 Girls from North Sulawesi and Jawa were promised legitimate 
well-paying jobs as waitresses and then forced into prostitution. 
Many were under age 18.  Local government officials took little 
action against this trafficking, with only four cases prosecuted and 
one brought to court. 
 
Internationally, following are the primary destinations in rough 
order of magnitude based on 2005-2009 IOM data of rescued victims: 
Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Japan, Syria, Kuwait, and Iraq. 
Other destinations include:  Taiwan, Thailand, Macau, Hong Kong, 
UEA, Qatar, Mauritius, Yemen, Palestine, Egypt, France, Belgium, 
Germany, Cyprus, Spain, Holland and the United States. 
 
In the latter half of 2007, an RSO investigation working with 
Jakarta police uncovered trafficking operations to the U.S. 
 
TYPES OF WORKERS EXPLOITED 
-------------------------- 
 
Men and boys, women and girls, are all widely trafficked. IOM data 
revealed the following breakdown of the victims it assisted:  55 
percent domestic workers, 15 percent sex workers, and 5 percent 
plantation workers.  Under three percent each were waitresses, 
construction workers, shopkeepers, nannies, fishermen, masseuses, 
and cultural dancers.  Females comprised 89 percent and males 11 
percent; 75 percent were adults 25 percent were children. 
 
CHILDREN 
-------- 
 
As outlined in the Mission's 2008 Worst Form of Child Labor Report 
(ref B), children are trafficked for a variety of purposes, but 
primarily into domestic servitude, prostitution, rural agriculture 
and cottage industries.  According to a study by Human Rights Watch 
published in February 2009, many girls under age 18, and even under 
age 15, work long hours - typically 14-16 hours a day at low wages 
as domestic servants.  They are oftentimes under perpetual debt 
bondage due to pay advances given to the children's families by 
brokers.  The problem is hidden because children work under lock and 
key.  So-called "foundations" are commonly used as fronts for 
trafficking children as domestic servants.  In 2007, one NGO 
identified 
285 child domestic workers in Bandung and 305 in Surabaya under age 
17, mostly under age 15. 
 
A child rights activist rescued teenagers in illegal logging camps 
in the jungles of West Kalimantan in 2008. Girls aged 13-17 were 
lured with promises of employment as waitresses or maids, and then 
sexually enslaved, servicing loggers, their bosses and forestry 
officials. 
 
 
RELIABLE STATISTICS UNAVAILABLE 
------------------------------- 
 
Reliable statistics or estimates of the overall number of 
victims--including number of prostitutes and child victims--are 
unavailable. 
 
TRAFFICKING CONDITIONS, METHODS 
------------------------------- 
 
For internal trafficking into the sex trade, traffickers used debt 
bondage, violence, intimidation, drug addiction, and withholding of 
documents to keep women and children in prostitution.  Traffickers 
employ a variety of means to attract and hold victims, including 
promises of well-paying jobs, debt bondage, community or family 
pressures, threats of violence, rape, and false marriages.  For 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  004 OF 019 
 
 
example, women who escaped from forced prostitution in Batam, Papua 
and Malaysia commonly related that traffickers recruited the young 
women with offers of jobs in restaurants, supermarkets or as 
domestic servants. Once at their destination, traffickers used 
violence and rape to force them into the sex trade.  Migrant worker 
recruiters also use misrepresentation and debt bondage to traffic 
men and women. 
 
Police found in 2008 that traffickers are now occasionally 
kidnapping victims.  They are drugged, transferred by car through 
the border areas from Indonesia to Malaysia and then sexually 
exploited.  For example, a junior high school student was kidnapped 
by five masked men in Lampung, Sumatra in June 2008. The victim was 
drugged and taken to Jakarta with three other victims from West Java 
and sent to Malaysia, where she eventually escaped from a brothel. 
 
 
Another new method which police discovered in 2008 was recruiting 
victims through schools.  Brokers sent schools official-looking 
letters offering internship programs to students.  For example, 16 
students from a vocational school in Bulukumba, South Sulawesi were 
offered an internship on a cruise ship but ended up being enslaved 
on a fishing boat, working 23 hours a day without salary.  Teachers 
at this school were implicated in this case. Some students in 
vocational school in Banyuwangi and Surabaya, both in East Java, 
also received similar offers.  This method is difficult to 
distinguish from legitimate internships. 
 
Debt bondage is particularly common in the sex trade.  Indonesian 
women and girls trafficked into prostitution in Batam, Riau, for 
example, commonly began with a debt of USD600-1,200.  Given the 
constant accumulation of other debts, women and girls are often 
unable to repay these amounts, even after years of work as 
prostitutes. 
 
Some migrant workers, often female, also entered trafficking 
situations during their attempt to find work abroad through migrant 
worker recruiting companies (PJTKI).  Licensed and unlicensed 
companies used debt bondage, withholding of documents and 
confinement in locked premises to keep migrant workers in holding 
centers, sometimes for periods of many months.  Some also used 
threats of violence to maintain control over prospective migrant 
workers. 
 
Traffickers took advantage of persons in impoverished regions. 
While poverty plays a leading role in facilitating trafficking, poor 
educational opportunities, cultural factors and established 
trafficking networks also acted as important determinants.  For 
example, in Indramayu, West Java, some farming communities have 
adopted a widely accepted practice of selling girls into 
prostitution in Japan in order for families to accumulate material 
possessions, a cycle which has proven difficult to break. 
 
Indonesians sometimes arrive legally in one country, for example 
Malaysia, and then are provided with false documentation and lured 
to more remote locations, such as the Middle East and Europe, where 
they are trafficked. 
 
TRAFFICKERS 
----------- 
 
Traffickers fit many different profiles.  Some worked in larger 
mafia-like organizations, particularly for trafficking into major 
prostitution areas.  Others operated as small or family-run 
businesses.  In many instances, local community leaders and parents 
of victims assisted in trafficking. 
 
Some manpower brokers operated similar to trafficking rings, leading 
both male and female workers into debt bondage, abusive employment 
situations and other trafficking situations.  Some of the offending 
manpower companies held official licenses.  Others operated 
illegally or appeared to be fronts for traffickers. 
 
RSO Jakarta uncovered new trafficking syndicates in 2008 using these 
techniques to traffic workers to the U.S.  These syndicates provided 
victims with false documents to procure visas to the U.S., after 
which they were turned over to agents in the U.S. who used debt 
bondage to enslave the victims. 
 
OFFICIAL COMPLICITY 
------------------- 
 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  005 OF 019 
 
 
Enforcement of the new anti-trafficking law deterred local officials 
from issuing false documentation for trafficking purposes, thus 
greatly inhibiting the ability of traffickers to obtain false 
documents. Some individual members of the security forces were 
complicit in trafficking, particularly by providing protection to 
brothels and prostitution fronts in discos, karaoke bars and hotels, 
or by receiving bribes to turn a blind eye to such crimes. 
 
DATA ON PROSTITUTION 
-------------------- 
 
Prostitution constitutes a major source of concern for TIP in 
Indonesia due to the number of women and children involved; the 
clandestine, abusive and often forced nature of this work; the 
prevalence of organized crime; and the frequent awareness and/or 
complicity of officials and security forces (police and military) in 
prostitution.  There is no reliable data on the number of girls and 
women forced into prostitution through debt bondage but the numbers 
are significant. 
 
GOI officials and NGOs often criticized police officers as too 
passive in combating trafficking absent specific complaints. 
Although police were often aware of underage prostitutes or other 
trafficking situations, they frequently did not intervene to protect 
victims or arrest probable traffickers without specific reports from 
third parties. Police in some areas facilitated and accepted at face 
value efforts by pimps to obtain written statements by prostitutes, 
which "verified" that the prostitutes were of adult age and had 
consented to their roles.  Police in some areas generally accepted 
trafficking situations, whether out of lack of awareness of 
trafficking as a crime, their involvement in trafficking, or lack of 
police resources for operations. 
 
INDONESIAN VICTIMS IN MALAYSIA 
------------------------------ 
 
Malaysia is commonly identified as the country receiving the 
greatest number of Indonesian trafficking victims.  An oversupply of 
Indonesian women and girls in Malaysia results in placement agencies 
in Malaysia offering incentives to more families to hire foreign 
maids, including offering the employer recovery of fees from the 
employee through wage reductions.  The first five months of wages 
are commonly deducted. 
 
IOM reported that from March 2005 to January 2009, 71 percent of 
female victims rescued from overseas had chlamydia, and a 
significant proportion had other STDs, including 4 percent who were 
HIV positive. 
 
A 2006 bilateral MOU between Indonesia and Malaysia failed to give 
adequate protection to Indonesian migrant workers, opening the door 
to abuse.  The agreement allows employers to hold workers' passports 
restricting their freedom to return home, allows monthly deductions 
of up to 50 percent of negotiated wages to repay loans and advances, 
and does not specify time off.  The GOI has demonstrated little 
political will to address this issue. 
 
"CULTURAL PERFORMERS" IN JAPAN 
------------------------------ 
 
GOI stopped permitting Indonesian women to travel to Japan and South 
Korea as "cultural performers" in June 2006, thus curtailing a 
practice that led to victims being trafficked under this guise. 
However, in 2008, traffickers increasingly used false documents, 
including passports, to obtain tourist visas for young girls who are 
forced into prostitution in Japan to repay a debt.  The false 
documentation makes it all the more difficult for them to escape 
from sexual slavery.  However, the Japanese government stepped up 
law enforcement cooperation with GOI in 2008 to prevent girls being 
trafficked to Japan. 
 
Taiwan 
------ 
 
Trafficking of young girls to Taiwan - mainly from West 
Kalimantan - persisted in 2008.  Traffickers used false marriage 
licenses and phony marriage photos for the girls to obtain visas. 
While many marriages are legitimate, many girls and women also are 
forced into prostitution. 
 
Middle East 
----------- 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  006 OF 019 
 
 
 
Large-scale trafficking to the Middle East persists, Saudi Arabia 
being the worst offender.   Victims from Saudi Arabia typically 
return extremely brutalized and report that they have no protection 
from exploitation and abuse in Saudi Arabia.  For example, one 
victim was beaten to death and sent home in a coffin with no 
explanation in 2008.  Another women, Keni Binti Carda, was burned 
with an iron, stabbed through the tongue and forced to eat feces 
before being sent home in early 2009 without and opportunity to 
report her abuse to authorities.  Many Muslim girls are lured to 
Saudi Arabia with promises of a good salary and the opportunity to 
make a pilgrimage to Mecca, a dream far beyond their financial 
means.  An increasing trend is for Saudi employers to contract out 
their domestic servants to several households, withhold wages, and 
then find an excuse to return the worker home unpaid. 
 
The UAE, Jordan and Iraq are also destination countries, though 
others exist.  Dozens of women trafficked to Iraq remained trapped 
in 2008.  GOI had little access to these girls and Iraqi law 
enforcement authorities were of no assistance.  IOM helped to rescue 
a number of these women. 
 
The Department of Foreign Affairs asked labor supplying companies to 
stop sending migrant workers to conflict areas.  The call came after 
a recent release of a migrant worker, Umi Saodah, working in 
war-torn Gaza, and other reports that another 14 Indonesian migrant 
workers remained in politically unstable regions, such as Yemen and 
Palestine. 
 
 
BURMA 
----- 
 
A Burmese seafarer, a chief engineer, was trafficked to Indonesia in 
December 2007.  An Indonesian shipping company which employed him 
paid him only part of his wages and then tried to force him to work 
another contract by holding his passport.  The Burma Embassy would 
not issue a new passport.  This seafarer remains stranded in Jakarta 
over a year later, supported by the Seafarers Union, and a police 
investigation has failed to secure his passport.  This seafarer said 
other Burmese seafarers have been similarly exploited. 
 
 
MIGRANT WORKERS 
--------------- 
 
Legal and illegal migrant workers are equally likely to be 
trafficked, in large part because in some destination countries, 
such as Malaysia, employers have the right to hold the workers' 
documentation.  Many workers prefer to go abroad to work illegally 
because they are in more control of their own destiny.  In 2008, 
large numbers of Indonesian migrant workers abroad were laid off due 
to the global financial crisis, increasing concerns that these 
workers would be more vulnerable to trafficking.  Similarly, 
increasing lay-offs of workers in Indonesia raised concerns that 
these workers would be forced to seek jobs as migrant workers and be 
vulnerable to trafficking. 
 
FOREIGN VICTIMS IN INDONESIA 
---------------------------- 
 
According to an American researcher who conducted a study in 2007 on 
trafficking of women in Southeast Asia, the vast majority of foreign 
prostitutes in Indonesia are from Mainland China.  Smugglers told 
this researcher that they estimate the number to be between 4,000 
and 20,000, many under debt bondage. The pimps/smugglers kept their 
passports and said it was easy to extend the visas with bribes. 
Other victims came from Thailand and eastern Europe.  In one major 
operation in December 2008, police rescued 39 women trafficked into 
prostitution in Jakarta, including a number exploited as masseuses 
in a five-star hotel.  The women came from China, Thailand, Tibet, 
Mongolia and Uzbekistan. 
 
POLITICAL WILL 
-------------- 
 
Political will to fight trafficking was clear at the national 
leadership level as well as at local levels in 2008, while awareness 
of the issue continued to penetrate through government agencies. 
President Yudhoyono made trafficking a top issue in his travels to 
destination countries.  In 2007, he convened a cabinet meeting at 
which he called for action to ensure better treatment and protection 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  007 OF 019 
 
 
of Indonesian migrant workers.  The Minister of Manpower made 
trafficking the top issue in his 2008 visit to Malaysia. 
 
A Malaysian law enforcement delegation visited Indonesia in late 
2007 to discuss better cooperation to protect Indonesian migrant 
workers.  Indonesia sent a reciprocal law enforcement mission to 
Malaysia in early 2009.  A joint Malaysian-Indonesian mission also 
toured border areas in early 2009 to discuss means to interdict 
trafficking. 
 
Furthermore, the President has appointed senior level officials in 
key positions with clear instructions to eliminate trafficking, 
resulting in noticeable progress in law enforcement. The government 
has trained over a thousand law enforcement officials on fighting 
trafficking, often times in interagency courses also attended by 
NGOs. The number of special anti-trafficking police and prosecutors 
greatly increased. 
 
With the passage of the new anti-trafficking law, local task forces 
in many provinces across Indonesia have reinvigorated their efforts. 
 For example, in Bandung, West Java, the local task force meets 
regularly, sharing information among agencies and NGOs, and gaining 
government funding for a local shelter and other support for 
victims. 
 
NATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION 
----------------------- 
 
The GOI in 2008 completed its evaluation of the National Plan of 
Action on Trafficking in Persons (NPA) for 2002 - 2007 and draft an 
NPA for the period of 2009-2013. 
 
While the first NPA was comprehensive and ambitious, its 
implementation has been inconsistent.  The 2007 law against 
trafficking in persons has not been properly socialized, is often 
not used in prosecutions against traffickers and still has not been 
harmonized with other criminal laws or local regulations. 
Similarly, while there have been efforts to improve services for 
trafficking victims, integrated service centers have not been 
established in all areas as required by the NPA. The NPA has not 
been consistently used by stakeholders in local areas as a guideline 
for anti-trafficking activities.  Many local stakeholders did not 
have NPA documents. 
 
For the next NPA, the report recommends that Indonesia prioritize 
six initiatives to combat trafficking. They are as follows: 
 
--Coordination between government agencies: The first priority of 
the new NPA should be the establishment of a secretariat with 
full-time staff to take on centralized responsibility of ensuring 
coordination between government agencies. To improve coordination, 
budgets from each government agency should be coordinated to avoid 
overlap of activities 
 
--Data gathering and management: There is a lack of data and 
information on trafficking patterns and responses within Indonesia. 
A dedicated unit with full time staff to monitor the collection of 
data on trafficking is needed. 
 
--Reformation of the legal migration system to reduce opportunities 
for exploitation: Many current policies are based on the assumption 
that trafficking occurs through illegal migration streams.  However, 
the current migration system may facilitate exploitation and 
trafficking and thus should be reviewed to ensure all possible 
protections are in place while freedom of movement is respected. 
There needs to be a greater focus on respect for the rights and 
additional protections for migrant workers, with a particular focus 
on domestic workers. 
 
--Debt bondage practices are increasingly identified as a common 
mechanism of exploitation that leads to trafficking and forced 
labor.  Widespread education of stakeholders on debt bondage as well 
as awareness-raising of vulnerable communities is needed. 
 
--Arrest, prosecution and asset confiscation of traffickers and 
those facilitating trafficking: An increased commitment to effective 
deterrence through criminal prosecution and monetary penalties is 
needed, including asset confiscation of traffickers.  Trafficking 
needs to be made an unprofitable venture by pursuing corporations 
complicit in trafficking and taking strong action against government 
officials involved in trafficking practices. 
 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  008 OF 019 
 
 
--Child Sexual Exploitation:  Increase efforts around child sexual 
exploitation are needed by reforming criminal laws so that the 
purchase of sex from children is clearly criminalized. Specific 
training is needed on this issue for the police and the general 
public. 
 
LIMITATIONS, RESOURCES 
---------------------- 
 
The GOI through the Ministry of Women's Empowerment, charged with 
coordinating efforts to implement the law, provided an 
anti-trafficking budget of USD242,000 for 2008 and USD105,000 for 
¶2009.  Other departments that allocated budget for trafficking 
include Social Ministry USD 200,000 (2008) and USD 300,000 (2009; 
Health Ministry USD 24,000 (2009) and National Education Ministry 
USD 1.5 million (2008) and USD2 million (2009) 
 
In addition, the GOI took over funding the repatriation of rescued 
trafficking victims in Malaysia, formerly funded by IOM. 
 
Increasingly, local governments across Indonesia also provided 
budgets, facilities and staff to assist trafficking victims. 
 
Given the scope of the country's trafficking problem, Indonesia's 
actions against trafficking, whether the responsibility of national 
or local governments, continued to demonstrate serious weaknesses 
and failings.  Indonesia's relative poverty, weaknesses in 
governance, poor public funding, and endemic corruption all 
contributed to these shortcomings. 
 
ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS 
----------------------- 
 
As President Yudhoyono's clear stance on clean government filtered 
down through the ranks, corrupt officials complicit in trafficking 
have been fired, prosecuted or transferred.  In 2008, immigration 
officials were arrested for conspiring with traffickers in North 
Sumatra and Jakarta, including immigration officials at Jakarta 
international airport.  In Tanjung Pinang, Riau Province - a major 
destination and transit point for trafficked girls and women - 
police arrested local government officials, immigration officials 
and labor agents on charges of falsifying documents for trafficking. 
 Ministry of Manpower also imposed administrative sanctions on a 
number of staff for assisting in trafficking.  Manpower Ministry 
also stepped up its cooperation with police to close down manpower 
firms involved in trafficking, shutting down nine operations. 
 
In June 2008, former Indonesian ambassador to Malaysia General (ret) 
Rusdihardjo - a former national chief of police -- was sentenced to 
two years in prison for overcharging for immigration documents.  The 
court also jailed former embassy immigration head, Arihken Tarigan, 
for four years in the same case. 
 
----------------------------- 
II. PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING 
----------------------------- 
 
A 2007 survey contracted by USAID included questions on Indonesian 
migrant workers, revealing a high awareness level of the dangers of 
working abroad:  about two-thirds of Indonesians believed that 
Indonesians who work abroad are likely to suffer from physical or 
psychological abuse from employers, while 60 percent believed that 
it is not worth seeking work abroad because of the high costs.  Only 
three percent have seriously considered working abroad, and among 
those who do not want to work abroad, 15 percent said they fear 
mistreatment, while 21 percent say the costs of seeking work abroad 
are too high. 
 
In 2008, documentary films depicting the plights of trafficking 
victims were screened nationwide and the media continued to publish 
hundreds of articles on the issue.  Major national newspapers 
frequently devoted entire pages or sections to in-depth analysis of 
trafficking, particularly the nation's largest newspaper, Kompas. 
Organizations such as Migrant Care, the Women's Protection 
Commission and the Child Protection Commission received widespread 
publicity for their frequent news conferences highlighting 
trafficking problems. 
 
In areas such as North Sulawesi, traffickers resorted to recruiting 
in more isolated villages because of increased community awareness 
and law enforcement.  In Indramayu, West Java, where entire villages 
were once depleted of girls trafficked overseas for sexual 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  009 OF 019 
 
 
exploitation, trafficking in some villages has been entirely 
eliminated due to community efforts.  While trafficking continues to 
be rampant, across Indonesia efforts to stop trafficking reached new 
highs in 2008. 
 
In January 2007, the National Agency for the Placement and 
Protection of Overseas Workers was (BNP) was established. 
The agency took over the Ministry of Manpower's responsibilities to 
protect migrant workers, such as facilitating labor export and 
providing legal protection. The agency was established as required 
by the 2004 Overseas Labor Placement and Protection Law.  BNP's 
jurisdiction to protect migrant workers is unclear vis a vis the 
Manpower Ministry.  Both bodies have been largely ineffective in 
protecting migrant workers from trafficking. 
 
However, under BNP's management, a new migrant worker transit 
Terminal Four opened up in 2008 at Jakarta international airport, 
providing better care for trafficked victims.  BNP officers do 
limited screening of returning migrant workers to detect if they 
were trafficked.  A medical doctor and beds are available for 
victims.  Legal Aid Society staff is allowed access and checks to 
ensure migrant workers are protected and trafficking victims receive 
care.  However, during Labatt visits to Terminal Four, it was 
obvious that most trafficking victims were not being detected during 
the screening process.  Furthermore, indigent trafficking victims 
were forced to spend up to several days at the facility without 
adequate food until they could find funds to pay for official 
transport home. 
 
Legal Aid Society curtailed the practice of labor brokers picking up 
trafficked victims at Terminal Four and forcing them back into debt 
bondage.  However, traffickers simply began intercepting victims on 
arrival at the regular passenger terminal, gaining control over the 
victims through complicity of immigration officials, an NGO 
monitoring the situation reported.  The regular arrival terminal has 
no monitoring system to protect against this abuse. 
 
In West Kalimantan, a short film on trafficking was shown at the 
waiting room of the Immigration Office in Singkawang. 
 
GOI SUPPORT TO OTHER PREVENTION PROGRAMS 
---------------------------------------- 
 
The GOI supported and administered other national programs related 
to the prevention of trafficking, but not designed specifically as 
anti-trafficking efforts.  These programs commonly faced serious 
constraints in terms of GOI limited funds, institutional capacity, 
and corruption.  Some of the more relevant programs were: 
 
--A program to encourage free basic public education through the 
first nine years of schooling, including subsidies for students from 
poor families.  A number of districts announced their achievement of 
free public schooling. 
 
--School Subsidy Operation providing a subsidy to poor people. 
 
--A national program to eliminate gender inequality in education. 
 
--Programs to train female migrant workers. 
 
--Credit schemes for micro-businesses, some of which focused on 
women. 
 
--Revolving credit schemes for cooperatives and savings and loan 
associations. 
 
--The Directorate of Women and Child Labor Monitoring in the 
Manpower Ministry has allocated funds for the establishment and 
operation of Provincial and District Action Committees on the 
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor. 
 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GOI, NGOs AND OTHER ELEMENTS 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
The overall relationship between relevant GOI offices and NGOs 
remained cooperative and mutually supportive on TIP-related issues. 
Cooperation varied from agency  to agency and location to location. 
The GOI recognized the importance of NGO expertise, networks and 
involvement.  NGOs met regularly with officials and participated in 
national and local task forces.  The GOI and NGOs collaborated on 
many TIP initiatives, including in protection of victims, public 
awareness-raising, and in providing assistance to law enforcement 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  010 OF 019 
 
 
officials in investigations and prosecutions. The police and NGOs 
continued to share information on trafficking, although mutual 
suspicions between NGOs and police sometimes prevented their 
cooperation. 
 
MONITORING OF IMMIGRATION/EMIGRATION 
------------------------------------ 
 
The implementation of bio-metric passports assisted immigration 
officials to stop trafficking of children. Immigration, police, 
prosecutors and judges from migrant worker transit areas were 
trained together in 2008. 
 
While efforts to increase passport integrity began, Indonesia's 
passport services, like most other government services, remained the 
object of widespread corruption. Indonesians are able to easily 
obtain passports with false and multiple identities.  Recruitment 
agencies routinely falsified birth dates, including for children, in 
order to apply for passports and migrant worker documents. 
 
The GOI did not effectively monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking, with some limited exceptions. 
On the whole, however, immigration officials and law enforcement 
agencies did not have the equipment, capacity or tools to generate 
useful information, or did not prioritize such information. 
 
The Transnational Crime Center (TNCC), which includes trafficking as 
one focus, was established in 2004 and has aggressively tackled 
trafficking. 
 
COORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION MECHANISMS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
In 2006, Indonesia signed the ASEAN Declaration on the Protection 
and Promotion of the Rights and of Migrant Workers, committing 
itself to an extensive list of protections. 
 
At the national level, the Women's Ministry served as the focal 
point for GOI actions on TIP.  The People's Welfare Coordinating 
Ministry, which includes the Women's Ministry under its umbrella, 
also played a key role in coordinating efforts across different 
agencies.  The Operational Action Plan to eliminate trafficking 
created a Task Force led by the People's Welfare Coordinating 
Minister and the Women's Minister, and included some 28 government 
and law enforcement agencies, NGOs, and civil society groups (see 
above).  Many provinces and a number of districts operated task 
forces for coordinating anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
The GOI actively participated in multilateral and international 
coordination efforts to combat trafficking under UN, ASEAN and 
regional frameworks. 
 
The GOI has given responsibility for developing anti-trafficking 
programs to the National Anti-Trafficking Task Force, created by the 
National Action Plan, and led by the People's Welfare Coordinating 
Minister and the Women's Minister, which includes other government 
and law enforcement agencies, NGOs, and civil society groups. 
Responsibility for provincial and district-level programs varies 
from location to location.  A growing number of provinces and 
districts (26 in total) have their own task forces or committees. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
III. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
Law Enforcement 
--------------- 
 
Police and prosecutors began using the new anti-trafficking law soon 
after it passed, not waiting for implementing regulations; however, 
other laws were still mostly used in 2007 pending widespread 
implementation of the new law.  These laws included the Penal Code, 
Child Protection Act, the Manpower Placement Act and the Manpower 
Act.  Police routinely use the new law but prosecutors and judges 
are using it sporadically, even when cases are brought forward by 
police under the new law. 
 
Arrests increased for the third year in a row, from 252 to 291, up 
15 percent over 2007.  However, other law enforcement data decreased 
following a sharp increase in 2007.  Prosecutions dropped 32 percent 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  011 OF 019 
 
 
from 109 to 74. Convictions 15 percent from 46 to 39.  The average 
sentence in these cases was 43 months, a slight drop from 45 months 
in 2007.  This data came mostly from the national police (INP) and 
the Attorney General's Office, with some cases reported by reliable 
NGOs.  All data was based on cases linked directly to trafficking. 
 
The 21-man national police anti-trafficking task force has worked 
with local police, Ministry of Manpower, the Migrant Workers 
Protection Agency, Immigration, Foreign Affairs and NGOs to shut 
down several large trafficking syndicates using Indonesia as a 
transit point and rescue hundreds of victims, mostly children, 
according to a February INP report, interviews with police and media 
reports. "Operation Flower" was conducted in 2008 across 11 
provinces, targeting trafficked girls and women, primarily in sexual 
exploitation.  In November 2008, this operation shut down large 
operations in several parts of Indonesia, resulting in arrests of 
dozens of pimps and rescuing hundreds of victims.  The West 
Kalimantan Regional Police reported that the Flower Operation 
resulted uncovering 17 trafficking cases and the arrest of 24 
suspects.  They also rescued 24 underaged girls.  One of the 
suspects, Chong Kunm Seng alias Kam Seng, is part of an organized 
network that involved both Indonesian and Malaysians.  He had sold 
104 victims into prostitution in Malaysia. 
 
In December 2008, this same operation rescued 38 sex workers at a 
five star hotel in Jakarta, arresting two traffickers.  Also in 
December 2008, police in the East Java handled 34 trafficking and 
smuggling cases and rescuing 109 victims.  Thirty two suspects are 
being charged under the 2007 anti-trafficking law while the other 12 
suspects were charged under the migrant protection law. 
 
In January 2009, the West Nusa Tenggara Police uncovered 30 human 
trafficking cases, rescuing 307 victims headed to the Middle East 
and Malaysia.  All the victims' documents were fake, falsifying the 
ages of the victims aged 17-19 years. 
 
Internationally, police stopped syndicated trafficking from Sri 
Lanka and Afghanistan with a destination of Australia in several 
large operations. 
 
In 2008, police had set up 305 women's help desks (RPK) to protect 
women and child victims of violence, including trafficking, and also 
to aid in investigations of these crimes, an increase of 25 from 
¶2006.  INP also had set up Integrated Service Centers in 41 
locations in 2008 where specially trained anti-trafficking police 
work with doctors and social service workers at police hospitals to 
provide special treatment for victims.  Complying with the 2007 
anti-trafficking law's requirement to set up special interview rooms 
for trafficking victims, police in major cities across Indonesia 
provided these rooms, complete with video cameras to record 
testimony for victims who do not want to appear in courtand special 
materials to help with interviewing hildren. 
 
To aid in trafficking investigations, olice have liaison officer"s 
in Indonesian embasses in Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Australia, 
Philippnes and Thailand. These police liaison officers conributed 
to growing law enforcement cooperation, articularly with Malaysia. 
 
 
EXISTING ANTI-TIP LWS 
---------------------(- 
 
On March 20, 2007, the Indonesian national legislature passed Law 
No. 21 of 2007 on the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking 
in Persons.  On April 19, the law was enacted through the 
President's signature.  The law defines trafficking, establishes 
harsh punishments, provides protections for victims and witnesses, 
provides services and restitution to victims, and calls for actions 
to address trafficking.  In 2007 and 2008, GOI passed all three 
implementing regulations under the law: 
 
National Police Decree No. 10 of 2007, was enacted on July 6, 2007 
to provide the organizational structure and procedures for a special 
unit providing services to women and children. 
 
Government of Indonesia Regulation No. 9 of 2008 on Procedures and 
Mechanisms for Integrated Service Centers regarding Witnesses and/or 
Victims of Trafficking in Persons.  The regulation requires the 
establishment of "integrated service centers" in every district and 
municipality to provide services for trafficked persons and 
witnesses. It takes a holistic approach to the services needed by 
trafficked persons and witnesses, providing integrated service 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  012 OF 019 
 
 
centers will promote the return and social integration of a victim 
or witness in the form of medical rehabilitation, social 
rehabilitation and legal assistance.  The regulation states that 
funding for the centers will come from both local and national 
governments bit does not specify sources of funding or allocation of 
funding. 
 
A third regulation, to establish counter-trafficking task forces at 
the national, provincial and district/municipal levels was 
promulgated on November 6, 2008.  The national task force formed 
under the new law met for the first time in early 2009.  The 
national task force is not only to develop anti TIP program but also 
includes coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the TIP program. 
 The national task force reports directly to the President. 
 
OTHER LAWS 
---------- 
 
The National Plan of Action encourages provincial and local 
governments to their own anti-trafficking regulations and a number 
have done so. Notable are strong anti-trafficking or women and child 
protection laws which reflect local reactions to the trafficking 
problem and are being used vigorously. 
 
In addition to many local laws passed in previous years, local laws 
passed in 2008 include: 
 
--West Java Provincial Regulation No. 3/2008 on Prevention and 
Counter Trafficking 
 
--West Nusa Tenggara Provincial Regulation No. 10/2008 on Prevention 
and Counter Trafficking. 
 
--East Nusa Tenggara Provincial Regulation No. 14/2008 on the 
Prevention and Handling of Victims Trafficking in Persons. 
 
In 2004, the DPR passed Law 39/2004 on the protection of migrant 
workers abroad.  The law provides greater regulation of the migrant 
worker recruiting and placement process.  It establishes jail 
sentences of 2 to 15 years for unlicensed labor recruitment 
agencies. 
 
Indonesia has also ratified almost all major conventions relating to 
trafficking. In addition to those referred to above, Indonesia has 
ratified ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor, the UN Convention on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and has signed the 
optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on 
the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography. 
Indonesia has also signed the UN Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime and its supplemental Protocol to Prevent, Suppress 
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children. 
 
PENALTIES FOR RAPE OR FORCIBLE SEXUAL ASSAULT 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
The Criminal Code, Article 285, stipulates a maximum of 12 years 
imprisonment for rape committed outside of marriage. Other generally 
less severe criminal sanctions apply for sexual intercourse with a 
minor, forcing a person to commit an act of sexual abuse of a minor, 
facilitating minors to perform acts of obscenity, and other related 
offenses.  The 12-year maximum jail sentence for rape exceeds the 
6-year maximum for trafficking under the Criminal Code, but is 
similar to the 15-year maximum penalty for trafficking of children 
under the Child Protection Act. 
 
PROSTITUTION 
------------ 
 
As a matter of national law, Indonesia has not legalized 
prostitution.  Indonesia's Penal Code does not explicitly mention 
prostitution, but the Code's Chapter 14 refers to "crimes against 
decency/morality," which many within national and local governments 
interpret to apply to prostitution. Central government officials 
contacted by the Embassy agreed in their interpretation that the 
Penal Code renders prostitution illegal.  The prostitution of 
children is clearly illegal under the Penal Code and the 2002 Child 
Protection Act. 
 
The Penal Code can be used to prosecute the acts of pimps, brothel 
owners and enforcers on the basis of various crimes, including: 
using violence or threats of violence to force persons to conduct 
indecent acts (Article 289, with a maximum penalty of nine years in 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  013 OF 019 
 
 
jail); facilitating indecent acts (Article 296, with a possible jail 
term of 16 months); conducing/facilitating public indecency (Article 
281); and making profits from the indecent acts of a woman (Article 
506, with a possible one-year jail sentence).  In practice, 
authorities rarely pursued such charges against those involved in 
prostitution. 
 
Clients of child prostitutes can be charged under the Penal Code and 
the Child Protection Act.  In theory, married persons who are 
clients of prostitutes can be charged for engaging in sexual 
relations outside of marriage (Penal Code Article 284).  In general, 
police did not arrest and pursue charges against clients of 
prostitutes. 
 
While contrary to societal and religious norms in Indonesia, the 
practice of prostitution is widespread and largely tolerated in many 
areas of the country, particularly when it is not a matter of public 
display.  Although contrary to national interpretations that the 
Penal Code prohibits prostitution, authorities in some localities 
have formally or informally regulated prostitution in response to 
community pressure.  In some areas, including certain locations in 
Papua, brothel owners registered prostitutes with the police with a 
view to demonstrating that the prostitutes are not coerced or 
underage. 
 
Some local governments gained important tax revenues from otherwise 
legal entertainment businesses, such as karaoke bars, that also 
offer prostitution.  Individual police and other officials also 
gained illegal income as a result of prostitution.  These factors 
encouraged the tendency to tolerate prostitution, according to 
observers. 
 
In East Java, the province's Child Protection Commission, police, 
city authorities, and NGO representatives in May 2005 launched a 
network to monitor and prevent trafficking of children into 
prostitution.  The network monitors brothels and reports to the 
social services office and police if a brothel employs a child 
prostitute.  In 2007, this resulted in a decrease of child 
prostitutes from 68 to 8, according to an ILO survey. 
 
INVESTIGATIVE TECHNIQUES 
------------------------ 
 
In some instances, the police, particularly those who had received 
anti-trafficking training, used active investigation techniques to 
develop trafficking cases.  The police used undercover operations to 
some extent.  In the past, police occasionally employed electronic 
surveillance using technical expertise developed for 
counter-terrorism.  Information collected through electronic 
surveillance is not admissible in Indonesian courts except in cases 
of terrorism.  The cooperation of victims and witnesses was 
important to police and prosecutors in making cases against 
traffickers. According to a number of the police, GOI officials and 
NGOs, victims frequently avoided testifying because of the prolonged 
nature of court cases, their desire to return to their home areas 
and lack of financial assistance to maintain themselves.  This 
complicated prosecution efforts.  In some cases, police did not 
detain suspects, who then subsequently disappeared and did not 
present themselves in court. 
 
SPECIALIZED TRAINING 
-------------------- 
 
Training of law enforcement officials by USG and international NGOs 
greatly increased this year, with strong cooperation by Indonesian 
officials. Over a thousand police, prosecutors and judges were 
trained on trafficking in 2008. 
 
Since October 2007, RSO has coordinated with the INP to target 
criminal syndicates that specialize in the production and sale of 
counterfeit documents to facilitate human smuggling and/or 
trafficking to the United States.  RSO is coordinating with 
Diplomatic Security Service's (DSS) Visa Fraud Branch, the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation and the Department of State's Human 
Smuggling and Trafficking Center to investigate these syndicates. 
 
In coordination with the Jakarta Consular Section's Fraud Prevention 
Unit, RSO has identified criminal organizations in Jakarta involved 
in the production and distribution of counterfeit documents and/or 
the smuggling/trafficking of persons from Indonesia to the United 
States and other countries.  DSS has provided RSO Jakarta with funds 
to provide human smuggling/ trafficking training to the INP.  RSO, 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  014 OF 019 
 
 
in conjunction with Department of Justice's International Criminal 
Investigative Training Assistance Program (ICITAP), provided five 
human smuggling and trafficking training courses to the INP in 2008. 
 In response, INP Jakarta set up a local anti-trafficking unit. 
 
In addition, a Department of Justice Intermittent Legal Advisor 
(ILA), from Office of Overseas Prosecutorial Development Assistance 
and Training (OPDAT) provided joint training to officials from 
Ministry of Manpower and the Overseas Manpower Protection Agency, 
along with judges, prosecutors and NGOs in 2008 in Bogor, West Java, 
the first such joint training.  Similar training was repeated in 
trafficking hotspots of Manado and Pontianak, the first time 
anti-trafficking training was given in those locations.  The same 
course also took place in Bali. 
 
In addition, IOM trained police, prosecutors, immigration official 
and judges in a series of national workshops. 
 
COOPERATION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTS 
---------------------------------- 
 
The GOI cooperated with other governments, particularly Malaysia, in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases during 2008. 
Indonesian and Malaysian law enforcement officers worked together to 
stop trafficking operations. 
 
In the past, Indonesia and Australia cooperated in the 
investigations of Australian pedophiles victimizing children in 
Bali, and syndicates trafficking women to Australia.  In February 
2009, police deported Australian and Swiss nationals for pedophile 
cases.  Both will face charges in their home countries. 
 
EXTRADITION 
----------- 
 
Indonesia maintains extradition treaties with only five countries or 
territories, but very seldom utilizes this mechanism to seek 
extradition of its citizens, preferring less formal options such as 
rendering and deportation. Indonesia does not have a history of 
extraditing or rendering its own citizens to other countries. 
 
Indonesia did not extradite any traffickers during this reporting 
period and there were no reports of such requests from other 
countries. 
 
Indonesian police and officials have cooperated with foreign 
governments, including the U.S. and Australia, in the apprehension 
and repatriation of foreign sex offenders. 
 
GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN OR TOLERANCE OF TRAFFICKING 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
Some government officials and individual members of the security 
forces facilitated, tolerated, or were involved in trafficking.  The 
most common example of such complicity was in the production of 
national identity cards.  In local communities, low-level officials 
certified false information to produce national identity cards and 
family data cards for children to allow them to work as adults. 
Based on the identity cards, traffickers processed passports and 
work visas for children who otherwise would not be able to obtain 
such documents.  With less than 30 percent of all births registered 
in the country, and such registrations also subject to 
falsification, authorities often had little legal basis to challenge 
documents containing false information. 
 
Some officials in local Manpower offices reportedly licensed and 
tolerated migrant worker recruiting agencies despite the officials' 
knowledge of the agencies' involvement in trafficking. In return for 
bribes, some Immigration officials turned a blind eye to potential 
trafficking victims, failing to screen or act with due diligence in 
processing passports and immigration control. Local governments' 
loose regulation of prostitution zones in larger cities also raised 
concerns about local officials' involvement and tolerance of 
trafficking. 
 
Individual members of the police and military were associated with 
brothels and prostitution fronts, most frequently through the 
collection of protection money, which was a widespread practice. 
Sometimes off-duty security force members worked as security 
personnel at brothels.  Security force members also involved 
themselves in prostitution as brothel owners or through other 
illicit business interests, according to NGOs and other reports. 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  015 OF 019 
 
 
Examples include allegations of Indonesian security forces 
complicity in trafficking to the "Dolly prostitution complex in 
Surabaya, one of Southeast Asia's largest brothel areas, and 
trafficking to Papua. 
 
STEPS TO END OFFICIALS' INVOLVEMENT IN TRAFFICKING 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
The GOI has begun to seriously take action against officials 
involved in trafficking, including corruption charges, 
administrative sanctions, dismissals and transfers. The impact of 
these few but unprecedented actions is beginning to change the 
culture of impunity. Unfortunately, this type of action is not being 
applied to military officials involved in trafficking, particularly 
of women and girls trapped in prostitution. 
 
There were no GOI reports of the security forces prosecuting or 
disciplining their own members for involvement in prostitution or 
other activities related to trafficking. 
 
FOREIGN PEDOPHILES PROSECUTED, DEPORTED 
--------------------------------------- 
 
On February 26, 2009, the Singaraja District Court in Bali sentenced 
Australian pedophile Philip Robert Grandfield to eight years in jail 
after he was found guilty of sexually assaulting five boys, aged 16 
and 17, while he was living in Buleleng, North Bali in 2008. 
 
Police say pedophile cases are particularly difficult to prosecute 
since affected boys and girls and their families are reluctant to 
file reports against the perpetrators. 
 
RATIFICATION OF INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
Indonesia has signed and in most cases ratified international 
instruments related to the worst forms of child labor and the 
trafficking of women and children: 
 
-- On February 3, 2009, The House of Representatives ratified a 
United Nations protocol against human trafficking which aims to stop 
and punish human traffickers, particularly those trafficking women 
and children, and is part of the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime.  Once enacted, the protocol will allow law 
enforcers to charge those responsible for trafficking people with 
the maximum possible sentence in a move to crack down on trafficking 
syndicates. 
 
-- On February 17, 2009, the House of Representatives ratified a 
United Nations protocol against smuggling of migrants.  Once 
enacted, the protocol will enable the authorities to crack down 
people smuggling syndicates. 
 
-- The GOI signed ILO Convention 182 concerning the elimination of 
the worst forms of child labor and ratified this with Law No. 1 of 
2000 on March 8, 2000. 
 
-- Indonesia ratified ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor in 1950. 
The GOI ratified ILO Convention 105 on the Abolition of Forced Labor 
in 1999. 
 
-- Indonesia signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and 
Child Pornography, and ratified this in September 2001. 
 
-- Indonesia signed in December 2000 the UN Convention Against 
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress 
and Punish Trafficking in Persons.  The GOI has not yet ratified the 
Convention and Protocol. 
 
-- On September 25, 2003, Indonesia signed the Convention for the 
Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and the Exploitation of the 
Prostitution of Others, 1950, and the Convention's Final Protocol. 
Indonesia has not yet ratified these instruments. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
IV.  PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  016 OF 019 
 
 
National and local level assistance efforts continued or increased 
over the past year, although they remained small in comparison with 
the scope of the problem.  The GOI and police operated 41 
"integrated service centers," providing health services to TIP and 
other victims of violence.  Four of these are full medical recovery 
centers specifically for trafficking victims.  The GOI pays for 
about a third of the cost of treating victims by offering intensive 
care treatment for the cost of ordinary care funded by IOM. These 
trafficking victim recovery centers treated thousands of patients 
since opening in 2005. The integrated service centers in Jakarta, 
Surabaya, Pontianak and Makassar provide support services such as 
temporary shelter, medical, psychological, and legal assistance. 
 
The Regional Offices of Women Empowerment also operate the 
Integrated Service Center for Empowering Women and Children (PTP), 
centers for women and children.  These provide medical, economic, 
and legal services to for victims of trafficking and violence.  PTPs 
have been established in 15 provinces and 93 
regencies/municipalities.  Between January and November 2008 these 
centers helped 1,115 patients. 
 
GOI also has established:   22 Residential Psychiatric Treatment 
Centers for Children; nine Safe Houses for the Protection of 
Children (RSPA), victim of trafficking unit at Karya Wanita Social 
Institution in Jakarta; children protection hotlines in five 
provinces and a national hotline service. 
 
The government conducted anti-trafficking outreach education in 33 
provinces and 37 regencies/ municipalities in 2008.  An increasing 
number of NGOs and community based organizations have set up Women's 
Crisis Centers, Drop in Centers or Shelters.  Local governments 
worked together with NGOs and civil society groups to establish and 
operate shelters for TIP victims, in key transit points such as 
Batam, Riau Islands and in Entikong on the West Kalimantan border 
with Malaysia.  Local governments also used social services offices 
and police women's desks as temporary shelters. 
 
The Foreign Ministry operated shelters for trafficking victims and 
migrant workers at its embassies and consulates in several 
countries, including Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Singapore. 
Over the course of 2008, these shelters housed thousands of 
Indonesian citizens, including trafficking victims.  Indonesian 
diplomatic missions, in coordination with other GOI agencies, 
assisted with repatriation of trafficking victims. 
 
The Social Affairs Ministry Directorate of Social Assistance for 
Victims of Violence and Migrant Workers assisted victims returning 
from overseas since domestic cases normally fall under the 
responsibility of local governments.  In 2008, the Ministry provided 
some repatriation assistance to tens of thousands of migrant 
workers, the vast majority of whom returned from Malaysia.  This 
included transportation, basic medical care, and food for some of 
these returnees. The Directorate provided some training to 
provincial Social Affairs offices.  The Ministry also operated 
women's rehabilitation centers and assisted with crisis centers. 
 
GOI SUPPORT FOR NGO SERVICES TO VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
The GOI provided some funding to domestic NGOs and civil society 
groups that supported services for TIP victims, usually as part of a 
larger program rather than one focused exclusively on trafficking. 
At the national level, for example, the People's Welfare 
Coordinating Ministry and the Social Affairs Ministry provided food 
assistance to social centers and safe houses nationwide.  Local 
governments across Indonesia funded NGOs to provide services to some 
victims, including shelters, medical exams and training. 
 
SCREENING AND REFERRAL OF VICTIMS 
--------------------------------- 
 
In Jakarta, a screening system is in place at the Tanjung Priok 
seaport to refer cases of abused migrant workers and trafficking 
victims to the city's police hospital.  NGOs active in migrant 
worker advocacy also identify and refer returned migrant workers who 
need medical attention.  An NGO screening process was also in 
practice in Surabaya.  However, at Jakarta international airport's 
Terminal Four, screening by officials is cursory and most 
trafficking victims appear to slip through without being helped, 
according to USG and NGO observations. In a recent visit, a G/TIP 
official interviewed a group of women trafficked from Saudi Arabia 
who told us they had been abused and exploited, a fact which 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  017 OF 019 
 
 
Terminal Four personnel failed to catch. 
 
Women's help desks at provincial and district level police offices 
typically have formal or informal arrangements in place with local 
NGO's to provide short-term shelter and a modicum of care for 
trafficking victims.  In general, long-term care does not appear to 
be available.  A current U.S.-funded project, implemented by IOM, 
has begun to develop models of better and longer-term care for 
trafficking victims. 
 
RESPECT FOR THE RIGHTS OF VICTIMS 
--------------------------------- 
 
The GOI's written policy, found in its annual trafficking report, is 
that, "from a legal perspective, the Government treats persons who 
are trafficked not as criminals, but as victims who need help and 
protection."  The People's Welfare Coordinating Ministry, the 
Women's Ministry, and training conducted by international NGOs and 
DOJ/ICITAP, reinforced this policy during the year in public 
settings and trainings of police and other officials.  Police who 
received ICITAP training demonstrated greater awareness of and 
respect for TIP victims. 
 
Local government and police practice varied, particularly in the 
lower ranks of law enforcement agencies.  Local governments, 
exercising greater authority under the nation's decentralization 
program, sometimes enacted regulations that tend to treat trafficked 
prostitutes as criminals, contrary to national policy.  In many 
instances, GOI officials and police actively protected and assisted 
victims.  In other cases, police officers treated victims, 
particularly trafficked prostitutes, as criminals, subjected them to 
detention, and took advantage of their vulnerability to demand 
bribes and sexual services.  The media and lower level officials, 
including police, frequently failed to protect victims' identities 
and commonly provided victims' names to the public. 
 
The GOI's policy is not to detain or imprison trafficking victims. 
Police implementation of this policy varies in practice.  Not all 
local government laws comply with this policy.  Local police often 
arrested prostitutes, presumably including trafficking victims, who 
operated outside recognized prostitution zones on charges of 
violating public order.  Police raids on prostitute areas commonly 
resulted in the arrest of prostitutes, rather than users or pimps. 
On occasion, the police detained victims, sometimes to gain their 
testimony or in the belief they were protecting the victims from 
traffickers.  In other cases, police detained victims in order to 
extract bribes. 
 
There was a growing understanding of the need to protect Indonesian 
victims of trafficking.  This included case of foreign prostitutes 
trafficked to Indonesia.  They were screened for trafficking and the 
GOI worked with the governments of the countries of origin for the 
humane repatriation of victims. 
 
 
ENCOURAGING VICTIMS TO ASSIST INVESTIGATIONS/ PROSECUTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
The GOI encourages victims to assist in the investigation and 
prosecution of traffickers.  The GOI reported that victims 
frequently were reluctant or refused to provide testimony out of 
shame and fear of retribution against themselves and their 
families. 
 
There have been reports of police officers who refused to receive 
complaints from trafficking victims, but insisted instead that 
victims and traffickers reach an informal settlement (for example, 
payment of debts in return for a prostitute's release from a 
brothel). 
 
PROTECTIONS FOR VICTIMS AND WITNESSES 
------------------------------------- 
 
The functions of the women's help desks at provincial and district 
level police stations include protection of women and children 
during the police investigation process of crimes such as 
trafficking.  Some of the desks functioned reasonably well, while 
others did not function adequately.  With the new anti-trafficking 
law and the Witness Protection law, police routinely offer witnesses 
special protection such as giving testimony via videotape.  All 
women's desks set up special victim interview rooms in 2008, in some 
cases including a video camera to film testimony. 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  018 OF 019 
 
 
 
TRAINING FOR OFFICIALS TO RECOGNIZE/ASSIST VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
The National Action Plan calls for training of government officials 
in recognizing trafficking and assisting victims, to be carried out 
in the 2003-2007 timeframe.  The GOI conducted such training on an 
ad hoc basis through various seminars, workshops and government 
meetings.  INP and Immigration both conducted anti-trafficking 
training, including victim recognition, over the past year. 
 
NGOs and international organizations have assisted in the training 
of Indonesian officials.  IOM and ICMC have worked with Indonesian 
diplomatic offices in Malaysia to improve their screening procedures 
for potential trafficking victims. 
 
ASSISTANCE TO REPATRIATED NATIONALS 
----------------------------------- 
 
The GOI, both at the national and locals levels, provides some 
measure of assistance, including limited medical aid, shelter, and 
financial help, to its repatriated nationals who were trafficking 
victims.  In general, the government at various levels provided more 
attention and assistance to repatriated victims compared with 
victims of internal trafficking.  In 2008, the GOI greatly improved 
its level of care for victims held at Embassy shelters overseas. 
The GOI now pays the cost of transporting victims from Malaysia to 
Indonesia. 
 
NGO'S WORKING WITH TRAFFICKING VICTIMS 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Some of the more prominent NGOs are Solidaritas Perempuan (Jakarta), 
LBH-Apik (Jakarta and West Kalimantan), Yayasan 
Mitra Kesehatan dan Kemanusiaan or YMKK (Batam), Rifka Anisa 
(Yogyakarta), Asa Puan (West Kalimantan) and LADA (Lampung).  Some 
labor unions also provided services to trafficking victims.  The 
activities of these groups related to TIP include: legal assistance, 
prevention and education programs, medical services, clinics for 
children, research and advocacy, counseling, reproductive health, 
HIV/AIDS prevention, and shelters.  More NGOs have emerged over the 
past several years, including Migrant Care, currently a leading 
advocacy body for migrant worker rights and anti-trafficking. 
 
The GOI continued strong cooperation with NGOs over the past year in 
the area of assistance to trafficking victims.  In some cases 
government offices relied heavily on NGO inputs and advice.  GOI 
offices provided licenses to organizations and access to trafficking 
victims, included NGOs on national and local action committees, and 
interceded with law enforcement agencies in some cases to permit 
NGOs to carry out their activities.  NGOs frequently interacted with 
the police, though mutual suspicions limited the interaction in some 
areas. 
 
--------- 
¶V. HEROES 
--------- 
 
Elly Anita is a migrant worker who escaped enslavement in Kurdistan, 
Iraq through her own willpower in 1997.  After being rescued, she 
went to work for an Indonesian NGO, Migrant Care, to help rescue 
other trafficked Indonesians in the Middle East. Her efforts 
resulted in a half dozen more women being rescued from trafficking 
in Iraq. 
 
In 2006, Elly was offered a job as a secretary at a private company 
in Dubai.  After suffering abuse from her employer and refusing to 
take a job as a domestic servant, she was then offered a job in 
"Italy" which she accepted.  She ended up in Kurdistan, Iraq 
instead.  In Iraq, she again refused to take a job as a domestic 
servant since she was a trained secretary.  The employment agent, a 
powerful person in the community, put a gun to her head, beat her, 
starved her and kept her confined to the employment agency. 
 
Near death, she still refused to be forced into a job as a maid. 
When the employment agency's office was empty, she used the 
company's computer to communicate by internet with other Indonesian 
migrant workers in the region, who directed her to the Indonesian 
Embassy in Amman and Indonesia's Migrant Care.  From there, GOI 
intervention and assistance by IOM eventually got her out Kurdistan 
at great risk.  Since returning to Indonesia, she has worked for 
Migrant Care as a vocal voice against trafficking.  She continues to 
 
JAKARTA 00000378  019 OF 019 
 
 
fight for liberty of fellow workers, including those still trapped 
in Iraq. 
 
------------------ 
VI. BEST PRACTICES 
------------------ 
 
North Sulawesi Local Task Forces 
-------------------------------- 
 
Beginning with a modest level of support from the International 
Catholic Migration Commission, community task forces in impoverished 
North Sulawesi have had a tremendous effect in fighting trafficking 
in North Sulawesi.  In 2004, the North Sulawesi provincial 
government passed an Anti-Trafficking Law and developed a Provincial 
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking (CTTF).  This encouraged 
significant efforts by the government and NGOs to combat trafficking 
in the province. However, the CTTF's efforts were handicapped by the 
lack of understanding about trafficking in the law enforcers. 
Following an ICMC workshop in Manado, the province began training 
task forces at the district level. The Women's Empowerment and the 
Manpower Offices in the districts convened coordination meetings, 
involving other government departments and NGOs, to discuss the 
creation of CTTFs. 
 
One district where CTTFs had great success was the Minahasa Induk 
District, where there was no policy or plan of action to combat 
trafficking in spite of it being a high sending area. However, the 
community was very concerned about its girls being trafficked and 
the local task force mobilized itself. By 2008, dozens of local 
agencies and NGOs were working together to fight trafficking. 
Assisted by a small grant for ICMC to the Maupasan Minahasa 
Foundation, the community loaned money to vulnerable families to 
start businesses, informed farmers about trafficking, and assisted 
in law enforcement. 
 
As a result, the loose confederation of small NGOs under the 
umbrella of this foundation drove traffickers away from their 
villages.  While Minahasa girls are still targeted in some of the 
more remote villages which are difficult to reach, this community 
network has succeeded in protecting hundreds of their girls from 
sexual exploitation. 
 
This example has further encouraged the authorities of two other 
neighboring districts, Minahasa Selatan and Minahasa Tenggara, to 
take counter-trafficking measures and consider  the formation of 
CTTFs. 
 
In the provincial capital of Manado, the local task force with 
representatives from all government agencies and NGOs also meets 
regularly.  As a result of strong community cooperation with law 
enforcement, traffickers largely avoid Manado as a transit point 
 
Still, many ethnic Minahasa girls and young women from the province 
are trafficked domestically and internationally, with large numbers 
sent to rich mining areas of Papua.  Working with families and a 
local NGO, TIP police in Manado have traveled to Papua to bring back 
victims from bars.  Police maintain a book with photos and known 
addresses of every victim and continue efforts to rescue each and 
every one. 
 
Police are assisted by a dynamic Manado NGO, the Information Center 
for Women and Children.  This small NGO works closely with police 
and takes a very active role in protecting, rescuing and sheltering 
victims from throughout North Sulawesi. It has distributed thousands 
of posters and leaflets to vulnerable communities.  PIPPA targets 
significant cases and gathers evidence to share with police.  Its 
case workers travel to Papua to rescue girls. It provides a shelter 
with medical and psychological counseling. 
 
As a result of all these efforts, one of Indonesia's most vulnerable 
communities for trafficking of girls has taken a stand, because the 
people want to protect their children. 
 
HUME