09KABUL527
AFGHANISTAN'S PANJSHIR: THE PROVINCE THAT WORKS - PART II
Tue Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO4819
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0527/01 0690731
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100731Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7655
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000527 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
NSC FOR WOOD 
OSD FOR WILKES 
CG CJTF-101 POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM SNAR AF
 
SUBJECT: AFGHANISTAN'S PANJSHIR: THE PROVINCE THAT WORKS - PART II 
 
REF: KABUL 526 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Panjshir province is a unique success story within 
Afghanistan.  Having achieved unparalleled security, poppy-free 
status, and solid governance largely free from corruption, Panjshir 
has set the stage for further development, including roads and 
mining.  The Panjshiris have accomplished all of this with no 
Coalition forces other than the U.S. Provincial Reconstruction Team 
(PRT), no Afghan National Army (ANA), few NGOs, and limited 
resources from Kabul.  This cable addresses governance and 
development in Panjshir, while Part I (reftel) addressed security 
and counter-narcotics. 
 
GOVERNANCE 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Panjshir benefits from strong governance, which primarily 
reflects the leadership style of Governor Haji Bahlol Bahij. 
Governor Bahlol, a Mujahedeen commander under the legendary Ahmad 
Shah Massoud, exerts his personality and authority over every 
significant aspect of life in the province.  He can regularly be 
seen at Provincial Development Council (PDC) meetings chiding 
ministry line directors for not doing enough in the valley. 
Bahlol's main priorities appear to the PRT to be well-placed, and 
include security, infrastructure development, and education.  A 
vocal supporter of educating girls, he has specifically told village 
shuras they need a school for girls.  On several occasions, Governor 
Bahlol has said to the PRT he believes governors in Afghanistan 
should have similar budgetary and line authority as U.S. governors. 
 
¶3. (SBU) While members of Panjshir's Provincial Council (PC) do not 
challenge Bahlol's authority, they are seen by the populace as 
legitimate representatives of the people, and serve primarily as 
advocates for their districts in the in the PDC.  Panjshir's 
second-tier of leadership -- the six district administrators, along 
with the mayor of Bazarak -- range from very capable and committed, 
as in the district of Khenj, to marginal in the district of Rokha. 
All act under the watchful eye of the governor. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Afghan Independent Directorate of Local Governance 
(IDLG) Executive Director is highly competent, and plays a key role 
in coordinating the work of the various ministry line directors. 
The line directors themselves represent varying degrees of 
competence, and as a rule, appear to be under-resourced by Kabul -- 
a frequent complaint from the governor and others.  Panjshir lacks a 
resident line director from the Ministry of Mines, a surprise given 
the level of mineral resources present in the valley, ranging from 
iron to emeralds. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Panjshir appears to be largely free of corruption, and the 
PRT has seen no direct evidence of provincial officials enriching 
themselves through their positions.  Indeed, Governor Bahlol has 
cited corruption as Afghanistan's greatest problem, saying it has 
led to an ineffective government that has lost the trust of the 
people, ultimately strengthening the Taliban.  When a PC member 
appeared to possibly strong-arm a PRT contractor to enhance a 
contract for a canal contract running through his property, the 
governor summoned him to his office, threatening to arrest him if he 
received any personal benefit from the project.  Bahlol has also 
advised the PRT to avoid awarding construction contracts to his 
brother-in-law, a competent contractor, due to the appearance of 
impropriety. 
 
DEVELOPMENT 
----------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Panjshir's security environment and activist governor 
enable development.  During the second half of 2008 development 
flourished, with the construction of roads, schools, clinics, and 
micro-hydro electric plants.  The majority of projects were funded 
by the PRT, Panjshir's main partner in development.  For FY-09 to 
date, the PRT has over USD 41 million in on-going or committed 
Commander's Emergency Response Program (CERP) projects on the books, 
and anticipates the amount will nearly double by the end of FY-09. 
On-going USAID programs in the province include vocational training 
for 5,717 people, and 39 home-based schools focusing on girls.  The 
number of NGOs in Panjshir remains disappointing given the 
"permissive" nature of the province.  In addition to the Italian NGO 
"Emergency" which provides the bulk of healthcare in the valley, the 
Massoud Foundation is active in Panjshir, offering everything from 
English and computer classes, to micro-lending. 
 
 
KABUL 00000527  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. (U) Among the most visible of Panjshir's development projects is 
Afghanistan's first power-generating wind farm, inaugurated November 
¶2008.  The PRT-funded wind farm generates 30 kW of electricity 
powering the new provincial government center, and is capable of 
being expanded to 100 kW.  The power from the project allows the 
governor's staff and key ministry personnel to be co-located, 
improving governance.  The wind farm has garnered substantial 
international attention, drawing visitors from other provinces 
looking to replicate the project. 
 
¶8. (U) Provincial leadership and the PRT are in agreement that major 
infrastructure projects, such as roads and the mining sector, are 
important enablers of future development, particularly from the 
private sector.  With this in mind, the PRT has received approval 
for improving and paving 70 km of the valley's primary road.  This 
project, once complete, will allow vehicular traffic to drive from 
the Lion's Gate to the border of the Badakhshan province without 
leaving pavement.  Ultimately, this connection could make the 
Panjshir Valley an important trade route linking China with the rest 
of Afghanistan. 
 
DELL