09PANAMA236
PANAMA: MERIDA AND PUBLIC MESSAGING
Fri Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0236/01 0791645
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201645Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3173
INFO RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3796
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0786
RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR 1529
RUEHBE/AMEMBASSY BELIZE
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0427
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 0636
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 1996UNCLAS PANAMA 000236 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA (JACOBSON), WHA/CEN, WHA/PDA (DICKSON), INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SNAR KCRM KPAO PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: MERIDA AND PUBLIC MESSAGING 
 
REF: PANAMA 176 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: As we roll out the Merida Initiative in Panama, 
the Embassy has launched a public diplomacy campaign to inform 
Panamanians about the broad range of Merida programs, placing a 
special emphasis on crime prevention.  Media coverage of 
drug-related violence in Mexico has cast Merida in a negative light 
with Panamanian policymakers and the public.  Our public messages 
emphasize the U.S. role in supporting Panama's efforts to confront 
its fast-growing crime problem through community policing, at-risk 
youth programs and other crime prevention measures.  The U.S. must 
be seen by Panamanians as part of the solution of stopping the 
violent crime that is increasingly plaguing their streets.  If we 
are perceived as being only interested in interdicting drugs headed 
for the U.S., long term public support for our counternarcotics 
collaboration with Panama will fail.  End Summary. 
 
Merida Has an Image Problem 
--------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) Crime has increased significantly in Panama over the past 
two years, and polls show that crime and juvenile delinquency are 
overwhelmingly the number one issue that Panamanians worry about. 
At the same time, news media carry stories daily about ghastly 
drug-related violence in Mexico and the increasingly militarized 
nature of the drug war along the U.S. border.  The Merida Initiative 
is often mentioned as the response to that crisis, and as a result, 
many Panamanians have come to associate Merida with a military 
solution to fighting drug traffickers.  Panama lived under military 
dictatorship for 21 years and abolished its military after the 
removal of Manuel Noreiga in 1989.  Panamanians are overwhelmingly 
opposed to any moves to "remilitarize" their country, and they view 
a military response to drug trafficking as inappropriate for their 
society. 
 
Panama Wants Prevention 
----------------------- 
¶3. (SBU) In sharp contrast to Mexico, there is a growing consensus 
among policy makers in Panama that prevention and community-oriented 
efforts are the long-term solution to the country's growing problem 
of crime and delinquency.  Presidential candidate Ricardo 
Martinelli, who is currently favored to win the May 3 presidential 
election promotes his "safe streets" security platform that calls 
for a broad mix of social programs to attack the roots of crime and 
improved police intelligence.  Thoughtful analysts call for a "drain 
the swamp" approach that would empower the community and deny the 
opportunity for organized crime to take hold.  The Panamanian 
National Police has embraced the concept of community policing and 
has undertaken NAS-funded training based on that model. 
¶4. (SBU) The prevention approach makes sense for Panama for several 
reasons.  Panama has not yet seen the levels of gang violence that 
have affected the northern Central American countries.  Experts 
believe that Panama's gang problem is still in an early phase and 
can be contained with robust at-risk youth programs.  In addition, 
Panama's courts and prisons are the weakest elements of its criminal 
justice system, and both are plagued by corruption.  Even if Panama 
were able to arrest large numbers of traffickers, its courts would 
likely fail to convict them and the prison system, known cynically 
as "gang university," would be unable to hold them. 
 
Our Message: Supporting Strong Communities 
------------------------------------------ 
¶5. (SBU) In recent weeks Embassy Panama has launched a public 
diplomacy program to highlight U.S. support for Panamanian NGOs and 
community organizations that are operating successful prevention 
programs.  We are pressing the message that the answer to Panama's 
crime and security problems lies in strengthening communities so 
that law-abiding citizens own the streets and create an environment 
that drives out crime.  We have organized a series of events 
featuring the Ambassador visiting sites around Panama and 
interacting with community leaders whose programs are making a 
difference in the lives of ordinary Panamanians.  The bi-weekly 
visits in underprivileged neighborhoods have included a music 
academy, a Kiwanis sports club, an after-school arts program, 
community centers, and baseball camps.  We look to support these 
organizations both with our own funds and by helping them to attract 
private sector funding.  Media coverage of the Ambassador's visits 
has been excellent, and the media has clearly conveyed the message 
that the U.S. Government believes that the work of those 
organizations makes Panama's communities stronger and more secure. 
The Ambassador's message tag line with the media is "security begins 
with strong communities." 
¶6. (SBU) When the anticipated Merida ESF funding arrives, we will 
broaden our message to promote education and English teaching. 
Education has special resonance for Panamanians because of a 
widespread belief that the country urgently needs to reform and 
improve its education system in order to maintain the high levels of 
economic growth and prosperity Panama has enjoyed in recent years. 
 
It's Not Just About US 
---------------------- 
¶7. (SBU) Panama cooperates very closely with the U.S. in 
interdiction efforts, and cocaine seizures in the Panama region are 
the highest in the hemisphere.  As in most countries in the region, 
drug trafficking historically has been perceived here as a "Gringo 
problem" that did not greatly concern Panama.  In that context, most 
Panamanians were indifferent about their government's collaboration 
with the U.S. on interdiction efforts. 
¶8. (SBU) However, the recent dramatic increase in drug-related crime 
could change that perception.  Panamanians have never seen 
assassinations and violent crime like they are currently 
experiencing, and the public mood is bordering on panic.  People are 
demanding action, and the current government of President Torrijos 
is perceived as having been ineffective in stopping crime.  The 
Torrijos government is also seen as very cooperative with the U.S. 
on drug interdiction. 
¶9. (SBU) In order to maintain the support of policymakers and the 
public for our joint interdiction programs, Panamanians must feel 
confident that U.S. programs like Merida will make a positive impact 
on their critical crime problem.  Panamanians must see the U.S. as 
their ally in solving a shared problem that affects all countries in 
the region.  Our message cannot simply be about stopping drugs 
headed to the U.S.  At the end of the day, we are seeking to 
encourage Panama and other Central American countries to formulate 
constructive policies that see them taking full responsibility for 
their own security.  The long term viability of our interdiction 
programs, and of our own security, depends in part on our success in 
delivering that message. 
STEPHENSON