09RPODUBAI121
IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - MARCH 17,
Tue Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO1553
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHDIR #0121/01 0761236
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O P 171236Z MAR 09
FM RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0364
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 0298
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0014
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0019
RUEHDIR/RPO DUBAI 0365S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 RPO DUBAI 000121 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  3/17/2019 
TAGS: PGOV EAGR ECON KDEM IR
SUBJECT: IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - MARCH 17, 
2009 
 
DUBAI 00000121  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Ramin Asgard, Director, Iran Regional Presence 
Office - Dubai, DOS. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 

¶1. [C/NF] Iranian Visa Applicants in Dubai Generally 
Unenthusiastic About Mir Hossein Mousavi:  IRPO Conoff queried 
visa applicants regarding their views of former Iranian Prime 
Minister and now presidential candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi. 
None professed particular enthusiasm with his candidacy and 
younger applicants, especially students, knew little about him. 
Others were inclined to dismissively lump Mousavi with other 
Iranian politicians.  Of those offering distinct opinions, a 
young, female Iranian doctor disapproved of his candidacy 
because she believes the Supreme Leader supports it.  A 
middle-aged chemist conditioned his support for Mousavi on 
Khatami's endorsement and, finally, a Tehrani gold jeweler 
applauded Mousavi's management of the country during the 
Iran-Iraq war, contrasting that era with the current reality. 
Comment:  Iranians visa applicants in Dubai are as a group 
apolitical and their general lack of enthusiasm for a 
presidential candidate is not surprising.  That students and 
Iran's youth know little about Mousavi is also unsurprising - 
such demographic groups came of age after Mousavi's generally 
well regarded stint as prime minister in the 1980s.  Still, if 
their views are representative of other young Iranians, 
attracting their support will be a key challenge for Mousavi. 
The notion that Khamenei supports Mousavi's bid is odd - the two 
were rivals in the 1980s-and further suggests that Mousavi is 
now relatively unknown. 
 
 
 
¶2. [S/NF] Iranian Government and Tehran Municipality's Interest 
in US Agricultural Trade:  Based upon discussions with 
Dubai-based Regional Ag Attache, IRPO has learned that Iran's 
Government Trading Corporation (GTC) has been in touch with the 
US Wheat Council regarding proposed travel by several senior 
officials to visit US wheat producing areas and to explore 
further bulk grain purchases from the US.  [Note: According to 
USDA, the GTC purchased $535 million of US wheat in 2008 and 
continues to purchase US wheat.  Iran's new fiscal year budget 
allows for greater wheat imports this year.  At present, trade 
sources indicate Iran is purchasing $15-20 million of US wheat 
per month]. IRPO Officer met with two UAE-based Iranian traders 
who claimed to represent the Municipality of Tehran and its 
interest in purchasing American agricultural products.    The 
UAE-based traders were unfamiliar with last year's trade or with 
the licensing procedures and requirements for US trade with 
Iran, but emphasized that their purchases are separate from 
those of the GTC.  The Tehran Municipality's shopping list of 
American products includes wheat, corn, barley, rice, and citrus 
fruits.  Comment:    Intermittent droughts in Iran, such as in 
2008, have historically raised demand for agricultural imports, 
but the choice of US origin agricultural goods may indicate an 
Iranian (GTC and the Tehran Municipality) decision to explore 
expanded trade opportunities with the US.  Future discussions in 
the US with USDA and/or private agricultural firms may clarify 
their motivation for selecting US agricultural commodities. 
 
¶3. [S/NF] Roxana Saberi's Arrest Likely Organized by Spoilers to 
Prevent U.S.-Iran Rapprochement.  In separate conservations, two 
highly regarded Iranian-American political analysts who both 
know Saberi personally, described her as "completely benign" and 
were highly skeptical that anything about her life or work in 
Iran had led to her arrest.  Both men cautioned against allowing 
spoilers to derail plans for engagement, recalling how the 
January 2002 seizure of the Palestinian freighter Karine A 
loaded with presumably Iranian-made weapons was likely the point 
at which the confidence built between the U.S. and Iran during 
the 2001 Bonn Conference began to disintegrate.  One of the 
contacts described Saberi, because of her dual nationality as 
well as the fact that she was not working directly for a 
prominent international news outlet, as ideal "low-hanging 
fruit" for security officials trying to thwart the possibility 
of dialogue between Washington and Tehran. 
 
 
 
¶4. [S/NF] The Lion Rising?:  Iranian Identity and Hubris in the 
Northern Emirates: A well-established IRPO business contact 
recounted the following anecdote to IRPO Officer from  a banking 
leadership meeting he attended in Ajman emirate last week. 
During the Q&A session, an Egyptian attendee rose and requested 
to ask his question in Arabic as his English was weak and 
suggested a colleague could translate.  A Bank Melli - Iran 
official immediately rose and declared that "if he is allowed to 
ask his question in Arabic, I should be allowed to ask mine in 
Farsi, and he (pointing to an Ajman government official 
attending the meeting) can translate for me."  The government 
official was reportedly taken aback, but the meeting eventually 
wrapped up without major incident.  Comment: The presence of 
Emirati-Iranian officials throughout the UAEG and all levels of 
business, particularly in the Northern Emirates, is a deeply 
sensitive matter rarely discussed openly in the UAE.  Within the 
context of potential UAE-Iran bilateral tension, questions of 
cultural identity may sharpen.  The Bank Melli official's claim 
that Farsi be treated equally to Arabic in an official meeting, 
and his use of a Farsi-speaking government official to bolster 
his position, is a thought-provoking example of the very real 
battle for influence and identity in the Gulf. 
 
¶5. [S/NF ] Test Case for Subsidy Reform Not a Hit:  IRPO Officer 
met with Hassan Kabiri, a scion of a prominent bazaari family 
and managing director/owner of Paknam, one of Iran's largest 
producers of detergent powder.    Kabiri discussed Iran's 
reduction of price subsidies for detergent powder in 2008, 
claiming that detergent had subsequently tripled in price but 
that President Ahmadinejad had simultaneously reduced tariffs on 
imported detergent from 35 to 20%.  The tariff reduction was the 
President's attempt to fight the inflationary impact of the 
price increase, but in Kabiri's estimation this effort had been 
a failure.   Kabiri's factory was adjusting to the new economic 
reality by trying to lower its fixed costs, primarily by 
reducing the labor force.  Paknam had laid off about half of its 
approximately 1,000 workers since the subsidy reduction, but 
Iran's legal code made this process extremely difficult--one 
laid off employee had even appealed his case to Iran's Supreme 
Court.  Kabiri found it easier to lay off workers if he first 
made provisions for their post-employment welfare.  Looking 
forward to Iran's new fiscal year that starts later this month, 
Kabiri predicted that the government will have to reverse course 
and raise tariffs on non-food items, including detergent, so 
that it can continue to pay for food imports as oil revenues 
decline.  Comment:  The removal of price subsidies and a reduced 
tariff for imports highlight some of the dangers that AN's 
economic transformation plan poses to Iran's domestic producers 
and their employees.  The recent defeat of AN's subsidy reforms 
during the debate over next year's budget in the Majles will 
delay significant changes, but Iran's massive subsidies remain a 
key burden on government finances and a distortion in Iran's 
economy. 
 
¶6. [U] Window on Iran is a classified, weekly product providing 
Washington policy community and Iran watcher highlights of key 
developments on Iran.  It is produced by the Iran Regional 
Presence Office - Dubai.  Please direct any questions/comments 
to: Kay McGowan XXXXXXXXXXXX or Charlie 
Pennypacker XXXXXXXXXXXX. 
ASGARD