09RPODUBAI141
IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - MARCH 25,
Wed Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO9396
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHDIR #0141/01 0841255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 251255Z MAR 09
FM RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0377
INFO RUEHDIR/RPO DUBAI 0378
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 0307
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0021
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0024
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RPO DUBAI 000141 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PROP EAGR
SUBJECT: IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - MARCH 25, 
2009 
 
DUBAI 00000141  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. [S/NF] Qalibaf Planning to Deliver US Goods in Time for 
Election?:  The Tehran Municipality's interest in US 
agricultural trade continues, but now appears driven by a more 
overtly political agenda.  IRPO Officer and Dubai-based regional 
Ag Attache met for a second time with two UAE-based Iranian 
traders representing the Tehran Municipality.  Following up on 
previous discussions of US wheat, the traders' new emphasis is 
now on rice and oranges, and they repeatedly emphasized the 
importance of having these products labeled "Made in USA" and to 
have them delivered before the June election, even if the size 
of the purchase is relatively modest.  The political nature of 
these purchases was further emphasized by the UAE-based traders 
effort to distinguish their purchases from those of the IRIG 
Ministry of Commerce's Government Trading Corporation (GTC), 
controlled by an AN appointee; the traders said the GTC would 
only be interested in expanded US trade if AN loses the election 
in June and a new director takes over the GTC.   Comment: The 
traders did not mention whether Tehran Mayor Qalibaf was 
involved in this proposed transaction.  Qalibaf, operating via 
the Tehran Municipality's procurement network, may plan to use 
this transaction of US-origin goods to position himself as 
someone who can deliver, in a material way, better US-Iran 
relations.  Numerous hurdles to completing the purchase and 
delivery before the elections remain, including US licensing 
procedures and the lack of a US-Iran phytosanitary agreement. 
 
 
 
¶2. [C] Iran's Channel 3 Broadcasts Video Conflating USG Digital 
Outreach and Internet Porn Ring:  A well-established IRPO 
contact reported that on March 20 Iran's Channel 3 ran a report 
describing how intelligence agents of the Revolutionary Guard 
have broken up a network of internet sites supported by the USG. 
 According to the report, the Farsi-language pornography and 
prostitution sites were part of the State Department's efforts 
to foster a velvet revolution in Iran by promoting 
anti-revolutionary and anti-religious activities within Iranian 
society.  According to our contact, the video spliced together 
commentary from a narrator, taped confessions of several men 
arrested for running the sites, and clips of a young 
Iranian-American man with a Department of State seal in the 
background discussing USG digital outreach efforts.  Our contact 
noted that the report was aired at the beginning of the Nowruz 
holiday, just before a popular movie was scheduled to run, thus 
ensuring a large audience. 
 
 
 
¶3. [C/NF] Hollywood Delegation Gets Rave Reviews: Two contacts 
have told us that contrary to official IRIG castigation of 
Hollywood, the delegation from the Academy of Motion Picture 
Arts and Sciences was warmly received throughout Iran.  One 
Iranian film industry contact said that Hollywood recognition of 
the Iranian film community was, he hoped, a step toward new 
cooperative relationships between film makers in both countries. 
 IRIG officials were privately very supportive of the visit, our 
contacts said. They noted that there had been no direct or 
indirect effort to press the delegation for an "apology" and 
that the atmosphere surrounding the visit had been completely 
positive.  Comment: Iranian officials are no strangers to 
playing to foreign audiences when saying one thing and doing 
another.  The presence of these high-profile American visitors, 
"300" aside, has created enormous good will and new 
opportunities for supporting collaboration between U.S. and 
Iranian film makers at various levels. 
 
 
 
¶4. [C/NF]  Iranians Appreciative of and Talking about President 
Obama's Message:  Most Iranian visa applicants in Dubai on March 
22 and March 24 were aware of President Obama's message and were 
very enthusiastic about it.  Some had seen the message on 
satellite television in Iran, but many had heard about the 
message from friends, family, or colleagues.  Young and old 
applicants alike offered their appreciation for the message and 
many hoped the speech would eventually yield a new relationship 
between Iran and the United States.  Fewer applicants were aware 
of the Supreme Leader's response to the President's message - 
though those that were either disappointed with its tone or 
unsurprised at the reaction.  One woman from Tehran, criticizing 
Khamenei, complained that a message of kindness should be 
reciprocated in kind.  Comment: Iranians seeking visas to visit 
 
DUBAI 00000141  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
the United States are probably predisposed to supporting the 
President and unlikely to criticize him during their visa 
interview.  Still, their comments are useful.  Many applicants 
had not seen or read the message themselves but had heard about 
it, suggesting the message was a popular topic of conversation. 
Most applicants were from Tehran, but those from other 
locations, such as Shiraz, Esfahan, and Arak also were aware of 
and supportive of the message.  And many applicants were visibly 
excited to be queried about the message and optimistic that 
better relations may be in the offing. 
 
 
 
¶5. [C/NF] Iranians See Potential Opening in Khamenei's Mashhad 
Speech:  Several IRPO contacts, based both inside and outside 
Iran, observed that Western press characterizations of Supreme 
Leader Khamenei's March 21 speech as a rebuff or rejection of 
President Obama's Nowruz overture were oversimplified and 
incorrect.  Each contact noted a distinct change in Khamenei's 
tone and remarked that when the crowd began the usual "Death to 
America" chant, he stopped them, saying that this was not the 
time for slogans.  Our contacts, several of whom make a point of 
listening to every speech by the Leader, said this was 
unprecedented and a "clear signal" to Iranians that Khamenei 
recognizes the importance of this opportunity and does not want 
the moment to be obscured by the "usual political theater."  As 
one Tehran-based woman observed, "Iranians speak in nuance," and 
emphatically argued that Khamenei did not rebuff President 
Obama; rather, he said "you change, then we will change." (Note: 
This young woman, who is from a middle class, relatively 
religious family not supportive of Ahmadinejad, said she found 
President Obama's message "condescending" and that while "nice 
words are necessary, they are not sufficient." 
 
 
 
¶6. [S/NF] Ras Al Khaimah, KRG, and Iran: During meeting with 
Iranian IRPO business contact serving as advisor to Ras Al 
Khaimah leadership, IRPO Officer learned that KRG officials 
visit RAK often, and offered the following recent anecdote from 
a visit of Iranian-Born KDP leader Massoud Barzani.  During a 
recent meeting with RAK leadership, Barzani began speaking 
Persian with IRPO contact.  Barzani reportedly said in greeting, 
"We (Iranians and Kurds) are brothers of one shared root" to the 
Iranian.  The RAK Crown Prince, Shaikh Saud Bin Saqr al Qasimi, 
asked contact to translate the exchange, and commented only 
half-jokingly, "God help us". 
 
 
 
¶7. [U] Window on Iran is a classified, weekly product providing 
Washington policy community and Iran watcher highlights of key 
developments on Iran.  It is produced by the Iran Regional 
Presence Office - Dubai.  Please direct any questions/comments 
to: Kay McGowan (mcgowanka2@state.sgov.gov) or Charlie 
Pennypacker (pennypacker@state.sgov.gov). 
ASGARD