09STPETERSBURG29
GRYZLOV JR.: A LESSON IN KNOWING YOUR PLACE IN ST.
Tue Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate St Petersburg
R 171210Z MAR 09
FM AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2728
INFO AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 
AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 
AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 
AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURGUNCLAS ST PETERSBURG 000029 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: RS PGOV
SUBJECT: GRYZLOV JR.: A LESSON IN KNOWING YOUR PLACE IN ST. 
PETERSBURG 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Dmitriy Gryzlov, son of the State Duma 
Chairman, lost his electoral bid as an independent candidate in 
the St. Petersburg municipal elections on March 1st.  After his 
loss, he was quick to accuse United Russia of unfair campaigning 
and election fraud.  Gryzlov said also that the leadership of 
the Legislative Assembly (whose Chairman also heads the local 
branch of United Russia) was facilitating corrupt ties between 
local businessmen and criminals.  Gryzlov's rhetoric, however, 
abruptly softened when he was offered certain political 
opportunities within the St. Petersburg branch of United Russia. 
 Gryzlov has recently announced his desire to join United Russia 
and to take charge of the party's youth polices.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Dmitriy Gryzlov, son of the State Duma Chairman Boris 
Gryzlov, was one of several relatives of well-known public 
figures to run in St. Petersburg`s March 1st legislative 
elections.  He initially sought United Russia's support, and 
United Russia did in fact nominate him as a candidate, but not 
in the district he wanted.  Gryzlov then decided to register and 
run in his preferred district as an independent, arguing that he 
was well acquainted with the area and had a number of allies 
there who would support him, and that his father had advised him 
to do so.  Unlike numerous other opposition candidates, Gryzlov 
did manage to register his candidacy, although he had to file a 
complaint with the City Election Commission to be put on the 
ballot. 
 
¶3. (SBU) During the election campaign, Gryzlov complained about 
numerous obstacles put in his way by his competitors and United 
Russia.  These complaints were unusual, coming as they did from 
a major United Russia figure's son.  After the vote, which 
Gryzlov lost by coming in eighth in a five-person district, 
Gryzlov's criticism of United Russia intensified.  In an 
interview with a local magazine, Gryzlov charged United Russia 
with unfair campaigning and with having perpetrated an 
unprecedented level of outright fraud.  Gryzlov also accused an 
unnamed person, allegedly close to the Legislative Assembly 
leadership, of political intrigues against him and added that 
this person was facilitating ties between the city government 
and local businesses and criminals.  Gryzlov also threatened his 
opponents with forthcoming sanctions from Moscow, which would 
result when he updated his father on the unpleasant details of 
the St. Petersburg's elections. 
 
¶4. (SBU) After Gryzlov's magazine interview was published, his 
election story became a major theme for the local media.  This 
upset United Russia's St. Petersburg leadership.  Legislative 
Assembly Speaker Vadim Tyulpanov, and local head of United 
Russia, apparently decided to resolve the conflict in a peaceful 
manner, and held a private talk with Dmitriy Gryzlov.  After 
this meeting, Gryzlov dropped his main accusations against 
United Russia, and instead named District Administrator Vsevolod 
Khmyrov as the party responsible for his loss.  Gryzlov also has 
said he might become a member of the regional United Russia 
Political Council, and may also be put in charge of United 
Russia's youth policies and of the City Youth Council, a youth 
organization that has been inactive recently. 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT.  This episode is indicative of United Russia's 
ability to manage conflict, so to speak, through co-optation, 
smooth over rifts, and ensure the party's continued overwhelming 
dominance of local politics.  END COMMENT. 
 
GWALTNEY