06REYKJAVIK401
Iceland: Visit of USS Wasp Demonstrates "Robust and
Thu Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Reykjavik
VZCZCXRO1843
PP RUEHC
DE RUEHRK #0401/01 2991754
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261754Z OCT 06 ZDK EACTC SVC #0128
FM AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3030
INFO RHMFIUU/COMUSNAVEUR NAPLES IT PRIORITY
RHBVEPB/USS WASP
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE 0037
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 REYKJAVIK 000401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECDEF FOR OSD/P (KELSO, HURSCH) 
OSLO FOR DATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS PREL MARR KPAO OPRC NATO IC
SUBJECT:  Iceland: Visit of USS Wasp Demonstrates "Robust and 
Visible" U.S. Commitment to Iceland's Defense 
 
Refs:  A) Reykjavik 369 (NOTAL) 
  B) Reykjavik 364 (NOTAL) 
  C) Reykjavik 359 (NOTAL) 
  D) Reykjavik 357 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The October 12-17 port visit of the 
USS Wasp provided a visible demonstration of USG intent to honor its 
defense commitment to Iceland following the September closure of 
Naval Air Station Keflavik (NASKEF).  The Prime Minister, Foreign 
Minister, and Justice Minister - just back from the Washington 
signing of a new Joint Understanding on future security arrangements 
- praised the timeliness and substance of the visit, and host 
government engagement was enthusiastic and professional. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Local media coverage highlighted the Wasp's humanitarian 
relief capabilities and provided striking coverage of joint training 
by the Wasp's helicopter detachment and Icelandic Police and Coast 
Guard.  The press also ran human interest stories on the lives of 
sailors and on Wasp's community outreach projects.  The public 
welcomed sailors warmly, and there were no reports of liberty 
incidents.  The visit undercut local skepticism over U.S. intent and 
capability to uphold its defense commitment, while strengthening 
Icelandic security forces and interagency planning - as well each 
side's familiarity with the other's procedures - in preparation for 
future exercises and contingencies.  End summary. 
 
¶3. (U) The USS Wasp (LHD-1), with an embarked crew of roughly 1300 
sailors, visited Reykjavik October 12-17, arriving twelve days after 
the closure of Naval Air Station Keflavik (NASKEF) and one day after 
Secretary Rice joined Icelandic Prime Minister Haarde and Foreign 
 
SIPDIS 
Minister Sverrisdottir in signing a "Joint Understanding" on 
modernizing U.S.-Iceland defense and security relations. 
 
¶4. (U) With support from USDAO Oslo and NAVEUR and an enthusiastic 
host government, Embassy and USS Wasp - the first U.S. warship to 
visit Iceland since 2002 - arranged for heavy media and political 
outreach in connection with the event, including: 
 
-- a media embark by MH-53 helicopter to cover the vessel's arrival, 
which became a lead story in all major media ("The Yankees Are 
Back!"); 
 
-- ship tours and a reception for GOI officials and targeted groups 
(with a focus on students and rising political leaders) emphasizing 
the LHD's secondary role in humanitarian relief operations; 
 
-- community relations projects (visits to the children's wing of 
the national hospital and a home for the elderly by sailors and the 
6th Fleet Jazz Ensemble, respectively, and sports matches with local 
notables); and 
 
-- a joint Icelandic National Police "Viking Squad"/Icelandic Coast 
Guard (ICG) counterterrorism training event supported by the Wasp's 
helicopter detachment.  The most memorable TV image was of Icelandic 
Police special forces and Coast Guard EOD specialists coming off an 
MH-53 to assault a suspected terrorist hideout.  (Several Icelanders 
have commented to embassy officers that they never knew their police 
had this capability.) 
 
¶5. (U) Media coverage was quite positive overall, with print media 
offering extensive photo spreads and broadcast media enjoying the 
opportunity for compelling video.  The media offered no editorial 
reservations to counter the U.S. message that the visit demonstrated 
the sincerity and robustness of American commitment to Iceland's 
defense.  (Post is sending media summaries and video files to Wasp 
and NAVEUR via email.) 
 
¶6. (SBU) PM Geir Haarde, Foreign Minister Valgerdur Sverrisdottir, 
and Justice Minister Bjorn Bjarnason all toured the Wasp and 
expressed enthusiasm for the visit and for the briefings they 
received on the Wasp's amphibious assault and humanitarian 
assistance capabilities.  In public comments, the PM and FM made an 
explicit link between the Joint Understanding and the ship visit, 
noting that the multi-role Wasp and her crew exemplified the mobile, 
flexible over-the-horizon forces that the U.S. had said could defend 
Iceland in a crisis. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Officials from the Defense Department of the Ministry for 
Foreign Affairs, the ICG, and other agencies noted their 
appreciation to embassy officers, with one GOI official commenting 
that the visit made it easier for him to be "taken seriously" when 
he argued the benefits of U.S.-Iceland security cooperation. 
 
 
REYKJAVIK 00000401  002.4 OF 002 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Opposition parties largely ignored the visit.  The youth 
wing of the Left-Green party, which has a stated policy of pacifism, 
declined a tour invitation and instead issued a public statement 
decrying the visit.  They were echoed by the Alliance of Military 
Base Opponents, which castigated the Wasp's counterterrorism 
training with the Icelandic Police and ICG as contributing to the 
"militarization" of the security forces.  The only public 
demonstration came in the form of four protestors who stood gamely 
in the rain pierside for an hour on 15 October, leaving as soon as 
their TV interviews were done. 
 
¶9. (U) The public welcomed sailors warmly and there were no reports 
of liberty incidents.  The only sour note: even with tour, store, 
and restaurant discounts arranged by the Embassy and local 
authorities, Iceland is an expensive liberty port.  At Ambassador's 
direction, post is already engaging with Icelandic authorities to 
explore means of making the next ship visit easier on sailors' 
wallets. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment: In the wake of the NASKEF closure decision, the 
leading opposition party and some press commentators (including some 
who had supported the presence of NASKEF) spoke of abrogating the 
1951 U.S.-Iceland Defense Agreement, questioning American intent and 
capability to come to the defense of Iceland in a crisis.  The 
Wasp's visit undercut those skeptics and confounded anti-NATO 
elements who had seen the NASKEF closure as a step on the road to 
Icelandic withdrawal from the Alliance. 
 
¶11. (SBU) The visit also strengthened the Navy's familiarity with 
Icelandic security forces in preparation for future exercises and 
contingencies.  The Police and Coast Guard took good advantage of 
both the real-world force protection requirements of the visit and 
the counterterrorism training to develop and demonstrate their own 
capabilities.  The visit also provided useful experience for the 
Defense Department (note: a division of the Foreign Ministry, 
Iceland having no Defense Ministry), Coast Guard, Police, and 
Ministry of Justice in staff work and coordination (with one another 
and with the Embassy and Wasp).  End comment. 
 
¶12. (U) Post offers sincere thanks to USEUCOM, COMNAVEUR, Sixth 
Fleet, and "Team Wasp" for their outstanding support of USG goals 
vis-a-vis this NATO ally.  We would warmly welcome another ship 
visit in 2007.  Wasp has not cleared this message. 
 
VAN VOORST