09BUENOSAIRES153
ARGENTINA: FOREIGN MINISTER PREVIEWS ARGENTINA
Fri Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXRO1303
PP RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHMT RUEHNG
RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHBU #0153/01 0441009
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 131009Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3031
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BUENOS AIRES 000153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/19 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON EFIN AR
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA: FOREIGN MINISTER PREVIEWS ARGENTINA 
EXPECTATIONS FOR PROGRESSIVE LEADERS, G-20, AND T&T SUMMITS 
 
REF: BUENOS AIRES 142 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Wayne for reasons 1.4 (b) & (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  Ambassador Wayne met with Foreign Minister 
Taiana and Vice Foreign Minister Taccetti to exchange views 
on how the USG and Argentina can work collaboratively in the 
coming months as President Obama's administration defines its 
priorities in the hemisphere.  They noted that there were 
many opportunities in the coming months for high-level 
bilateral exchanges, including VFM Taccetti's upcoming trip 
to Washington, the Progressive Leaders' Summit in Chile, the 
G-20 in London, and the Summit of the Americas in Trinidad 
and Tobago.  Taiana expressed the GOA's hope that a 
senior-level USG official would attend the Chile summit, 
especially since the initiative began under former President 
Clinton's administration. 
 
¶2. (C) The FM also underscored the importance of the G-20 
summit in developing a multilateral approach to resolving the 
economic crisis and stressed the GOA's hope for a positive 
Summit of the Americas.  Taiana was upbeat on Argentina's 
ability to weather the economic storm in the short term, 
saying the world ""always underestimates Argentina.""  He 
cautioned, however, that ""the world needs this fixed quickly"" 
to avoid a deeper and longer global economic recession. 
Privately, Taiana said he hoped a brief meeting between the 
two presidents would be possible during the G-20 Summit, and 
expressed his strong interest in meeting with Secretary 
Clinton, perhaps on the margins of the April 6 
Ministerial-level event on the Antarctic to which the 
Secretary has just invited the Minister.  End Summary. 
 
Upcoming Opportunities for Dialogue 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) On February 12, Ambassador Wayne met with Foreign 
Minister Jorge Taiana to exchange views on how the USG and 
Argentina can work collaboratively in the coming months as 
President Obama's administration defines its priorities in 
the hemisphere.  They were joined by Vice Foreign Minister 
Vittorio Taccetti, DCM, and Acting Polcouns (notetaker). 
Taiana indicated that VFM Taccetti's visit to Washington next 
week was an ""excellent preparatory meeting"" for eventual 
contacts between senior USG and GOA officials that would 
""likely happen at the G-20 Summit and the Summit of the 
Americas.""  The Ambassador agreed that this was an opportune 
time to visit Washington and to enhance collaboration for the 
two Summits. 
 
¶4. (C) The Ambassador noted that Argentina's proposed 
guidelines for the VFM's meeting with WHA A/S Tom Shannon 
were good and proposed additional topics (pre-cleared with 
WHA) for discussion, including: enhancing regional security 
cooperation, future of the 3 1 dialogue, counternarcotics 
cooperation; promoting progress on renewable energy and 
climate change; exchanging views on Bolivia, Venezuela, 
Ecuador, Colombia, Cuba and Haiti; bilateral economic issues; 
and the future of the bilateral consultative process.  Taiana 
stated that these suggestions were fine, and reiterated the 
GOA's interest in a bilateral meeting at the upcoming G-20 
Summit and Summit of the Americas. 
 
¶5. (C) Taiana then asked about the possibility of 
senior-level USG attendance to the upcoming Progressive 
Leaders Summit in Santiago, Chile.  He noted that the UK's 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown would attend as well as Brazil's 
Lula and Spain's Zapatero and added that the Chile meeting is 
an excellent opportunity to prepare for the subsequent G-20 
Summit in London.  He said that he was pleased that the 
United States would attend again, especially since the 
Progressive Leaders Summit was an initiative of the former 
Clinton administration.  The Ambassador noted that Washington 
has not yet made a decision on who will attend. 
 
The Kirchners' Fascination with President Obama 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The FM confirmed the Argentine first couple's 
ongoing fascination with President Obama.  He said that 
ex-President and First Gentleman Nestor Kirchner made his 
remarks (reftel) to a Peronist political rally that Obama ""is 
implementing the same policies we have been carrying out 
since 2003"" just hours after watching televised coverage of 
the President's February 10 speech on the U.S. economy in Ft. 
Myers, Florida. 
 
FM: We Need a Successful Summit of the Americas 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
BUENOS AIR 00000153  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶7. (C) Turning to the April Summit of the Americas in 
Trinidad and Tobago, the FM stressed that it is ""important 
that the Summit be a success.""  At the same time, he 
expressed his understanding that the GOA did not expect the 
USG to have a fully formulated Latin American policy ready in 
time for the summit.  GOA officials did, however, hope for 
some early indications of the new direction that President 
Obama will give to U.S. policy.  Referring to the 2005 Summit 
of the Americas hosted by Argentina, Taiana joked that 
Argentina has experience with ""combative"" summits and 
stressed that it was in everyone's interest that the Trinidad 
Summit be positive and forward-looking.  (Taiana, as 
then-Vice Foreign Minister, had the lead in organizing the 
Counter-Summit of the Americas, which invited protesters to 
an anti-Summit rally featuring Venezuelan President Chavez as 
the keynote speaker.)  He asserted that Bush's emphasis on 
free trade and security had little resonance in Latin 
America, particularly in Argentina since the country ""did not 
have problems with terrorism and drugs at the time."" 
 
¶8. (SBU) VFM Taccetti added that President Obama has an 
opportunity to adopt a ""more cooperative"" approach to the 
Americas.  He acknowledged that the USG has by far the most 
influence to define the regional agenda but that it was 
important ""not to throw your weight around.""  Taiana added 
that Latin America would be more open to U.S. leadership if 
it worked collegially, saying ""crises have a way of bringing 
countries together."" 
 
FM: World Must Avoid Protectionism 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) Turning to the G-20 summit in London on April 2, 
Taiana opined that the focus should be on elements of common 
ground, which in his opinion included an aggressive to get 
the global economy out of a recession, the need for 
solidarity towards the many millions affected by the global 
slowdown, and what he called ""the tension between saving 
domestic jobs and preserving international trade.""  He said 
that he understood that such tension exists in all countries 
-- ""in times of crisis, countries take care of their own 
first"" -- and suggested that the G-20 explicitly recognize 
this fact of life.  At the same time, he expressed concern 
over the ""Buy America"" program and the potential for other 
countries to adopt a protectionist stance.  He acknowledged 
that it would be difficult for countries to open their 
economies now but, noting the lessons from the Great 
Depression in the 1930s, insisted that protectionism would be 
a disastrous ""political mistake."" 
 
¶10. (C) Taiana mentioned Argentina's interest at the G-20 in 
pursing reform of International Financial Institutions and 
particularly the IMF so that they increased their emphasis on 
financing infrastructure projects and de-emphasized policy 
conditionality, as well as its support for cracking down on 
tax havens to reduce tax evasion and capital flight.  The 
Ambassador noted that what was important was a constructive 
process in which agreement can be found.  A number of 
countries, for example, will likely not favor the degree or 
type of IMF reform Argentina is seeking but we should be able 
to find common ground.  Taiana said he agreed. 
 
FM:  Argentina Will Weather the Storm 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (C) Taiana was upbeat on Argentina's prospects for 
weathering the current economic storm, predicting that the 
economy would grow in 2009 despite widespread predictions to 
the contrary.  As always, he said, ""the money stashed under 
mattresses and in home safes"" would be Argentina's secret 
weapon, bolstering consumption when it seems that domestic 
liquidity had evaporated.  The upcoming completion of several 
large projects, including Argentina's ""Atucha 2"" nuclear 
reactor and the expansion of the country's electricity grid, 
would for example bolster energy supply and thus growth. 
 
¶12.  (C) The world ""always underestimates Argentina,"" Taiana 
complained good-naturedly, noting that the country for years 
has outperformed predictions of impending doom from the IMF 
and ""The Economist"" magazine, which he attributed to 
ideological hostility to Argentina's recent governments. 
Despite the fact that the international financial community 
still has not ""forgiven us"" for cancelling debts, Argentina 
has consistently outpaced expectations, growing despite its 
lack of access to foreign capital markets.  Referring to his 
conversation in Madrid with Peruvian Foreign Minister Jose 
Antonio Garcia Belaunde earlier this week, Taiana noted that 
Argentina, Peru, and many other countries in the hemisphere 
have taken steps to ride out the crisis until the end of 
¶2009.  What concerns Latin governments, he said, is the 
 
BUENOS AIR 00000153  003 OF 003 
 
 
global economic crisis's prolongation beyond the end of this 
year.  ""The world needs this fixed quickly,"" he said. 
 
Bilateral Meetings 
------------------ 
 
¶13. (C) On the way out, Taiana (He asked to handle this very 
quietly.) said we very much hoped that a bilateral meeting 
(even if brief) between the two presidents could be held 
during the G-20 Summit in London.  He also said he very much 
hoped to have an early opportunity to talk with Secretary 
Clinton.  In this context, he indicated that he understood 
there would be an event which Secretary Clinton will host 
April 6 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Antarctic 
Treaty and said that he would work to rearrange his schedule 
to attend in strong hope that even a short meeting with the 
Secretary might be possible. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶14. (C) GOA officials, from President Cristina Fernandez de 
Kirchner on down, are clearly ready for enhanced dialogue 
with the USG and hope that the three upcoming summits result 
in high-level bilateral meetings.  The GOA shares our desire 
for a positive outcome at the Summit of the Americas, even if 
our definitions of ""success"" may differ.  VFM Taccetti's 
visit to Washington -- billed locally by the GOA as a coup 
because it is the first policy-level discussion between State 
Department and Latin American officials since the 
inauguration -- gives us an opportunity to encourage 
responsible and constructive GOA behavior at both the G-20 
and the Summit of the Americas. 
WAYNE