09SANJOSE991
Costa Rica's Foreign Affairs "Accomplishments" in 2009
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0991/01 3522133
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 182133Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0145
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SAN JOSE 000991 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM CS
SUBJECT: Costa Rica's Foreign Affairs "Accomplishments" in 2009 
 
REF: 09 SAN JOSE 799; 09 SAN JOSE 619; 09 SAN JOSE 622 
09 SAN JOSE 651 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The Costa Rican Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
presented its major accomplishments for the year to the public on 
December 15.  Arias' foreign policy has focused on creating new 
political partnerships in Asia and the Middle East as well as 
strengthening relations with Latin American partners.  While 
highlighting President Arias' role in mediating the Honduran 
crisis, the GOCR pointed out that that situation impeded further 
accomplishments with its Central American partners.  Costa Rica 
will finish its term on the United Nations Security Council at the 
end of December 2009 without having made much progress on its 
declared priorities of disarmament and UN reform.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
Border Disputes and Honduras 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) The GOCR saw its work internationally in 2009 as focused on 
five areas: sovereignty, regional politics, new diplomatic 
partnerships, multilateral politics and citizen services.  The 
Ministry highlighted the progress made on the long-standing dispute 
with Nicaragua over management of their shared border along the San 
Juan River.  The July 2009 ruling by the International Court of 
Justice was viewed as a victory by the GOCR (Ref B), though some 
issues still remain to be worked out (Ref A).  Additionally, in 
2009 the GOCR lodged an application to extend its continental shelf 
in order to increase the area of its exclusive maritime economic 
zone. 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) The President and the MFA dedicated significant time and 
attention to the situation in Honduras.  Costa Rica was the first 
stop for Manuel Zelaya after being deposed, and Arias took the lead 
role in mediation efforts between the two sides.  Arias proposed 
the San Jose Accord (Ref C) in early July, met with the 
presidential candidates before the polls in November, and pushed 
other Latin American countries to recognize the legitimacy of the 
elections after they took place. 
 
 
 
New Partnerships 
 
 
 
¶4. (U) A good deal of Arias' foreign policy has focused on creating 
new political partnerships outside the region, while strengthening 
relations with countries the GOCR sees as partners in Latin 
America.  In 2009 Costa Rica opened relations with nineteen 
countries and continued to strengthen ties with China and India, 
where it plans to open a new Embassy in early 2010.  With a stated 
focus on building ties with Arab and Muslim countries, Arias also 
made the first visit by a Costa Rican president to the Middle East. 
He visited Turkey, Israel and "Palestine", where he pressed for a 
demilitarized state.  Closer to home, Costa Rica has signed 
"association agreements" with Chile, Mexico and Panama over the 
past year. 
 
 
 
Multilateral Impact and Citizen Services 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) The GOCR's impact in multilateral fora has been much more 
muted.   Costa Rica will finish its term on the United Nations 
Security Council at the end of December 2009 without having made 
much progress on its declared priorities of disarmament and UN 
reform (Ref D).  Furthermore, the end of the GOCR's rotating 
presidency of the Central American Integration System (SICA) will 
also pass without the achievement of any real accomplishments. 
While other factors certainly were at play, namely the crisis in 
Honduras, the GOCR must be disappointed at its missed opportunity 
to assume a greater leadership position within the region. 
 
¶6. (U) Over the past year the MFA, working in conjunction with the 
Department of Immigration, has also modernized Costa Rica's 
passport and visa services, transitioning to automated entry and 
exit stamps (replacing manual stamps by immigration officials). 
This has eliminated a good amount of corruption within the 
entry/exit process and resulted in a cost savings for the ministry. 
 
 
 
 
Comment: Costa Rica's Potential to Lead 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Costa Rica has been very active on the international stage 
throughout the Arias administration, from its prominent seat on the 
UNSC to Arias' role in the Honduran crisis.  Yet despite having 
arguably the most democratically stable country in the region, 
Costa Rica has generally failed to assume a greater leadership role 
within Central America.  Due to a host of factors, including both a 
jealousy of Costa Rica's success and a perception of Costa Rican 
arrogance, Central America continues to see Costa Rica as an 
outlier, rather than an example to follow. 
BRENNAN