08NAIROBI2543
SOMALIA - ARS Chairman Leads Delegation into Somalia
Tue Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO2243
PP RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2543/01 3090449
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 040449Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7521
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 002543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - ARS Chairman Leads Delegation into Somalia 
 
REF: A) Patterson-Garey emails B) Djibouti 840 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  On November 1, Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, 
Chairman of the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS), led 
an eight-person delegation into Somalia.  Encouraged by A/S Frazer 
during a recent meeting in Nairobi to demonstrate leadership on the 
ground (Ref A), the ARS Chairman made his first trip into the 
country in over two years.  Sharif began in Jowhar where he is 
rallying support for the Djibouti Agreement, promoting a unity 
government, and preparing to implement the cease-fire agreement 
signed between the Somali government and ARS on October 26.  The 
delegation, comprised of key members of the High Level Committee and 
the Joint Security Committee, has been well-received, though they 
have also been threatened by hard-liners.  Sharif is engaged in 
private talks with groups from Mogadishu, most associated with the 
Islamic Courts.  Although Sharif had planned to stay in Jowhar only 
for a few hours, his arrival in Beletweyn has been delayed by rains, 
which have made the Hiran regional airport inaccessible.  The ARS 
delegation plans to leave Jowhar on November 4 and remain in 
Beletweyn for at least a week, and maybe more depending on the 
support they receive.  End Summary. 
 
ARS Leaders Return 
to Advocate Peace 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On November 1, ARS Chairman Sheikh Sharif led an 
eight-person delegation into Somalia.  It was Sharif's first visit 
to the country in over two years, since the fall of the Islamic 
Courts Union (ICU) in 2006.  They began in Jowhar, the provincial 
capital of Middle Shabelle region, 90 km north of Mogadishu, and a 
stronghold during Sharif's leadership of the ICU.  In public 
speeches, Sharif rallied support for the Djibouti Agreement, 
encouraged the establishment of a unity government, and talked about 
creating the conditions within the ARS and the Islamic Courts to 
implement the October 26 ceasefire agreement.  Sharif is also 
holding a series of closed-door discussions with local elders and 
religious leaders, some of whom have come from Mogadishu to engage 
in talks.  Our contacts have told us the delegation has been warmly 
received and some media reports suggest the same. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The eight-member delegation, led by Sharif, comprises key 
ARS leaders, most of whom are associated with the Islamic Courts 
faction of the ARS.  Most of the delegation members are from the 
Hawiye clan that dominates central Somalia.  They include Joint 
Security Committee Chairman Omar Hashi Aden, the former ICU 
Secretary for Internal Affairs, a former military colonel and 
regional administrator in the Siad Barre regime.  Hashi is extremely 
influential in Beletweyn, and within his sub-clan (Hawiye/Hawadle). 
Hashi's participation in the Djibouti Process was regarded by many 
as a key turning point to gaining the support of military commanders 
in the field.  He played an active role in the Joint Security 
Committee's negotiations that finally led to the signature of a 
cessation of armed confrontation agreement (Ref B). 
 
¶4. (SBU) Also part of the delegation is Ahmed Abdullahi Sheikh, ARS 
information secretary and the former director of the Formal Private 
Education Network that operated most of the primary and secondary 
schools in Mogadishu prior to the fall of the ICU.  Ahmed Abdullahi, 
an ARS High Level Committee member, was a member of the ARS 
delegation that met with A/S Frazer during her recent visit to 
Nairobi.  Abdurahman Mohamud Faarax "Janaqow" and Dahir Mohamud 
Gelle, both members of the High Level Committee, are also part of 
the ARS delegation. 
 
Waging a Battle for 
Somali Hearts and Minds 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The delegation traveled with three Al-Jazeera journalists 
to garner favorable media coverage.  ARS leaders acknowledged to us 
they're waging a public diplomacy war with al-Shabaab and others, 
and were keen to ensure their voices were heard during this 
important visit.  Arabic language Al-Jazeera reports that Sharif 
called on all Somali groups to lay down their weapons, reconcile and 
join a national unity movement.  He publicly denied the existence of 
wide-ranging opposition to the Djibouti agreement, and said the ARS 
will support a unity government provided it puts an end to the 
current crisis and is capable of serving the Somali people. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The media has widely reported Sharif's remarks on various 
issues, particularly on the friction between leaders in the ICU.  He 
reportedly said there are mediators in the country and that any 
 
NAIROBI 00002543  002 OF 002 
 
 
differences can be resolved through the Quran.  Independent 
religious leaders publicly called on factions associated with the 
ICU to end internal conflicts and work toward peace.  Despite these 
calls, hard-line elements issued public statements highly critical 
of Sharif and warning all persons not to work with the "traitorous" 
ARS leaders.  Our contacts within the ARS told us that they expected 
these media messages, but that the people on the ground nevertheless 
are responding favorably. 
 
----------------------- 
Continuing the Momentum 
----------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) If weather permits, Sharif plans to depart Jowhar for 
Beletweyn on November 3 to carry his peace and reconciliation 
message to the Hiran region.  Hardliners have been threatening 
persons in Hiran, and have warned Sharif directly against traveling 
there.  However, ARS leaders have told us that this visit is crucial 
to building the necessary conditions for a ceasefire and that Sharif 
is determined to show his mettle where it counts, on the ground. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Sheikh Sharif's departure for Somalia almost immediately 
after the IGAD Extraordinary Summit on Somalia came at the urging of 
A/S Frazer and is an unusual, welcome, and courageous effort to 
capitalize on positive momentum created by the creation of a unity 
government.  Sharif's willingness to build a constituency in Somalia 
for the TFG - ARS merger rather than worry first about what 
positions members of his Alliance will have in that government is a 
breath of fresh air in a process that has, too much of the time, 
been excessively preoccupied with status. 
 
RANNEBERGER