08NAIROBI2679
SOMALIA - PM Installs New Banadir Government
Fri Nov 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO1223
PP RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2679/01 3330359
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 280359Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7748
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 3106
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 002679 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - PM Installs New Banadir Government 
 
REF: A) Nairobi 2520  B) Djibouti 946 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On November 23, a Transitional Federal 
Government-appointed committee elected a new Banadir administration, 
in accordance with an IGAD-imposed deadline and more than two months 
after Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein dissolved the former 
administration on September 12 in a bitter political battle. 
Mohamed Osman Ali "Dhagahtur" (Hawiye/Abgaal) was elected Mogadishu 
Mayor and Banadir Governor.  Initial reactions are mixed.  On 
November 24, hundreds of Mogadishu residents staged a peaceful 
demonstration in support of the new administration as a fresh start 
for Benadir.  Some within the Hawiye clan, including Alliance for 
the Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS) leaders are disappointed with the 
outcome.  They contend that Dhagatur is another warlord who, as a 
deputy in Mohamed Dheere's past administration, was part of the 
previous corrupt government.  The Benadir election is a signal that 
the Prime Minister is following his own agenda, even without 
President Yusuf's approval.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
TFG Achieves One Goal with New Administration 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On November 23, Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein "Nur 
Adde" announced a new Banadir regional administration after a secret 
ballot election at his Mogadishu residence.  The  Region includes 
the capital of Mogadishu, and is regarded by many as the epicenter 
of Somalia's conflict.    Establishing a new administration to 
replace that of former Governor and Mayor of Mogadishu Mohamed Omar 
Habeeb "Dheere" has boosted the Prime Minister's popularity in 
Mogadishu, and fulfills overdue requirements from August's Addis 
roadmap (reftel A) and the October 29 Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development (IGAD) agreement. 
 
---------------------------- 
Clan-Based Electoral Process 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Through complex clan negotiations, the Prime Minister, and 
a now-dissolved regional governing body he appointed on September 
12, named 69 delegates to serve as counselors in the new 
administration and to elect from among themselves the region's top 
leaders.  The 69 delegates were allocated to clans: Hawiye - 32 
delegates (Abgaal 15, Morasade 9, and Habar Gedir 8); Darod - five 
delegates; Dir - five delegates; Digil and Mirifle - five delegates; 
and the minority clans collectively received three voting 
delegates. 
 
--------------------------- 
Three Top Officials Elected 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The three elected officials were: 
 -- Mohamed Osman Ali "Dhagahtur" (Hawiye/Abgaal) was elected 
Mogadishu Mayor and Banadir Governor.  Osman received 50 of 69 
votes.  Osman was deputy mayor under Mohamed Dheere before Dheere 
was ousted. In his acceptance speech Osman pledged to prioritize 
security and facilitate the return of Mogadishu's IDPs. 
-- Abdifatah Omar Sabriye "Shaweye" (Hawiye/Morasade) was elected as 
First Deputy Mayor/Governor.  Omar served in Mohamed Dheere's 
administration as Deputy Mayor/Governor.  He was appointed to the 
position as a replacement to his father following his death in a 
roadside bomb.  He received 38 votes to clinch the position. 
-- Ahmed Adan Shido (Hawiye/Habar Gedir) was elected as Second 
Deputy Mayor/Governor.  Adan is also allied with the TFG but did not 
previously serve in previous Banadir administrations.  He is closely 
allied with Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Abdisalam. 
The remaining 66 counselors will serve in different capacities in 
the administration, including as commissioners to Banadir's 16 
districts. 
 
----------------------- 
Initial Reactions Mixed 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The election of the Banadir government received mixed 
reactions.  On November 24, media report that hundreds of Mogadishu 
residents peacefully demonstrated their support for the new 
administration.  Influential Hawiye elders implored the newly 
elected to learn lessons from past administrations' failures. 
Abdimalik Yusuf (Habar Gedir/Ayr), Director of the Shabelle media 
 
NAIROBI 00002679  002 OF 002 
 
 
network, told us that ordinary Somalis of all clan affiliations are 
hopeful.  Transportation companies in Mogadishu welcomed the 
election and requested the administration to remove the numerous TFG 
checkpoints used to extort money from transport vehicles. 
Influential traditional elders have publicly supported the new 
administration including Imam Mohamed Imam Omar, an important 
spiritual leader. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The strongest criticism came from within the PM's own 
Hawiye clan.  Hawiye/Abgaal sub-clan members expressed 
dissatisfaction with the the administration's clan distribution, 
arguing that they are the underrepresented as the largest native 
community.  The Hawiye/Habar Gedir argued that the 
mayor/governorship should have gone to them instead of the Abgaal 
because the Prime Minister is Abgaal, thus their sub-clan rivals are 
already represented at the highest level.  Alliance for the 
Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) Chairman Sheikh Sharif Ahmed told us 
in Djibouti that "this is not the administration we wanted," and is 
disappointed with the election of a "warlord" and Dheere henchman 
who served in the previous, corrupt administration (reftel B).  We 
made it clear that in order to influence the outcome of the 
election, they should have taken part in the process. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Hawiye Traditional Unity Council, the most influential 
Hawiye political body, was in full support of the electoral process 
and its outcomes.  Despite some of its leaders' disappointment with 
giving representation to "outsiders," the HTUC endorsed the new 
administration because they see it as successful challenge to 
President Yusuf.  Also, the HTUC requested that the new 
administration employ Shari'a law and the new administration quickly 
agreed.  Despite having no formal legal jurisdiction, all matters 
will be referred to the Mayor/Governor who serves as arbiter on a 
range of issues. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) While the clan-based electoral process for the Benadir 
administration may not have been the free and transparent model for 
which advocate, residents and community elders endorsed it. 
Nevertheless, some are criticizing the PM for backpedaling by 
allowing a member of the former "corrupt administration" to assume 
the top regional post.  Indeed, it seems doubtful that replacing 
Dheere with his deputy could improve Benadir's functioning. 
 
RANNEBERGER