08NAIROBI2233
Somalia - No Cease Fire in Joint Communique
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO8349
RR RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2233 2661414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221414Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7123
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROME 0402
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 7391
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUQCDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS NAIROBI 002233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM EAID EWWT SO
SUBJECT: Somalia - No Cease Fire in Joint Communique 
 
¶1.  From October 17-21 Transitional Federal Government and Alliance 
for the Re-Liberation of Somalia joint High Level and Security 
committees met in Djibouti to advance implementation of June 9 peace 
agreement.  At the conclusion of the meetings, the parties issued a 
communique, the text of which follows in paragraph two. 
 
¶2.  Embassy comment will follow after consultations with the UN 
Political Office for Somalia and signatory parties.  We note, 
however, the communique does not include an expected ceasefire 
declaration per se; rather, item four calls for further discussion 
of a cease fire within 15 days "following field assessments and 
assessments...to jointly develop viable technical modalities 
for...implementation."  The joint committees also pledged to 
reconvene within 30 days. 
 
Begin Communique Text: 
 
¶1.  The Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the Alliance for 
the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) held a second round of meetings 
of the High Level Committee and the Joint Security Committee in 
Djibouti from 17 to 21 September 2008.  The international community, 
including the United Nations, diplomats from regional organizations 
(African Union, European Union, League of Arab States, the 
Organization of Islamic Conference) and individual countries, as 
well as representatives of Somali civil society, attended. 
 
¶2.  The two Committees continued their discussions on practical 
means of implementing the Djibouti Agreement. 
 
¶3.  The Parties agreed to continue the political dialogue between 
themselves and make efforts to move forward on issues relating to 
political cooperation, reconciliation, justice and human rights. The 
Parties agreed to work together through sub-committees to address 
issues of institutional capacity building, constitution, 
humanitarian issues and recovery, reconstruction and development. 
 
¶4.  The Parties agreed to conduct field assessments and 
consultations as well as meet within 15 days to jointly develop 
viable military technical modalities for the implementation of the 
ceasefire. 
 
¶5.  They welcomed all efforts undertaken by Somali nationals inside 
and outside Somalia, as well as those of the international 
community, particularly the International Contact Group for Somalia 
to help implement the Djibouti Agreement. 
 
¶6.  The Parties agreed to form a Board as a mechanism to facilitate 
and coordinate the response to the humanitarian situation. They call 
on the international community to urgently provide humanitarian 
assistance to the needy people of Somalia. The Parties reaffirmed 
their strong determination to help ensure unhindered humanitarian 
access and assistance. 
 
¶7.  The Parties reassure the Somali population on their 
determination to strengthen their commitment for peace, stability, 
unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity and dignity in Somalia. 
 
¶8.  The Parties again thank the Government and people of Djibouti 
for their hospitality during the meetings of the High Level 
Committee and the Joint Security Committee. 
 
¶9.  The Parties express their appreciation to the UN Special 
Representative Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his commitment and 
tireless efforts in moving the Somali peace process forward as well 
as the international community for its generous support and invite 
it to continue supporting the Djibouti Agreement. 
 
¶10.  The next meeting of the High Level and Joint Security 
Committees will take place within 30 days. 
 
Djibouti 
21 September 2008 
 
End Communique Text 
 
RANNEBERGER