09NAIROBI1735
SOMALIA - TFG RESHUFFLES CABINET
Tue Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO5155
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #1735/01 2301134
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181134Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0683
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 001735 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR SO EG DJ
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - TFG RESHUFFLES CABINET 
 
REF: A) Nairobi 1655 B) Nairobi 1698 C) Nairobi 1732 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary. On August 17 Somalia's Ambassador to Kenya 
Mohammed Nur notified us of a major cabinet reshuffle.  Changes 
include new Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Defense, Treasury, 
Information, Land Transport, Water and Minerals, the Minister of 
State for the Prime Minister, and the Minister of State for the 
Presidency.  On August 18, the Ambassador notified us that the 
President and the Prime Minister of Somalia had approved the 
reshuffle, although no official announcement has been issued.  The 
President's Chief-of-Staff has also confirmed the changes.  Several 
of the Ministers are unhappy with the reshuffle.  Politically, the 
moves bring an experienced leader into the Defense Ministry, and 
respond to Abgal clan concerns by selecting Abgals for the cabinet. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Somalia's Ambassador to Kenya Mohammed Nur on August 17 
notified us of a significant cabinet reshuffle.  The reshuffle comes 
after several weeks of restructuring rumors and on the heels of 
several military successes in the Galgaduud and Hiraan regions 
(reftels A and B).  On August 18, the Ambassador told us that the 
President and the Prime Minister have signed their approval of the 
re-shuffle.  The President's Chief-of-Staff has also confirmed the 
changes, although we caution that, as of this writing, no public 
announcement has been made. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Details of the appointments follow: 
 
-- Minister of Foreign Affairs:  Ali Ahmed Jama "Jingele" 
(Darod/Harti/Dhulbahante).  "Jingele" is moving to MFA from the 
Transport Ministry.  He replaces Mohamed Abdullahi Omar (Northern 
Dir/Isaak), who recently found himself at odds with the Prime 
Minister.  "Jingele" was Transitional Federal Government (TFG) 
Foreign Minister under President Abdullahi Yusuf.  He also served as 
Post and Communications Minister under former Prime Minister Gedi, 
and reportedly held several cabinet and diplomatic posts under Siad 
Barre, including ambassadorial appointments to Egypt, Yemen, and the 
UK.  In 2008 he was among ten ministers who resigned from former 
Prime Minister Nur Adde's cabinet during a dispute between Nur Adde 
and Yusuf.  Later in 2008 at the UN he publicly denounced President 
Yusuf as an obstacle to progress in Somalia.  "Jingele" has an 
advanced degree in economics from Egypt. 
 
-- Minister of Defense:  Abdullah "Boss" Ahmed (Northern Dir/Isaak). 
 "Boss" replaces Mohammed Abdi "Gandhi" (Darood/Ogaden).  A defense 
minister under former President Yusuf and fisheries minister under 
former FM Gedi, "Boss" was a key member of the Joint Security 
Committee where he advocated a peaceful merging of the TFG with the 
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS) in Djibouti in 
January 2009.  Even after he was appointed to the Ministry of Water 
in February 2009, he continued to work closely with "Gandhi" and 
other TFG security sector officials until a mild stroke sidelined 
him in April 2009.  He reportedly has recovered fully from the 
stroke, but still suffers from occasional poor health.  We estimate 
he is in his early 70s. 
 
-- Minister of Treasury:  Abdirahman Omar Osman "Engineer Yarisow" 
(Hawiye/Abgal/Wabudhan).  This is a new cabinet position reportedly 
created for a member of President Sheikh Sharif's Abgal clan. 
Before his appointment, the 40 year old "Yarisow" was the Director 
of Communications and Protocol for President Sharif.  He is a member 
of the Somali Concern Group, a U.K.-based Somali diaspora 
organization.  He is reportedly a close friend of Yusuf Garad, the 
head of the BBC Somali Service who is a frequent critic of TFG. 
Even though "Yarisow" is Abgal, he is said to be closely associated 
with the Rahanweyne, his mother's clan.  He holds a British 
Passport. 
 
-- Minister of Information:  Dahir Gelle(Hawiye/Abgal/Waesle). 
Gelle replaces Farhan Ali Mohamud (Hawiye/Habr Gedir/Duduble), 
possibly because Mohamud was often absent from Mogadishu.  Gelle is 
an ARS Member of Parliament and a trusted ally of President Sharif, 
whom he has known since the two were members of the Islamic Courts 
Union (ICU).  He was a member of the ICU's Communication Committee 
in 2006.  Gelle studied political science in Eqypt and is said to 
have good contacts there.  He is a former member of Al-Itihaad 
al-Islamiya, and is regarded as one of the more intellectual and 
politically active ARS MPs, along with Education Minister Wayeel and 
Justice Minister Farah.  Gelle founded Mogadishu's Radio Qur'an/Holy 
Qur'an Radio.  We estimate he is 40-45 years old. 
 
-- Minister of Air and Land Transport:  Mohammed Abdi "Gandhi" 
 
NAIROBI 00001735  002 OF 002 
 
 
(Darood/Ogaden).  A self-professed dilettante on defense issues, 
anthropology professor "Gandhi" moves from Defense to Transport. 
According to Ambassador Mohammed Nur, "Gandhi" is likely extremely 
unhappy with his reappointment. It is unclear whether he will remain 
a key TFG interlocutor with restive Darood politicians and 
operatives who favor a semi-autonomus Jubaland state and who may be 
organizing to confront al-Shabaab.  Juba contacts are concerned that 
a rumored Juba offensive to take Kismayo will not happen unless 
"Gandhi" remains in charge of the initiative, despite his removal as 
Minister of Defense.  Jubaland contacts are reportedly encouraging 
"Gandhi" to approach President Sharif about this issue.  The Juba 
offensive was planned to begin within weeks (reftel C). "Gandhi" is 
in his 60s. 
 
-- Minister of Water and Minerals:  Mohamed Abdullahi Omar 
(Dir/Isaak).  Oxford and Cambridge-educated entrepreneur/consultant 
Omar appears to have been demoted, possibly as a result of 
differences of opinion with the Prime Minster and Finance Minister 
over, among other issues, advocating competing transparent financial 
mechanism for international assistance, and failing to lobby for 
sanctions against Eritrea at the last African Union (AU) Summit, 
which reportedly frustrated President Sharif.  On August 17 Somali 
Ambassador Nur told us he talked to Omar, who was upset by his 
reassignment.  Omar told Nur he had discussed his reassignment with 
President Guelleh of Djibouti.  We understand that President Guelleh 
in turn has called President Sharif to express his unhappiness with 
the decision.  Nonetheless, Omar's background may be better suited 
for his new ministry. 
 
-- Minister of State for the Prime Ministry:  Khalid Omar (Digil and 
Mirifle/Digil/Bagadi).   A long-time TFG MP, Omar served as 
President Yusuf's state minister. He grew up in Mogadishu but his 
sub-clan inhabits Afgooye, Lower Shabelle. Omar is a dentist by 
profession. 
 
-- Minister of State for the Presidency:  Hassan Maalim 
(Hawiye/Murasade).  An ARS MP, Maalim was previously the influential 
chief of cabinet at the presidency.  A British subject, he grew up 
in Mogadishu and has comparatively little formal education.  He may 
be in his early 40s.  His appointment as State Minister appears in 
part a response to criticisms that Maalim should not have served as 
chief of cabinet as an MP.  It also allows him to maintain his 
influence at Villa Somalia. 
 
-- Minister of State for Planning and International Cooperation: 
Abdullahi Sheikh Ali "Qolo'ow" (Hawiye/Gugundabe/Dagodia).  Before 
this appointment, "Qolo'ow" was a long-serving senior UNDP Somalia 
staff member.  He served in Siad Barre's government in various 
capacities, including in the planning ministry, and as Mogadishu 
deputy mayor.  He has also taught at Mogadishu University. 
"Qolo'ow's" daughter is married to former TFG Prime Minister Gedi's 
son. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Comment:  Although we've been assured there will be a 
formal announcement, we caution that the TFG has not yet publicized 
this reshuffle.  If implemented, however, these moves accomplish 
several important goals.  First, they bring two Abgal clan members 
into the cabinet as a by-product of President Sharif's overtures to 
the Abgal, and likely in exchange for greater Abgal military backing 
to the TFG.  Returning security-savvy "Boss" to the Defense Ministry 
seems to correct a poor choice for defense made early in the unity 
government.  New foreign minister Jingele comes with valuable 
governmental and diplomatic experience. 
 
RANNEBERGER