09NAIROBI1033
SOMALIA - DADAAB REFUGEES' VIEWS ON U.S. POLICY
Thu May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO0027
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #1033/01 1411316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211316Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9612
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 001033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E, A/S CARSON AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER PREF KPAO SO KE
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - DADAAB REFUGEES' VIEWS ON U.S. POLICY 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The residents of Kenya's Dadaab refugee camp, home to more 
than 270,000 mostly Somali refugees, espoused a wide range of both 
positive and negative views on the U.S. government's involvement in 
Somalia.  In general, most were grateful for U.S. aid to the camp, 
but many felt the United States was at least partially responsible 
for the turmoil in Somalia, and believed the United States could, 
given political will, quickly neutralize the extremists who continue 
to impede Somalia's progress toward peace and stability.  The 
refugees' views on Somalia's future and opportunities for U.S. 
engagement with the refugees will be discussed in septels.  End 
summary. 
 
-------------------- 
Population is Triple 
Planned Capacity 
 ------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) A Somalia Unit officer, accompanied by a visiting AF/PDPA 
officer, traveled to Dadaab refugee camp from May 11-13 to survey 
the views of the refugees regarding U.S. policy toward Somalia, the 
current and future political prospects for Somalia, and 
opportunities for public diplomacy engagement with the refugees. 
The Dadaab refugee camp is in fact three separate camps - Ifo, 
Dagahaley, and Hagadera - and is located approximately 80 
kilometers? from the border with Somalia in Kenya's Northeast 
Province.  The camp was created in 1991 with capacity for 90,000 
refugees.  The camp currently houses over 270,000 registered 
refugees, with more arriving daily in spite of the official closure 
of the Kenya-Somalia border. 
 
---------------------- 
Surprise at U.S. Focus 
on Somalia 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Many refugee groups with whom we spoke were unaware of the 
existence of the Somalia Unit in Nairobi, and expressed surprise and 
pleasure that the Department of State had personnel dedicated to 
diplomatic relations with Somalia.  A community leader in Hagadera 
said the creation of the Somalia Unit "symbolizes great progress" in 
U.S. involvement in Somalia.  Many of the refugees were very 
appreciative of the visit, noting that our effort to interact with 
them symbolized our recognition of the refugees' importance in the 
present and future well-being of their country.  A female community 
leader in Ifo claimed no one had ever asked the refugees for their 
opinion before, and thanked us for making the visit.  A female 
member of a drama group in Dagahaley camp said she was honored by 
our visit, that it had "rekindled her spirit" and that the visit was 
a huge boost to her morale.  However, one community leader in 
Dagahaley said the United States should do only public affairs and 
humanitarian work in the camp, and leave discussions of Somali 
politics to the Somalis. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Although the refugees were often unaware of the U.S. 
government's work through the Somalia Unit, nearly all with whom we 
spoke were aware of the U.S. aid to the camps, and express gratitude 
to us.  A contact from the Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) told us that when the refugees 
were told that the hijacking of the Maersk Alabama was related to a 
recent temporary cut in their rations, they were disappointed and 
embarrassed that fellow Somalis had inflicted even more hardship on 
them in the camps.  A Community Peace and Security Team (CPST) 
member in Ifo camp cited the donation, with funding from the Bureau 
of Populations, Refugees, and Migrants (PRM) via Lutheran World 
Federation, of bicycles, boots and reflective vests - one CPST 
member wore his reflective vest to our early morning meeting - for 
CPST patrols in the camp as evidence of positive U.S. involvement in 
the camps.  Finally, several refugees acknowledged that the United 
States accepts the largest number of Dadaab refugees on a yearly 
basis. 
 
---------------- 
U.S. Caused This 
---------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Many refugees with whom we spoke claimed that the U.S. 
government was behind much of the turmoil that has plagued Somalia 
 
NAIROBI 00001033  002 OF 002 
 
 
for the past 18 years.  In one especially frank exchange, a 
community action leader in Ifo camp claimed Somalis would not be 
fighting were it not for the United States and other outside parties 
perpetuating the conflict in Somalia.  Continuing, he said that the 
United States in recent years "left no stone unturned to destroy 
Somalia" and claimed some Somali males felt compelled to shave their 
beards to avoid being labeled as terrorists. 
 
----------------- 
U.S. Can Fix This 
----------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) While many of the refugees blamed the U.S. government for 
the troubles of Somalis, many stated that they believed the United 
States could, given sufficient political will, neutralize the 
extremist elements who continue to cause political instability in 
the country.  Another community leader in Ifo camp said the United 
States could expel the troublemakers, "just like in Bosnia."  The 
leader of a youth empowerment initiative in Ifo camp told us 
refugees' views on acceptable U.S. interventions in Somalia ranged 
from invasion and re-colonization to a complete disengagement, 
leaving Somalis to fend for themselves.  A Dagahaley community 
leader believed the United States had destroyed Somalia, but that 
the role of the world's remaining superpower was "not only to 
destroy, but rebuild." 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Septel will review several opportunities for further public 
diplomacy engagement with this large population of Somalis.  The 
simple act of making ourselves available to several groups of these 
refugees over three days afforded us significant inroads.  Further, 
concerted engagement with this population will likely allow us to 
repair some misconceptions about U.S. policy toward Somalia, and the 
fact that the audience is in regular contact with Somalis inside 
Somalia will give any public diplomacy engagement an exponential 
impact.  End comment. 
 
RANNEBERGER