09NAIROBI173
SOMALIA - REACTION TO SHARIF'S ELECTION
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO0939
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0173/01 0331500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021500Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8353
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHMV/AMEMBASSY MONROVIA 0358
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 000173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND ACTING A/S CARTER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - REACTION TO SHARIF'S ELECTION 
 
REF: Nairobi 172 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The January 30 election of former Union of Islamic 
Courts head Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed has resulted in a wide range 
of reactions from a variety of parties both domestic and 
international.  Most Somalis appear to have welcomed the new 
president and pledged to support him in continuing the country's 
reconciliation process.  Most notable among those who have reacted 
positively are militia commanders of the former Union of the Islamic 
Courts (UIC), elders from the predominant Hawiye clan in Mogadishu, 
and privately-owned media stations in Mogadishu.  As may have been 
expected, extremist elements wasted no time after the election in 
registering their disapproval.  Sharif's rival, ARS-Asmara Chairman 
Sheikh Hasan Dahir Aweys dismissed Sharif's election, while 
al-Shabaab spokesman Sheikh Mukhtar Robow vowed to continue 
forcefully pursuing an Islamic administration for Somalia.  End 
summary. 
 
Positive Reactions: 
A New Era, Focus 
on Reconstruction 
-------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Following the January 30 election of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh 
Ahmed as the new President of Somalia's Transitional Federal 
Government (reftel), a series of individuals and organizatoins 
immediately spoke out in support of Sharif.  The supreme council of 
Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a (ASWJ) strongly welcomed Sharif's election. 
During a January 31 news conference at a Mogadishu hotel, ASWJ 
spokesman Sheikh Abdiqadir Sheikh Abukar Sheikh Muhammad Somow first 
congratulated the Somali people, wherever they may be, on the 
"momentous" election of the President.  He called on groups still 
opposed to the government of national unity (GNU) to take part in 
the reconstruction of Somalia and promotion of peace.  He called on 
groups engaging in armed conflict in Somalia, many with the 
objective of having the country ruled by Islamic law, to join the 
peace process and abide by the wishes of the majority. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The internal administration of the Union of Islamic Courts 
(UIC), resolved to support the new President in order to restore 
peace and order in the country.  They urged Sheikh Sharif to 
implement Sharia law and form a national armed force to restore 
peace. Speaking to BBC Somalia Service, the head of the Courts' 
international administration, Sheikh Abdiqadir Ali Omar, said his 
group was fully behind the new president and any past differences 
would take second place to furthering the interests of the country. 
Omar noted that with the election of Sharif and the departure of the 
Ethiopian troops, Somalis should "forget the past and consider the 
general good." 
 
¶4. (SBU) In Mogadishu, residents from various neighborhoods took to 
the streets in celebration of Sharif's election.  Elders from the 
predominant Hawiye clan welcomed the results of the Djibouti 
elections and promised to work with the new president.  Abukar Osman 
Sheikh, a Hawiye/Habargidir sub-clan elder, urged the new president 
to reach out to all armed groups in order to achieve proper 
reconciliation among all Somalis.  In central Mudug region, clan 
elders and intellectuals welcomed the election of the new president 
with demonstrations in support of Shairf in several towns, including 
Beledweyne, Bula Burte and Chalalaqsi.  In Beledweyne, capital of 
Hiraan Region, the head of local administration, Sheikh Abdirahman 
Ibrahim Maow, urged the residents to observe law and order and help 
the new government to restore peace.  In central Galagadud Region, 
elders and intellectuals welcomed Sharif's victory and urged the 
president to help the displaced people to return to their homes.  In 
Galkacyo, the local administration pledged to work closely with the 
new president. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In a departure from their standard practice, radio stations 
in Mogadishu have resolved to stop broadcasting religious lectures 
and sermons conducted in mosques.  The decision was meant to 
marginalize radical views that would create a hostile political 
environment for the new regime.  In a meeting attended by radio 
directors from mainstream stations in Mogadishu, the media resolved 
to work towards enhancing peace by not publicizing incidents of 
violence in Mogadishu, especially those which target the presidency 
and the airport, with the goal of denying Al-Shabaab and other 
violent groups publicity. 
 
Negative Reactions: 
 
NAIROBI 00000173  002 OF 002 
 
 
Islamists Still 
Won't Participate 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) A variety of naysayers quickly made their way into the 
public eye following Sharif's election.  The Islamic administration 
of the southern port city of Kismayo expressed strong opposition to 
the new leadership.  In a joint press statement in Kismayo, the 
deputy head of the city's administration, Abdighani Mohamed Yusuf, 
and Information Department head Sheikh Hasan Yaqub said the 
newly-formed government was not different from the regime that had 
been constituted in Kenya in 2004.  Asmara-based rival and leader of 
the Asmara faction of the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia 
(ARS) Sheikh Hasan Dahir Aweys described Sharif's presidency as "a 
chair with no legs."  Speaking to Al-Jazeera, Aweys said electing 
Sharif as the President of Somalia was of no significance to him and 
his alliance.  He said the conflict between him and Sharif was not 
about his election but was a matter of principle. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Former TFG President Abdullahi Yusuf, speaking to 
Al-Arabiya TV from Yemen, said Sharif would not be able to bring any 
changes to Somalia because of the increasing influence of Al-Qaeda 
affiliates.  Yusuf said international recognition alone would not be 
enough for Sharif to bring stability.  Al-Shabaab spokesman Sheikh 
Mukhtar Robow reportedly said Shabaab would not recognize Sharif's 
election but would continue its violent effort to establish an 
Islamic state in Somalia.  (Comment: Contrary to media reports, our 
contacts in Baidoa say Robow has not yet commented on the election 
but that his subordinates have expressed their opposition to the new 
government.  End comment.) 
 
Was this report useful?  Send comments and questions to 
Somaliawatchers@state.sgov.gov. 
 
RANNEBERGER