09NAIROBI1031
SOMALIA - DADAAB REFUGEES' VIEWS ON THE WAY FORWARD
Thu May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO9969
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #1031/01 1411244
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211244Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9608
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 001031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E, A/S CARSON AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER PREF KPAO SO KE
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - DADAAB REFUGEES' VIEWS ON THE WAY FORWARD 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The residents of Kenya's Dadaab refugee camp, home to more 
than 270,000 refugees, the vast majority of whom are Somali, were 
bitter about the last 18 years of disorder in Somalia but generally 
optimistic about rebuilding the country.  However, the refugees were 
divided on the cause of the chaos.  In addition, views on the way 
forward ranged from re-colonization to a complete laissez faire 
policy.  The refugees' views on U.S. policy in Somalia and 
opportunities for U.S. engagement with the refugees will be 
discussed in septels.  End summary. 
 
-------------------- 
Population is Triple 
Planned Capacity 
-------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) A Somalia Unit officer, accompanied by a visiting AF/PDPA 
officer, traveled to Dadaab refugee camp from May 11-13 to survey 
the views of the refugees regarding U.S. policy toward Somalia, the 
current and future political prospects for Somalia, and 
opportunities for public diplomacy engagement with the refugees. 
The Dadaab refugee camp is in fact three separate camps - Ifo, 
Dagahaley, and Hagadera - and is located approximately 80 kilometers 
from the border with Somalia in Kenya's Northeast Province.  The 
camp was created in 1991 with capacity for 90,000 refugees.  The 
camp currently houses over 270,000 registered refugees, with more 
arriving daily in spite of the official closure of the Kenya-Somalia 
border. 
 
------------------ 
It's Not Our Fault 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Among the parties who claimed Somalis are not the cause of 
the ongoing instability were community self-management leaders in 
Ifo camp.  One of the leaders claimed the 20 years of conflict was 
generated by outside forces, including "Arabs, Africans, Europeans, 
and Americans."  Another leader ended his remarks about outsiders by 
saying, "May God destroy them because they destroy us."  The same 
leader said that the arms used in the conflict are from "the 
outside," so the conflict is from the outside. Another Ifo leader 
called for sanctions on not only weapons but also food being brought 
into the country, since the food was being used as a tool by the 
elements hostile to peace in Somalia. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Several of our contacts claimed that, contrary to the 
oft-stated belief that much of Somalia's conflict is clan-based, 
religion-based sects and ideologies are now to blame for the ongoing 
conflict.  The facilitator of a youth empowerment program stated 
that the youth realize that their elders have participated in the 
ongoing conflict, and that they have developed a strong sense of 
peace and human rights. 
 
¶5. (SBU) With regard to conflicts inside the camp, many of our 
interlocutors expressed a belief that newly-arrived refugees were 
still concerned with clan loyalties to a greater degree than those 
that had been at Dadaab for up to 18 years.  The chairman of the Ifo 
camp's Community Peace and Security Team (CPST) noted that early 
arrivals to Dadaab were members of the deposed Marehan clan, 
referring to those associated with the Siad Barre regime, but later 
arrivals were associated with the clans that deposed Barre.  As 
such, current feuds are symbolic of political feuds, but not clan 
rivalries.  A Peace Education Officer in Ifo camp added that many 
conflicts in Dadaab are the result of family members of those 
wronged in Somalia seeking to avenge the slight that occurred at 
home, rather than resolving conflicts that originated in Dadaab. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In at least four of our meetings over the three days, the 
refugees complained about lack of inclusion in the peace process. 
The principle the refugees espoused was that between the 270,000 in 
Dadaab and a possibly equal number in other areas of Kenya, the 
international community had failed to consult nearly a half million 
Somali refugees about their opinions. 
 
------------ 
Take Over, 
or Hands Off 
------------ 
 
NAIROBI 00001031  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Participants in a Dadaab-wide youth empowerment program 
have views ranging from advocacy for massive military intervention 
and re-colonization to a complete cessation of foreign intervention 
in Somalia.  An elder in the Dagahaley drama group said the only 
solution is international control of Somalia, and one of the other 
members said the only solution is "not from within," but that the 
international community "must rally and capture the country by 
force."  In contrast, a Community Self-Monitoring (CSM) group member 
in Dagahaley said that since external actors are causing the 
problems in Somalia, the country should be left to Somalis.  At the 
same time, another member of the CSM said that if Somalia is left to 
its own devices, fighting will continue.  A youth group leader in 
Dagahaley claimed that since the conflict is being caused from the 
outside the international community should neutralize the outside 
actors and then leave Somalia alone. 
 
------------------------------ 
The Current TFG Administration 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Ifo camp community leader cited above noted that there 
have been many governments in Somalia in the past two decades and 
implied that President Sharif is having similar difficulties, 
"though [the leader] pray[s] for success."  The facilitator of the 
youth empowerment program reported that participants are positive 
and hopeful about the current leadership of the Transitional Federal 
Government (TFG).  The drama group elder from Dagahaley appealed to 
the U.S. government to fully engage the TFG's new leaders in order 
to "save the future generation."  Another member of the drama group, 
however, cast doubt on the current TFG administration, claiming that 
nothing has changed and that old troublemakers have "changed shirts" 
and methods, gaining a foothold in the TFG. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) During at least four of our meetings over three days, the 
refugees requested inclusion in the political process, including 
meetings and consultations.  Rather than continuously advocating for 
resettlement in other countries, several of our interlocutors 
expressed a desire to return to Somalia and assist in the rebuilding 
process.  Another refugee, a member of a youth sports program in 
Hagadera, told us that when he arrived in 1991, he worried about his 
future.  18 years later and having started his own family, he 
realized he was now worried about his child's future.  The refugees 
are clearly concerned and as active as possible in the affairs of 
Somalia.  Post will explore possibilities of involving Dadaab 
refugees in current events, whether inclusion in meetings or other 
increased efforts to reach out to the refugees, via vehicles like 
web chats and DVC conversations. 
 
RANNEBERGER