09NAIROBI267
GOK COMMITS TO FOURTH DADAAB REFUGEE CAMP
Wed Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO8377
RR RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0267/01 0421145
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111145Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 4557
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8453
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNRCC/REFUGEE COORDINATOR COLLECTIVE
RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3056
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 2954
RUEAHQA/AFAAO WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUEHNR/KUSLO NAIROBI KEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 000267 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KE PGOV PHUM PREF PREL SO
SUBJECT: GOK COMMITS TO FOURTH DADAAB REFUGEE CAMP 
 
------- 
 SUMMARY 
 ------- 
 
¶1. During his recent visit, UNHCR Deputy High Commissioner 
(DHC) Craig Johnstone told the Ambassador that he had 
received a "commitment" from the Kenyan Prime Minister to a 
package approach to resolving Somali refugee issues - 
including the allocation of land for a fourth camp - to 
relieve severe overcrowding in the Dadaab refugee camps.  The 
DHC said he also believes the Government of Kenya (GOK) will 
review its border closure policy and may agree to re-open the 
Liboi Reception Center.  Johnstone said he welcomes demarches 
by the international community to keep pressure on the GOK to 
follow through on its commitment.  The DHC said he 
anticipates donors attaching conditions to their 
contributions to UNHCR's $92 million Dadaab Supplemental 
appeal to ensure that the GOK implements the package of 
activities as agreed.  We are working closely with UNHCR to 
follow-up with the PM and other key officials.  End Summary 
 
---------------------------------- 
Agreement on Package of Activities 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2. In a meeting with the Ambassador on February 5, Craig 
Johnstone, the UNHCR Deputy High Commissioner, said in a 
"frank" and "forceful" conversation with Kenyan Prime 
Minister Raila Odinga, he had received the PM's "commitment" 
that the GOK agreed to the implementation of a "package" 
approach to reduce severe overcrowding in the three Dadaab 
refugee camps.  The DHC said he clarified several times with 
the PM that the elements of the package included: 1) 
establishing a fourth refugee camp in Dadaab; 2) transferring 
at least a symbolic number of refugees from Dadaab to Kakuma; 
and, 3) addressing more effectively the needs of host 
communities around Dadaab.  After some hesitation, and a 
surprisingly strong endorsement from Otieno Kajwang, Minister 
of State for Immigration and Registration of Persons, the PM 
affirmed to the DHC that he had his commitment to implement 
the package.  The Ambassador cautioned that although the PM 
still had to negotiate the package within the Kenyan 
political environment, he was confident the PM would deliver 
on his commitment. 
 
¶3. The DHC also received a commitment of support from George 
Saitoti - Minister of State for Provincial Administration and 
Internal Security.  Describing his meeting with Saitoti as 
surprisingly open and substantive, the DHC said the Minister 
was fully briefed on the issues and clearly articulated both 
the pros and cons of the package as well as the GOK's 
security concerns with the Dadaab camps.  Johnstone said 
Saitoti agreed that maintaining the status quo in Dadaab was 
not acceptable, transferring refugees from Dadaab to Kakuma 
was not a viable solution and, therefore, the only 
alternative was the establishment of a fourth camp in Dadaab. 
 The DHC reiterated the need to implement the package as a 
whole, which Saitoti said he understood. 
 
¶4. The DHC told the Ambassador he only found one GOK member 
resistant to the implementation plan - Lagadera MP and Deputy 
Speaker of Parliament, Farah Maalim.  The DHC said he found 
Maalim difficult.  Maalim was not opposed to the three 
proposed activities, but he insisted they be implemented 
sequentially, beginning with development activities for the 
local community and ending with the establishment of the 
fourth camp.  Johnstone said his meeting with Fafi MP Aden 
Sukow confirmed that a previous agreement to establish a 
fourth camp in Fafi District remained valid.  Johnstone said 
he believes the lack of a structure for community leaders in 
Dadaab to negotiate with UNHCR has permitted Maalim to 
misrepresent and disrupt local receptivity to the fourth 
camp. 
 
--------------------- 
Border Closure Policy 
--------------------- 
 
¶5. The DHC said he separated the issues of obtaining 
agreement to the package from that of advocating for the 
re-opening of the Liboi Reception Center.  Johnstone said he 
received consistent messages from both the PM and Saitoti 
that re-opening the Liboi Reception Center may be possible. 
The PM told the DHC that controlled entry of Somali asylum 
 
NAIROBI 00000267  002 OF 002 
 
 
seekers across the border was preferable to random and 
haphazard crossings into Kenya.  Saitoti agreed with the DHC 
that Kenya's security could be enhanced through an orderly 
process of health and security screenings of asylum seekers 
at Liboi.  Saitoti said the reasons for Kenya initially 
closing Liboi and sealing the border had "evolved" and that 
it may be time for the GOK to review its border policy. 
Minister Saitoti added that Kenya's border policy was not 
intended to restrict the entry of asylum seekers, but rather 
to respond to the GOK's security concerns. 
 
--------------------- 
Dadaab a "Powder Keg" 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. The DHC visited both Dadaab and Kakuma refugee camps 
during his three day visit to Kenya.  Citing an increase in 
security incidences, reports of al Shabab and militia 
recruitment in the camps, the potential for outbreaks of 
contagious diseases, and the risk of a fire catastrophe 
because of severe overcrowding, Johnstone described Dadaab as 
a "powder keg."  Rejecting the expansion of any of the three 
existing camps as impractical, the DHC said he expects to 
construct the new camp housing up to 100,000 refugees on the 
2,000 hectares already identified in Fafi district. 
Johnstone said UNHCR camp planners have been instructed to 
modify camp construction plans in order to begin 
accommodating residents within a few months of receiving the 
land from the GOK.  The DHC admitted that the local 
communities' complaint of environmental degradation was 
justified and he highlighted his intention to minimize the 
environmental impact of the new camp by incorporating fuel 
efficient stoves and improved housing designs in camp 
planning.  The DHC said Kakuma is unprepared to receive large 
numbers of refugees from Dadaab, but UNHCR will - in a show 
of good faith - begin moving some refugees to Kakuma, but 
will not relocate 50,000 refugees as had been proposed. 
 
---------- 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶7. The DHC outlined next steps as: 
 
a. Maintaining the pressure on the GOK to implement the 
package of activities: The Ambassador and the DHC agreed on 
the need to keep the pressure on the GOK to fulfill its 
commitment through a series of demarches.  The Ambassador and 
relevant Mission Teams will follow-up with the PM and key 
officials as well as relevant members of Parliament. 
 
b. UNHCR will raise funds for its Dadaab Supplemental Appeal: 
The DHC said upon his return to Geneva, he will begin pushing 
donors to contribute to UNHCR's $92 million Dadaab 
Supplemental Appeal.  The DHC said UNHCR may modify the 
existing appeal to include the transfer of refugees from 
Dadaab to Kakuma as well as increase the amount of 
development activities for local communities.  Johnstone said 
he would welcome donors attaching strings to their 
contributions instructing UNHCR not to disburse funds until 
there is progress on the GOK's side in meeting its 
commitments - especially the allocation of land for the 
fourth camp. The DHC said he expects the US to be a generous 
contributor to the appeal. 
 
c. Build community groups with whom UNHCR can negotiate in 
Dadaab: Johnstone said UNHCR does not have a consistent group 
of local leaders with whom it can communicate with in Dadaab. 
 The DHC views establishing such a group of community leaders 
as essential for UNHCR in order to prioritize and implement 
the anticipated community development projects, resolve petty 
disputes between community members and UNHCR or NGOs, and to 
isolate MP Maalim's obstructive behavior. 
RANNEBERGER