09NAIROBI1834
SOMALIA - Somaliland Parliament Disrupted Amid Increased
Tue Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO6083
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #1834/01 2441358
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011358Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0844
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NAIROBI 001834 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM SO ET UK
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - Somaliland Parliament Disrupted Amid Increased 
Tension 
 
REF: A) Nairobi 1729  B) Addis Ababa 2092 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On August 29, on orders from the Minister of Interior, 
police took control of the parliament building in Hargeisa.  The 
police commander on the scene dismissed the usual security at the 
parliament and the Speaker's bodyguards.  The police then escorted 
into parliament six MPs from the president's UDUB party who had been 
suspended days before by parliament's disciplinary committee for 
disrupting the August 24 session and destroying public property. 
The Speaker publicly called the police presence an illegal 
interference with the activities of the House of Representatives. 
The Minister of Interior countered that the actions were in the name 
of public safety.  Again on August 30, police were dispatched into 
key areas and fired into the air to disburse crowds in front of the 
parliament building.  There were no injuries, but police arrested 
several persons.  As the tension is mounting among key stakeholders, 
the political impasse remains at a deadlock.   International and 
internal mediation efforts are ongoing, but are making little 
headway.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Police Escort Renegade Legislators 
Into Parliament 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) With the backdrop of Somaliland's ongoing political crisis 
(ref A), tensions flared as lawmakers and police confronted each 
other at the House of Representatives.   On August 24, six MPs from 
the ruling UDUB party disrupted parliamentary debate by breaking 
chairs, disabling the amplification system, and instigating a 
scuffle with the House leadership.  In a September 1 conversation, 
Speaker of Parliament Abdirahman Abdilahi "Irro" told us that he 
suspected the MPs caused the disturbance to prevent the tabling of a 
motion of impeachment against President Riyale.  Parliament's 
Standing and Discipline Committee placed the MPs under disciplinary 
action and suspended them from attending three legislative sessions. 
 On August 28, the suspended MPs released public statements that 
they would not accept any disciplinary action and that they would 
continue to attend parliamentary sessions.  They requested security 
support from the police and government. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On August 29, on orders from the Minister of Interior, 
police units led by Police Commander Gen. Mohamed Saqadhi took 
control of the Parliament building in Hargeisa.  The Commander 
dismissed the House's regular security, under the Speaker's control, 
and replaced them with units under the command of the Minister of 
Interior.  Saqaghi also dismissed the Speaker's bodyguards.  The 
policemen escorted the six banned UDUB parliamentarians into the 
legislative session. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Speaker adjourned the session and reportedly told the 
police commander that his units' presence was an illegal 
interference with the activities of the House of Representatives. 
Commander Saqadhi replied that he was simply following orders from 
the Minister of Interior to escort the six MPs into the meeting 
hall, despite the disciplinary action against them. 
 
-------------------------- 
Tensions Mount in Hargeisa 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Immediately following the August 29 police intervention, 
the Speaker and his two deputies told the press that the elected 
members of parliament cannot function properly due to "interferences 
and harassment from the government."  For his part, the Minister of 
Interior explained that police were protecting the parliament and 
preventing riots to take place.   Opposition leaders publicly 
accused the government of destroying the legal institutions of the 
country and undermining national unity. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On August 30, the government again deployed a large number 
of police on Hargeisa's main roads, at the Parliament grounds, and 
at presidential compound.  They closed the parliament and prevented 
MPs from bringing their vehicles on the premises.  To disperse the 
crowds, police fired into the air and arrested several people, 
including the wife of the second deputy speaker who was released 
after being detained for several hours. Large crowds near the 
 
NAIROBI 00001834  002 OF 003 
 
 
Parliament were reported to have chanted "Down with Riyale".  The 
disturbances cause the Guurti, or upper house, to cancel its August 
30 mediation session on the political standoff. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
International Mediation Efforts Ongoing 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) While the political impasse deepens and tensions mount, 
mediation efforts continue.  The August 19-24 Ethiopian delegation 
reportedly made some progress, most notably encouraging dialogue and 
discussions with all stakeholders on the points of the non-paper it 
developed.  Though all sides expressed to us their hope that the 
mediation efforts would break the impasse, Minister of State Takeda 
Alemu apparently failed to negotiate a breakthrough during his 
initial visit.  Ethiopian efforts provided a point of departure (ref 
B), but now appear to be on hold in favor of UK leadership of 
international mediation, our contacts tell us.  At present, both 
opposition parties remain firm in their opposition to the Ethiopian 
proposal that would allow President Riyale to remain in office in 
case the elections are once more postponed. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) While the Ethiopian mission was in Somaliland, the African 
Union also sent a delegation, led by Special Envoy for Somalia 
Nicolas Bwakira.  Ambassador Bwakira met with all the key 
stakeholders and the Ethiopian delegation.  In a statement to the 
press, the AU Special Envoy endorsed the Ethiopian efforts. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The UK delegation, led by John Marshall, Deputy Ambassador 
of the UK Embassy in Addis, visited Hargeisa August 29-30.  The 
delegation reportedly met with President Riyale, members of the 
National Electoral Commission (NEC), and opposition party leaders. 
A UK representative who accompanied Marshall told us the August 29 
Riyale meeting was disappointing because he remained steadfast that 
the NEC could not be reconstituted.  The delegation was to have a 
follow-up meeting the morning of August 30, but it was cancelled 
because Riyale was reportedly ill.  Kulmiye leader Silanyo remained 
firm in his position that there cannot be any more extensions for 
Riyale.  UCID leader Faisal was more flexible, suggesting that 
accommodation could be made for another extension provided that the 
four controversial NEC commissioners were removed and a date for the 
elections set by outside experts. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The UK delegation also met with the NEC.  The election 
commissioners indicated that there was a budget, but at the moment 
no money to move forward with elections without the voter 
registration.  The UK planned to release a public statement and 
indicated that next steps will include working with the Ethiopians 
to suggest alternative language in a revised MOU for the 
stakeholders.  The UK representative also indicated the importance 
of keeping up pressure to re-constitute the NEC. 
 
----------------------------- 
Concurrent Internal Mediation 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) In addition to the international efforts, there are also 
several Somaliland-based mediation initiatives.  The Union for 
Somaliland Journalists has organized a team of 25 persons including 
merchants, religious leaders, traditional elders, scholars, and 
others.  This team nominated a smaller working group which met with 
the chairmen of the opposition parties.  The committee requested a 
meeting with President Riyale, but he declined, citing the Ethiopian 
delegation's efforts. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) More successful by operating behind the scenes is a 
concurrent mediation effort driven by the sultans of Somaliland's 
major clans, who are meeting widely to solve the crisis.  The Guurti 
also appointed an internal mediating committee consisting of 22 
members to solve the crisis.  The Guurti claimed that they are the 
only institution which has the mandate to solve problems of this 
magnitude and discouraged sultans or others from interfering in the 
country's political disputes.  Thus far, the committee has not 
agreed on an approach and as a result of the August 30 disturbances, 
they have not met. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Despite multiple mediation efforts, there has been no 
 
NAIROBI 00001834  003 OF 003 
 
 
real break in the political stalemate.  Riyale and the UDUB party 
insist on yet another extension and refuse to reconstitute the NEC. 
Even though parliament has long demanded the NEC and the government 
to use the voter registration list for the presidential elections, 
both have refused to commit to this.  We remain in touch with our 
international partners and with key stakeholders from all sides, 
including some working level Somaliland officials, though some 
government representatives remain reluctant to engage with us 
directly.  Nevertheless, as the UK assumes a more prominent role in 
the mediation efforts, we are hopeful the President will engage with 
us, too. 
 
RANNEBERGER