09NAIROBI348
SOMALIA - Cabinet Nominated and Sworn In
Tue Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO0481
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0348/01 0550410
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240410Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8577
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3075
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 2119
RUEHMV/AMEMBASSY MONROVIA 0362
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NAIROBI 000348 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E 
LONDON FR ACTING A/S CARTER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM EAID SO
SUBJECT:  SOMALIA - Cabinet Nominated and Sworn In 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  On February 20, Prime Minister Sharmarke 
nominated a 36-member cabinet to lead the new unity Transitional 
Federal Government (TFG).  In composing the cabinet, each of the 
ministries was first allocated to a specific clan and sub-clan and 
then the ministers were chosen from these groups, thus ensuring 
representative clan distribution.  Sharif and Sharmarke engaged in 
extensive consultations on the structure and composition of the 
cabinet, including with the Ambassador and members of the Somalia 
Unit.  The final cabinet is larger than ideal, several of the key 
ministries were awarded to Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia 
(ARS) loyalists, and there are only three women.  Yet there are 
relatively equal numbers from both the ARS and the TFG and there are 
no hard-line fundamentalists.  We have cultivated excellent 
relationships with the majority of the individuals who now comprise 
the cabinet. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary Cont'd.  The morning of February 21, the cabinet 
was sworn in, prior to parliamentary debate and approval.  Although 
parliamentarians expressed disappointment in the nominations, the 
night of February 21, they voted overwhelmingly to support the 
cabinet.  Sharif openly acknowledged the imperfections in its 
composition, but insisted the nominations were an early measure to 
mollify a variety of constituents.  Over the next few months, after 
they return to Mogadishu and begin work, he indicated that the 
cabinet would be adjusted based on the needs at hand.  President 
Sharif and the PM have been open throughout the selection process 
and have sought our views and support at all key junctures.  End 
Summary. 
 
Intense Consultations and Negotiations 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Since his election on January 30, President Sheikh Sharif 
has consulted regularly with us in his selection of a prime minister 
and the process to stand up his government.  On February 19 
Ambassador Ranneberger spoke to Sharif by phone and expressed our 
expectation that the cabinet be balanced, representative, and 
composed of individuals with whom we can effectively work.  Sharif 
noted the intense pressures from multiple constituencies seeking 
influence in the cabinet but promised to deliver a cabinet based on 
these criteria. During this conversation, for instance, he lamented 
the cabinet's potential size, but said he had to share cabinet 
positions among the many sub-clans, as a means of advancing the 
reconciliation process.  He told us that once the government 
returned to Mogadishu and began work, the structure and composition 
will be adjusted accordingly.  PM Sharmarke told us that he intended 
to re-visit the cabinet structure in three to six months. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The evening of February 20, Prime Minister Sharmarke 
presented parliament with a list of 36 ministers and a document that 
outlined the priorities for his government.  As Sharif warned us the 
day before, the nomination process was influenced by powerful 
constituencies, each insisting on their "fair share" of the 
ministries.  The PM presented us with an advance copy of the 
nominations hours before it was given to parliament.  After 
parliament convened on February 20 to hear the announcements, 
several last minute changes were still being made.  Late into the 
night, negotiations continued among the various interested parties. 
 
 
Cabinet Sworn In 
---------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) To the surprise of many, the ministers were convened at 
Djibouti's presidential villa on February 21 at 11:00 a.m. to be 
sworn in.  Although most had expected the parliament to first debate 
the list of nominations and give a vote of confidence, the Charter 
does not require this step.  With dissention within parliament about 
the selections and the time pressure to return to Mogadishu, Sharif 
opted to expedite the process by conducting a limited invitation 
swearing-in ceremony to which no MPs were invited.  The ceremony 
began three hours late as Sharif, Sharmarke and others were in 
closed-door negotiations, primarily with leaders from the 
Darod/Marehan sub-clan who wanted more than the Deputy Prime 
Minister position they received.  Two Darod minister designates 
refused to attend the swearing-in: Deputy Prime Minister of Energy 
and Petroleum Resources Abdiwahid Elmi Gonjeeh and Minister of 
 
NAIROBI 00000348  002 OF 003 
 
 
Diaspora Outreach Abdullahi Ahmed Abdulle Azari. 
 
President Sharif Implores 
Parliament to Understand Constraints 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) After an almost three hour delay, parliament convened at 
about 8:45 pm on February 21 to consider the cabinet appointments 
and Prime Minister Shemarke's program for the government.  The 
Speaker announced that 375 MPs were present -- enough for a quorum. 
President Sharif addressed parliament and immediately shifted the 
mood among the hostile MPs.  Sharif told the parliamentarians that 
all Somalis have high expectations and that they are looking to them 
to make a difference.  He explained that in the short time that PM 
Sharmarke was given to form a government, he listened to a wide 
range of advice and made his selections based on these 
consultations.  Sharif acknowledged that neither he nor Sharmarke 
will be 100 percent correct in their decisions and that they will 
make mistakes.  Yet he asked for the confidence and the support of 
parliament through the process. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Sharif said that they applied the 4.5 formula for clan 
representation, but still could not satisfy everyone.  He said that 
he wanted the representatives to fully understand the constraints on 
the nominations.  He reminded the MPs that they were all put into 
office to solve old problems and therefore should not create new 
divisions.  "We must help each other solve the problems of Somalia; 
I respect parliament and the MPs and will abide by whatever outcome 
you decide," he said.  He implored the MPs to remember that that 
their mandate was to support the Somali people, not their clan and 
that similarly, all should expect the ministers to represent 
Somalia, not their clans.  Sharif concluded by asking parliament to 
give a vote of confidence to this cabinet as the next step in the 
solution to Somalia's problems. 
 
Parliament Gives Overwhelming 
Vote of Confidence 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) After President Sharif concluded his address, the Speaker 
opened the floor for debate.  The first motion was for parliament to 
vote by secret ballot on a vote of confidence for the cabinet.  One 
of the sponsoring MPs read the motion aloud and the names of the 51 
MPs endorsing the motion.  Madobe said that they were logistically 
unprepared to vote by secret ballot and if the MPs insisted, the PM 
would return to Mogadishu and make new appointments from there.  The 
Speaker warned that those who were pushing for secret ballots were 
trying to obstruct the process and would cause the early collapse of 
the government. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) As soon as the floor opened for debate, about 20 MPs 
rushed to put their names on the list to speak.  PM Shermarke found 
an unlikely champion in ex-warlord and MP Mohamed Quanyare who said 
that the PM was new and was expected to make mistakes, but the time 
for complaints was over.  Quanyare implored the MPs to vote and 
return to Somalia tomorrow.  The MPs responded with resounding 
applause and agreed, with a show of hands, to vote immediately for 
the cabinet.  The outcome was an overwhelming vote of support for 
the government:  354 to 19 with 2 abstentions. 
 
The New Cabinet 
--------------- 
 
¶10.  (U) Post will provide septel more complete biographical 
information on each of the ministers.  The confirmed cabinet 
appointments follow: 
 
-- Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries and Ocean 
Resources - Abdirahman Aden Ibrahim "Ibbi" 
-- Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance - Sharif Hassan 
Sheikh Aden 
-- Deputy Prime Minister of Energy and Petroleum Resources - 
Abdiwahid Elmi Gonjeeh 
-- Minister of Foreign Affairs - Mohamed Abdullahi Omar 
-- Minister of Defense - Mohamed Abdi Mohamed "Gandi" 
-- Minister of National Planning and International Cooperation - 
Abdirahman Abdishakur Warsame 
 
NAIROBI 00000348  003 OF 003 
 
 
-- Minister of Constitution and Federal Affairs - Madobe Nunow 
Mohamed 
-- Minister of Religious Affairs and Endowmentss - Sheikh Ali Adan 
 
-- Minister of Women and Family Affairs - Fowziya Mohamed Sheikh 
-- Minister of Rehabilitation and Handicapped - Mohamed Ali Ibrahim 
-- Minister of Humanitarian and Emergency Assistance - Mohamed Abdi 
Ibrahim 
-- Minister of Information - Farhan Ali Mohamed 
-- Minister of Scientific Research and Technology - Mohamed Ali Hagaa 
-- Minister of Health - Qamar Aden Ali (woman) 
-- Minister of Labor and Workforce Development - Mohamed Abdi Hayir 
"Mareeye" 
-- Minister of Diaspora Outreach - Abdullahi Ahmed Abdulle Azari 
-- Minister of Education - Ahmed Abdullahi Sheikh Mohamed "Wayel" 
-- Minister of Public Works and Housing - Mohamed Abdi Yusuf 
-- Minister of Rural Development - Khadija Mohamed Diriye 
-- Minister of Youth and Sports - Seleban Olaad Roble 
-- Minister of Interior - Abdukadir Ali Omar 
-- Minister of Security - Omar Hashi Aden 
-- Minister of Livestock - Aboukar Abdi Osman 
-- Minister of Justice - Abdurahman Mohamud Farah "Janaqow" 
-- Minister of Agriculture - Mohamed Nur Shati Gudud 
-- Minister of Ports and Marine Transport - Mohamed Ibrahim Habsade 
-- Minister of National Property and Equipment - Mohamed Mursal 
-- Minister of Culture and Higher Education - Ibrahim Hassan Addow 
-- Minister of Mineral Resources and Water - Abdallah Boss Ahmed 
-- Minister of Reconstruction and Recovery - Hussein Helabe Fahiye 
-- Minister of Tourism and Wildlife - Mohamed Hussein Said 
-- Minister of Posts and Telecommunications - Abdirizak Osman Jurile 
-- Minister of Commerce - Abdirashid Irro 
-- Minister of Industries - Abdirahman Jama 
-- Minister of Land and Air Transportation - Ali Jama Jangeli 
-- Minister of Environment - Buri Mohamed Hamsa 
 
Was this report useful?  Send questions and comments to 
SomaliaWatchers@state.sgov.gov. 
 
RANNEBERGER