09NAIROBI185
SOMALIA - A POSITIVE CHANGE IN MEDIA ATTITUDES
Wed Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO2866
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0185/01 0351458
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041458Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8370
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHMV/AMEMBASSY MONROVIA 0360
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 000185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND ACTING A/S CARTER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - A POSITIVE CHANGE IN MEDIA ATTITUDES 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: A week before the January 30 election of Sheikh 
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed as president of Somalia, mainstream radio 
stations in Mogadishu convened a meeting of senior managers and 
passed a resolution on the way forward following the withdrawal of 
Ethiopian troops from Somalia.  The 11 attendees, all heads of 
private radio stations, resolved to give peace programs first 
priority in their broadcasts and encourage professionalism and media 
ethics in reporting.  The meeting also focused on media coverage of 
continuing incidents of violence, hate sermons delivered in mosques, 
and call-in telephone interviews with unspecified individuals 
advocating for the implementation of Islamic law.  The attendees 
concluded that all media stations should steer clear of any incident 
that is deemed to jeopardize the ongoing peace and reconciliation 
efforts in the country.  Since the subsequent election of Sharif, 
outlets appear to have adhered to these resolutions, to the benefit 
of the new administration.  End Summary. 
 
A New Resolve 
From the Media 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Eleven heads of media outlets met on January 27 in 
Mogadishu to discuss the role of media in the Somali political 
process, specifically focusing on the dawning of a new era with the 
withdrawal of Ethiopian troops from Somalia.  The stations 
represented included HornAfrik, Shabelle, Simba, Somaliweyn, Holy 
Koran, Radio Voice of Peace, Banadir, Harmo, Sahan, and Radio 
Mogadishu.  The session became even more relevant with the January 
30 election of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed as president of Somalia 
and the owners recognizing their role in supporting this new regime. 
 The station managers discussed how to counter threats from 
extremists who threatened violence if denied air time, airing of 
extremist mosque lectures, and support for actors like AMISOM. 
 
Insurgents Don't Disclose Identities 
When Seeking Interviews 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) The owners noted the threat from radical Islamist groups 
who seek to convey their extremist views to the public by requesting 
anonymous radio interviews, and then threaten to kill reporters if 
denied the interview opportunity.  Realizing the uncivilized nature 
of their operations, radical Islamists seek never to reveal their 
identities, bases of operations and even their true affiliations 
when speaking to the media.  Instead, they call radio stations from 
their hide-outs and homes and ask for an interview using pseudonyms 
and fictitious titles and associations. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Mogadishu-based director of Simba radio Abdullahi Ali Farah 
said almost every radio station operates in fear of the extremists 
and that there is a great need for "us to liberate ourselves out of 
this captivity."  He gave the example of a situation where reporters 
are captured, blindfolded and coerced to report on insurgent 
statements.  After the abductions, the journalists were freed and 
told to broadcast the recorded items, failing which the extremists 
threatened to kill the reporter.  Out of fear, many stations are 
forced to broadcast these sorts of interviews and telephone calls. 
The callers do not accept tough questions from journalists seeking 
to give balanced reporting.  Muktar Mohamed, Director of Shabelle 
radio in Mogadishu, said, "You dare ask them questions touching on 
their ill-mannered behavior, such as the killing of innocent people 
and attacks on African Union peacekeepers, and the telephone line 
goes dead immediately." 
 
Mosques Used As Platforms 
for Hate Speeches 
------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The owners also discussed radical clerics in Mogadishu 
mosques who frequently delivered lectures and religious decrees 
calling for violence and continuation of jihad and which, on many 
occasions, generated media coverage.  Following the pull-out of 
Ethiopian forces in early January and election of Sharif as 
president, radical clerics preached for a fresh jihad against the 
new government, alleging it was still a pro-Ethiopia institution and 
an American puppet. On January 3, Simba director Farah said he was 
asked by mosque clerics to broadcast anti-Sharif taped religious 
lectures on his radio.  "They accused me of favoring some groups 
when I refused to air the lectures," said Farah.  The taped lectures 
were recorded in Nairobi by Sheikh Mohamed Abdi Umal, a known 
 
NAIROBI 00000185  002 OF 002 
 
 
radical cleric at the Sixth Street Mosque in Nairobi's Eastleigh 
neighborhood. 
 
Radio Stations Resolve to 
Sideline Extremist Views 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) At the end of the session, the attendees resolved that, 
since the Ethiopian troops had left the country, there were no 
excuses for continuing violence.  For this reason, media stations 
pledged to fully support the new government's peace and 
reconciliation efforts.  As part of their professional 
responsibility, the representatives promised to suspend call-in 
interviews from unidentified persons, to cease reporting on violent 
incidents against AMISOM troops and government forces, and also to 
refuse to air religious lectures.  The stations agreed on a new set 
of operating rules, requiring interviews to be conducted in person 
and interviewees to be ready to answer all questions, even the 
difficult ones.  The stations also noted the importance of avoiding 
conveying reports from people claiming to be eye witnesses and 
giving detailed accounts at the scenes of violence without 
independent verification of the reports. 
 
Extremists Feeling the Heat 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Since private radio stations in Mogadishu began bravely 
implementing the January 27 changes, violent incidents have 
significantly decreased.  Notable exceptions have included two 
suicide attacks against AMISOM in the last three weeks and reports 
of a February 4 media head assassination (septel).  Following the 
set conditions, radio stations have received threats from anonymous 
callers demanding that the stations rescind their decisions. 
 
Was this report useful?  Send comments and questions to 
Somaliawatchers@state.sgov.gov. 
 
RANNEBERGER