05ATHENS1505
CONTINUED GREEK ANGST, BUT POSITIVE NUMBERS ON
Fri Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Athens
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ATHENS 001505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/24/2014 
TAGS: PREL PARM MARR GR TU TURKEY
SUBJECT: CONTINUED GREEK ANGST, BUT POSITIVE NUMBERS ON 
AEGEAN AIRSPACE ISSUES 
 
REF: ANKARA 2891 
 
Classified By: Amb. Charles P. Ries.  Reasons 1.4(b/d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary.  Senior Greek officials continue to express 
concern about the level of Turkish air activity in the 
Aegean.  At the same time, statistics recently released by 
the MOD paint a more positive picture of the actual situation 
in the region.  Greek officials insist that, the content and 
tone of this briefing notwithstanding, there has been no 
change in Athens, Aegean policy.  Nevertheless, we intend to 
capitalize on this relatively good news to urge the Greeks to 
break out of the Aegean stalemate. End summary. 
 
FM Focussed on Quantity, Not Quality 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (C)  Reviewing the PM's May 20 meeting with the 
President, FM Molyviatis reiterated to Ambassador May 25 the 
Greek argument that high Turkish sortie rates in the Aegean 
made it increasingly difficult for the Greek government to 
defend its cooperation with Turkey in other areas, including 
the EU.  Molyviatis emphasized that Turkey did not need to 
send 40 aircraft a day across the disputed airspace to make 
its political point; they could, he insisted, send one flight 
a week and accomplish the same purpose.  If the Turks pursued 
a less inflammatory policy in the Aegean, he suggested, there 
would be much more sympathy for Turkey in Greece. 
 
¶3.  (C) Ambassador questioned whether Greece drew a fine 
enough distinction between Turkish airspace violations and 
Turkish non-notifications of the FIR, reminding Molyviatis 
that the U.S. did not file FIR notifications either.  It was 
important for Greece to be on solid ground when it reckoned 
up the number of "violations."  Molyviatis acknowledged that 
there was a legal difference between violations of the 
six-mile limit versus FIR notifications.  He admitted that 
the Greek nouns for "violation" ("paraviasi," used for 
intrusions into national airspace) and "infringement" 
("paravasi," used for flights in the Athens FIR) are nearly 
indistinguishable, even to Greeks.  Ambassador suggested 
Greek credibility with partners would be helped if they made 
an issue only of Turkish violations with six nautical miles 
of Greek territory, where the numbers are much smaller and 
international law is clearer. 
 
MOD Statistics Paint a (Relatively) Positive Picture 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Meanwhile, two prominent pro-government newspapers 
reported on a Ministry of Defense briefing on Turkish air 
activity in the Aegean that was given to journalists 
accompanying MOD Spiliotopoulos on his May 30 visit to the 
Greek air operations center in Larisa.  Despite negative 
headlines (e.g., &Confrontation in the Aegean8 and 
&Provocations by the Numbers8), the content of the articles 
was strikingly positive.  Both articles avoided the word 
"infringement" (paravasi) when discussing Turkish flights in 
the Athens FIR, using instead the more neutral term "incoming 
aircraft" (eiselthonda aeroskafi).  (Asked about this 
apparent effort to tone down the rhetoric, MOD staffers 
insisted that the tone of the articles was the result of 
editorial decisions and not a change or softening of the 
government's stance.)  Additionally, by breaking down 
statistics on Turkish violations of Greek airspace into two 
categories -- flights within 6 nautical miles of Greek 
territory and those that penetrated to between 6 and 10 
nautical miles -- the MOD briefing tacitly accepted the fact 
that the Greek definition of its national airspace is 
disputed.  Finally, the MOD briefing compared 2005 figures 
with those from 2003 (i.e., discounting statistics from 2004, 
when Turkey reduced its Aegean profile as an Olympic goodwill 
gesture), revealing what even officials at MOD and MFA 
admitted was a positive trend. 
 
¶5.  (C)  The Greek MOD figures claim there were 1625 Turkish 
violations of Greek airspace during the first five months of 
2003; the figure for the corresponding period in 2005 was 
¶830.  Equally significant, the Greek figures show that the 
majority -- almost 60 percent -- of reported violations in 
2005 occurred between six and ten nautical miles from Greek 
territory (i.e., beyond what Turkey and most other countries 
recognize as Greek airspace).  This marks a signficant change 
from 2003, when the Greeks claimed that 75 percent of Turkish 
aircraft that violated Greek airspace flew within 6 nautical 
miles of Greek territory.  The MOD figures also show a 
remarkable decline in the number of "mock dogfights" between 
Greek and Turkish jets over the Aegean.  According to Greek 
statistics, in the first five months of 2003, Greek and 
Turkish jets were involved in 593 mock dogfights; in Jan-May 
2005 this had dropped by 80 percent, to 106.  In a briefing 
for journalists, MOD officials credited this drop to a 
decision by the Turkish General Staff to order its pilots to 
be cautious and avoid potential accidents. 
 
Turks Sending the Same Message in Athens, Ankara 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Turkish embassy political officer Hakkan Abaci gave 
poloff the same message as the one reported reftel.  The 
Turkish government genuinely wanted to solve Aegean issues 
with Greece, he said, but was frustrated that its decision to 
notify NATO (and thus, effectively, Greece) of flights in the 
Athens FIR had yielded no positive response from Greece. 
Instead, the Greek Air Force used the information to 
intercept Turkish jets and the Greek government continued to 
attack these "FIR infringements" in the media and in 
discussions with other countries.  Ankara was still mulling 
this policy change, Abaci emphasized, and had not discussed 
the matter with Greece.  When pressed, Abaci (who will take 
over the Aegean air/sea portfolio at the Turkish MFA this 
fall) said he was not suggesting that the United States play 
a role in Aegean airspace issues or inform the Greek 
government of the possible change in Turkish policy.  Poloff 
commented that a change in Turkish notification policy would 
cede the high ground Ankara currently had on the subject and 
undermine Turkey's stated goal of resolving Aegean issues. 
Asked whether the tone of the news coverage of Defense 
Minister Spiliotopoulos's trip to Larisa would help, Abaci 
said Ankara would undoubtedly first wait to see if a pattern 
developed. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  By raising Aegean issues with the President on May 
20, PM Karamanlis has invited our comments on this 
longstanding dispute that diverts Greek military resources 
from more important NATO or coalition operations and which 
could, in the event of an accident during mock dogfights, 
lead to a crisis between two NATO Allies.  In many ways, 
Greece has created the problem for iteslf by dramatizing the 
lack of FIR notice while pocketing the NATO flight plans.  We 
will use the ammunition provided by these latest figures 
released by MOD to encourage the Greeks to ratchet down their 
rhetoric, focus on six-mile airspace violations, and look for 
ways to further Greece's long-term goal of improving ties 
with Turkey, rather than score short-term points in a no-win 
game. 
RIES