09CARACAS967
THREATS AGAINST INDEPENDENT MEDIA CONTINUE IN JULY
Mon Jul 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXRO7580
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHCV #0967/01 2082014
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 272014Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3456
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CARACAS 000967 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HQSOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO AID/OTI (RPORTER) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/27/2024 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL KDEM VE
SUBJECT: THREATS AGAINST INDEPENDENT MEDIA CONTINUE IN JULY 
 
REF: A. CARACAS 663 
     ¶B. CARACAS 887 AND PREVIOUS 
 
CARACAS 00000967  001.2 OF 002 
 
Classified By: ACTING POLITICAL COUNSELOR DARNALL STEUART, 
REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 ¶1.  (C)  Summary:  As of the second half of July, pressure 
continues against independent media in Venezuela.  New 
charges were brought against opposition-oriented Globovision 
station owner, Guillermo Zuloaga, for "conspiracy to commit a 
crime."  A judge barred Zuloaga from leaving the country but 
then claimed she was pressured by a superior into issuing the 
order after her initial order was revoked. Those supporting 
the station claim that this is simply more proof that the 
GBRV is using prosecutors and judges to pressure and 
intimidate the opposition.  As the Government continues to 
threaten draconian restrictions on radio networks, 
pro-Government stations seemingly are able to bypass the "new 
rules" designed to silence more critical stations.  Two New 
York Times reporters learned first hand how pro-Chavez 
security forces deal with reporters that ask too many 
questions after their camera was seized and photographs 
erased. As pressure against the independent media continues 
to slowly accumulate week by week in Venezuela, the GBRV has 
shown it is not hesitant to use intimidation, restrict the 
technical ability of radio networks to broadcast, or resort 
to simple bullying in order to intimidate and harass any 
media that dares to criticize.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
JUDGE HANDLING GLOBOVISION FIRED / HARASSMENT 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On July 16 a Venezuelan court issued an injunction 
preventing Globovision station owner Guillermo Zuloaga from 
leaving Venezuela after he was accused of "conspiracy to 
commit a crime" stemming from the May 21 seizure of 24 new 
vehicles on his property (Ref A).  In a surprise move, 
however, on July 17 the judge handling the case, Alicia 
Torres, announced to the media that she was pressured into 
signing the court order preventing Zuloaga's departure.  On 
July 20 Judge Torres was notified that her appointment as a 
judge had been revoked.  In statements to the press, Torres 
claimed, "I am not political, I am independent. I am not from 
the opposition, nor do I know anybody.  The person who 
pressured me was Venicce Blanco. This was an abuse of her 
power."  Note: Blanco is the President of the Judicial 
Criminal Circuit Court.  End Note.  Following Torres' 
announcement that she had been dismissed, the injunction was 
overturned on July 21st by the 13th Criminal Court.  The 
following day, however, in a third flip-flop, on July 22 the 
court changed its mind again and a new judge reinstated the 
original order preventing Zuloaga's departure. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Harassment against opposition oriented TV station 
Globovision has continued throughout the month of July.  Ten 
new summons were issued against journalists and employees of 
the station (for a total of 18 court ordered appearances) 
regarding a controversial October 13 transmission of the show 
"Hello Citizen," in which guest Rafael Poleo, editor of the 
opposition daily El Nuevo Pais, said that Chavez "would end 
up like Mussolini." 
 
¶4.  (C)  With five investigations against the station 
currently pending in the offices of the government media 
regulatory agency CONATEL, Minister of Public Works and 
Housing, Diosdado Cabello, is likely to continue to use his 
position as head of the agency to further harass the network. 
 Globovision President Aberto Federico Ravell, in a private 
email shared with PolOff on July 16, opined that Cabello will 
shut the network down when he decides it is time.  Ravell 
hypothesized "As the concession for Globovision was given to 
two persons, and one of them has died, we anticipate they 
will use legal mechanisms to recover 50% of the station, 
especially because they claim it (the concession) is not 
inheritable." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
PRO-CHAVEZ STATIONS (AND SPORTS) IMMUNE FROM RESTRICTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶5.  (C)  In another move designed to cripple opposition 
oriented media, GBRV Minister Diosdado Cabello addressed the 
National Assembly (AN) on July 9 insisting that pro-Chavez 
lawmakers limit radio networks to a maximum of three stations 
under the proposed "Law on Social Responsibility for Radio 
and Television." Under Cabello's proposal, radio networks 
would further be atomized by limiting their ability to 
conduct simultaneous programs (joint broadcasts) to only 30 
minutes a day. (Ref B)  One presumed target of the measure is 
union radio an independent network of five stations and 15 
affiliates. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Pro-Government stations, however, seemingly are 
immune from the "new draft rules" designed to silence more 
critical stations.  On July 20, Radio National de Venezuela 
(RNV) inaugurated a new state-sponsored radio station (92.5) 
in Monagas, Anzoategui. According to media reports, the 
pro-Chavez station will broadcast on a circuit of 73 
stations, with an additional 35 stations to be brought into 
the circuit in the near future.  Director of RNV, Helena 
Salcedo made a point of telling media attending the 
inauguration that, "in this area there was no access to 
stations or state run channels. People could only receive 
their information by cable, which is too costly for the 
majority of the population.  We are insuring that people 
really can receive information, as established in the 
constitution." 
 
¶7.  (U)  In a July 17 interview on state controlled VTV, 
Cabello announced his intention to immediately begin 
administrative proceedings against "illegal" radio stations. 
Cabello publicly threatened to seize 50% of Globovision, and 
made a point of defending his "administrative proceedings," 
claiming that 27 families currently control 32% of the radio 
spectrum.  In an ironic and uniquely Venezuelan twist, 
however, Cabello specifically announced that all baseball and 
soccer games would be exempt from the new time restrictions 
of 30 minutes a day for joint broadcasting.  According to 
Cabello, "Every rule has its exception." 
 
------------------------------------- 
NYTIMES REPORTER EXPERIENCES THUGGERY 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U)  On July 9, New York Times photographer Scott Dalton 
was harassed, briefly detained, and had his electronic camera 
photos erased by security agents allegedly working for 
Barinas State Governor Adan Chavez.  The photographer, 
accompanied by NY times journalist Simon Romero, was shooting 
photos at a public event where the Governor was speaking. The 
journalists were researching material for a July 20 NY Times 
article chronicling kidnappings, societal violence, and 
public insecurity in Barinas, a rural ranching state governed 
by President Chavez's eldest brother and birthplace of 
President Hugo Chavez. 
 
¶9.  (C) Following the incident, Romero told Embassy assistant 
information officer that Dalton had been harassed by "three 
men wearing red shirts."  According to Romero the agents 
tried to push the photographer into a bathroom, and when he 
resisted, they seized his camera and erased several days 
worth of photographic material.  Following the incident, the 
two journalists were escorted out of the event and Dalton's 
erased camera equipment was returned to him.  The two men 
decided to keep the incident "low profile" in order to remain 
in the area and complete their assignment. 
 
¶10.  (C)  Comment:  Pressure against the independent media 
continues to slowly accumulate week by week in Venezuela. 
Pundits speculate as to exactly when Chavez will launch the 
final blow against the highly critical opposition oriented 
station. The GBRV has shown it is not hesitant to use 
intimidation, restrict the technical ability of radio 
networks to broadcast, or resort to simple bullying in order 
to intimidate and harass any media that dares to criticize. 
Chavez has established a pattern of threatening critical 
media, but then easing up as they self-censor.  He 
undoubtedly realizes he will pay a price in international 
credibility if he closes down Venezuela's last remaining 
critical TV station and would prefer to avoid that.  Although 
Chavez may delay action to close down Globovision as he 
calculates the costs and benefits of this action, if the 
station refuses to change its editorial line history 
indicates that it will ultimately go off the air.  End 
Comment. 
CAULFIELD