05ANKARA6514
Avian Influenza Situation Update in Turkey
Mon Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/RUS, OES/STC, EB/TPP/ATP, EB/TPP/BTA 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER/PBUDASHEWITZ 
FAS FOR ITP/MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
FAS PASS FSIS AND APHIS 
VIENNA PASS APHIS 
BRUSSELS PASS APHIS/FERNANDEZ 
GENEVA PASS HEALTH ATTACHE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR KPAO TBIO AMED TU
SUBJECT:  Avian Influenza Situation Update in Turkey 
 
Ref:  (A) Ankara 5119 
      (B) Ankara 6105 
      (C) Ankara 6138 
      (D) Ankara 6232 
     (E) Ankara 6291 
      (F) Ankara 6430 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for Internet Distribution. 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The Government of Turkey (GOT) plans to lift 
the quarantine restrictions in the AI affected zone if new 
lab results determine that there is no sign of AI in the 7 
kilometer radius outside the quarantine zone near Balikesir. 
The Ministry of Agriculture confirmed reports in the press 
that 153 chickens died in Inegol, Bursa over the weekend. 
Initial reports indicate an outbreak of Newcastle disease, 
although test results are not expected back until after the 
local holidays.  End summary. 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
The Quarantine Restrictions May Soon Be lifted 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  (U) According to Turkish law, the quarantine 
restrictions in the AI affected area near Balikesir can be 
lifted if there are no new confirmed AI incidents in the 
area of the outbreak for 21 days following the outbreak. 
Since the outbreak was reported on October 7, the GOT could 
have technically lifted the quarantine restrictions from the 
3 kilometer radius around the infected farm on October 28. 
 
¶3.  (U) However, the GOT decided to take more precautions 
before lifting the restrictions.  The government sent blood 
samples from poultry in the 7 kilometer observation area 
outside of the quarantine zone to a lab to be tested for AI. 
Results are pending.  If the results are negative, 
indicating that there is no AI present in that region, then 
the quarantine restrictions will be removed. GOT continues 
to monitor for other AI occurrences in the country. 
 
 
--------------- 
A New Outbreak? 
--------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Ministry of Agriculture confirmed reports in 
the press that 153 chickens died in Inegol, Bursa over the 
weekend and that 750 additional birds were killed as 
precautionary measures.  Inegol is in the same region as the 
first outbreak near Balikesir.  The Turkish press indicated 
that this was not a case of Avian Influenza but rather one 
of Newcastle Disease, which is closely related to AI and 
also quite serious.  The Ministry of Agriculture sent 
samples to the lab and expects to receive results next week. 
The lab results will determine whether the deaths of these 
birds can be attributed to AI, Newcastle Disease or 
something else. 
 
--------------------- 
Government Assistance 
--------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Ministry of Social Security announced lat week 
that social security debts of all of the affected poultry 
processors will be postponed for six months. 
 
¶6. (SBU) It was also announced that, for a certain time 
period, the GOT is issuing unemployment pensions from the 
national unemployment fund to those whose jobs were affected 
by the AI outbreak in order to keep employment at current 
levels. This indicates that the government believes that 
this is only a temporary disruption and that the jobs should 
still be there after a few months. 
 
------------------------- 
Poultry Industry 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) According to the Turkish Poultry Association, 
immediately following the outbreak, poultry sales were down 
to ten percent but have now risen back to 65 percent of 
normal levels.  This industry expects that the government's 
decision to lift the quarantine will help to further boost 
poultry sales in the coming weeks.  However, the industry is 
still cautious since it is still the bird migratory season 
and the Hatay region may be vulnerable to another outbreak. 
Given the drastic decrease in poultry production in Turkey, 
the feed industry will also be affected.  However, it is 
hard to predict just how much at this point. The growth of 
the poultry sector will take a long time to get back to 
normal, pre-AI, levels. 
 
MCELDOWNEY