05ANKARA6191
EXBS: PROBLEMS WITH BORDER SECURITY IN TURKEY
Thu Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 006191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/PRA MAZEVEDO 
DEPT FOR ISN/ECC JHARTSHORN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KSTC LG PARM PREL TU
SUBJECT: EXBS: PROBLEMS WITH BORDER SECURITY IN TURKEY 
 
REF: STATE 183118 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: Turkish MFA has requested a hold on travel 
to border areas under the EXBS program until the Turkish 
Parliament ratifies the recently signed Nonproliferation 
Cooperation Agreement.  Following ratification, expected by 
the end of October, full implementation of the EXBS program, 
including travel to border areas, in Turkey can begin.  As 
reflected in Embassy Ankara's Consular information sheet, no 
region of Turkey is off-limits to official or unofficial 
travel.  Caution in travel to all regions is advised 
following the June 2004 announcement by the PKK terrorist 
organization that it was ending its unilateral cease fire. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Nonproliferation Cooperation Agreement between 
the Republic of Turkey and the United States, signed on June 
14th, awaits final ratification by the Turkish Parliament. 
Once this ratification is completed, all programs covered 
under the EXBS umbrella will be open for engagement. 
However, until final ratification, MFA has requested that 
EXBS program engagement be limited to exchanges with senior 
government officials in Ankara.  MFA officials want to avoid 
the appearance that the government is beginning work before 
the Agreement is ratified which they expect by the end of the 
month.  Once this is done, travel by USG officials throughout 
Turkey will be encouraged in order to make the program as 
successful as possible.  Many programs are awaiting this 
final ratification, including the DOE Second Line of Defense 
and an overall Customs and Border Protection Service 
assessment. 
 
¶3.  (U) Turkish Customs, Foreign Trade and other government 
organizations are eager to participate in many of the EXBS 
programs that will be available to Turkey.  They understand 
the importance of following established governmental 
procedures towards ratification of the Agreement.  All 
Turkish agencies involved with the EXBS program are careful 
to ensure that any actions that they undertake within the 
EXBS program will not give the appearance of circumventing 
the ratification of the Agreement by Parliament.  Each 
organization is ready to quickly move forward engaging their 
U.S. counterpart once this final step is complete. 
 
¶4.  (U) In response to concerns raised in reftel, post 
emphasizes that there are no general travel restrictions on 
travel throughout Turkey.  Travelers must exercise caution 
when traveling in certain regions of the country due to 
periodic terrorist activity or other concerns, but overall 
safety is good.  The border crossings with Syria, Georgia, 
Bulgaria and Greece are generally free of violence and safe 
to visit.  Visits to SE Turkey, including the border 
crossings with Iraq and Iran, are monitored and subject to 
approval by the Embassy.  While travel to SE Turkey requires 
greater vigilance, travel to this region does occur in 
support of specific mission goals and programs is possible. 
 
¶5.  (U) Questions concerning the Turkish EXBS program should 
be addressed to the Turkish EXBS Advisor, Kevin Lyon.  His 
contact information is phone (90)(312)455-5555 ext 2525, fax 
(90)(312)468-4775, email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
MCELDOWNEY