05ATHENS2663
MACEDONIA NAME: GOG REJECTS LATEST NIMETZ PROPOSAL
Tue Oct 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Athens
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ATHENS 002663 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR P, EUR, EUR/SE, EUR/SCE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/11/2015 
TAGS: PREL MK GR AMB MACEDONIA
SUBJECT: MACEDONIA NAME: GOG REJECTS LATEST NIMETZ PROPOSAL 
AS BASIS FOR NEGOTIATIONS 
 
REF: SKOPJE 1222 
 
Classified By: AMB. CHARLES P. RIES FOR REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C)  SUMMARY:  Citing its long-standing opposition to a 
dual-name solution, the GoG clearly rejected the latest 
proposal from UN Envoy Matthew Nimetz, leaving prospects for 
a solution dim before the EC's November 9 avis on Macedonia's 
EU application.  At an October 11 meeting with Ambassador, 
MFA SecGen Rokanas had little to offer in the way of next 
steps, but noted that the GoG had no objection to the 
continued use of "FYROM" in order not to block Macedonia's EU 
progress.  Meanwhile, the Greek media of all persuasions 
unanimously slammed the proposal, with many arguing that the 
U.S. was behind it, a charge that Ambassador told Rokanas was 
wrong and unfair.  Some predicted that PM Karamanlis would 
choose to hold a referendum on the name issue -- a worrisome 
but unlikely development, given that FM Molyviatis has told 
us he fears this above all.  END SUMMARY. 
 
GoG Rejects Latest Plan 
 
¶2. (SBU)  In a detailed statement on October 10, the GoG 
deemed "unacceptable" the latest name issue proposal from UN 
Envoy Matthew Nimetz (full text at www.mfa.gr).  While we 
have yet to see the actual proposal itself, based on reftel 
and broadcast/print reports here, the Greeks objected in 
particular to a dual-name solution -- a stance they have 
maintained for some time and which FM Molyviatis has 
repeatedly told us is unacceptable.  The statement also 
accused Nimetz of bias in favor of the Macedonian position. 
However, the statement devotes a lot of space to support the 
European perspective of Macedonia and makes clear Greece will 
continue to work within the framework of the UN process. 
 
¶3.  (C)  In an October 11 meeting with Ambassador and DCM, 
MFA Secretary General Rokanas said that while he himself did 
not believe this, most Greeks considered the U.S to be behind 
the new proposal.  Ambassador replied that that 
characterization was both wrong and unfair and that Nimetz 
had been careful not to brief it to the U.S. before 
presenting it to the two sides to avoid just such an 
impression.  He also reminded Rokanas that when Greece had 
accepted Nimetz's last proposal as a basis for negotiations 
("Republika Makedonija-Skopje"), few then had made such an 
accusation. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Ambassador reiterated USG support for Nimetz and the 
UN process and that we remained anxious for a solution, 
especially in relation to the November 9 avis from the 
European Commission on Macedonia's readiness to begin 
accession talks.  Noting that U/S Burns had made these same 
points to FM Molyviatis at their September 18 meeting in New 
York, Ambassador asked whether the GoG would accept the term 
"FYROM" for Macedonia's EU accession prospects to proceed; 
Rokanas answered that he believed so.  Asked the way ahead 
now that the GoG had rejected this proposal, Rokanas said he 
was unsure, but noted that Greece's relations with Macedonia, 
aside from the name issue, were excellent.  He did not know 
when or what the GoG would formally reply to Nimetz. 
 
Greek Media Frenzy, Opposition Jumps on Bandwagon 
 
¶5.  (U)  Meanwhile, the Greek press of all political stripes 
gave prominent space to the proposal, unanimously 
characterizing it with such words as "travesty" and 
"disaster."  Two pro-government papers (Eleftheros Typos and 
Apogevmatini) argued that PM Karamanlis would now choose to 
hold a referendum on the name issue and use the outcome as a 
platform to veto Skopje's desire to join both NATO and the 
EU, if it chose to pursue membership with its constitutional 
name.  Pro-main opposition party PASOK media characterized 
Karamanlis as "buckling under American pressure" and not 
receiving anything in return.  PASOK foreign affairs 
spokesman Papoutsis charged that it was the ND government's 
"lack of strategy" that had brought Greece to this juncture. 
Both PASOK and other opposition parties have also asked the 
government for a briefing on the proposal and some have asked 
for a convening of the National Foreign Affairs Council, made 
up of all the parliamentary parties. 
 
¶6.  (C) In an October 11 conversation with poloff, MFA 
spokesman Koumoutsakos complained that he was taking a lot of 
heat from journalists, who were asking why the GoG did not 
hold a referendum on the issue and why it had nothing to show 
for its so-called strategic partnership with the U.S.  Poloff 
noted that the USG was unfairly being attacked and 
Koumoutsakos agreed, but said that in this atmosphere, it 
made more sense to say as little as possible than take the 
issue head on. 
 
¶7. (C)  COMMENT:  It should come as no surprise that the GoG 
quickly rejected this latest Nimetz proposal.  FM Molyviatis 
has been clear and consistent that Greece could never accept 
a dual-name solution.  Our key interest in all this, of 
course, is to make certain the name issue does not de-rail 
Macedonia's EU prospects.  If there is no solution by 
November 9 -- and this DOA proposal makes the chances look 
increasingly dim -- at least the Greeks will not object to 
the continued use of "FYROM" in the accession process. 
 
¶8.  (C)  COMMENT (cont'd):  Another factor that needs to be 
kept in mind is the GoG's fear of what Molyviatis calls the 
"referendum virus."  He is afraid that with the focus on the 
name, pressure will build even in pro-government circles for 
Greece to promise to hold a referendum on Macedonia's EU 
accession to strengthen the government's negotiating 
position.  Besides introducing uncertainty into Macedonia's 
future, a referendum commitment would make it hard to avoid a 
similar vote on Turkey's accession.  While both accession 
decisions seem to be distant prospects, referendum promises 
made now would be hard to undo later. 
RIES