05BAGHDAD4088
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 3, 2005
Mon Oct 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 3, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion of the occasion of Ramadan, Saudi 
interference, government incompetence, and the constitution 
were the major editorial themes of Iraqi, Arabic language 
websites on October 3, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.   "Ramadan Doesn't Revive the Dead, But It's an Occasion 
  for Solace" (Iraq 4 All News, 10/3) 
¶B. "Your Highness, Saud Al-Faisal, It's Enough!" (Sawt Al- 
Iraq, 10/3) 
¶C. "Our Government Is Busy .Please Do Not Disturb" (Watan 4 
All, 10/3) 
¶D. "Why `No' to the Constitution?" (Al-Jeeran, 10/3) 
 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Ramadan Doesn't Revive the Dead, But It's an Occasion 
for Solace" 
(Editorial by Fatih Abdul Salam - Iraq 4 All News - 
http://iraq4all.org/viewnews.php?id=10169 ) 
 
"Despite traditional differences over [when to] announce the 
start of the holy month of Ramadan, Muslims of different 
sects have agreed upon the significance of the month. It 
represents a graceful occasion, but its spiritual generosity 
has not been used appropriately by Iraqi politicians, whose 
only concern is to announce the Ministry of Interior's 
decision to prevent eating in public. 
 
"Ramadan does not change political positions or beliefs, but 
this religious occasion should encourage politicians of 
different backgrounds to meet and agree over political 
basics. These foundations have been lost in the widening gap 
of power struggles and the lost definitions of concepts such 
as terrorism, treason, infidelity, resistance, suppression, 
and democracy. 
 
"Any monitoring of daily political life in Iraq will show 
that the broad perspective of two years ago has been reduced 
to nothing more than narrow angles and tunnels. This view 
indicates a political stagnancy that should be resolved 
through true cooperation among all parties. No quick 
solution can be reached through political activities such as 
a constitutional referendum or parliamentarian elections. If 
there is no intention to walk this road, then I believe that 
solos will dominate our political concerts [that unilateral 
action will decide political outcomes]. 
 
"Policy should not be monopolized by major parties and 
alliances, especially in a naked political process that has 
nothing aside from U.S. support-an incredible support that 
insists that the dead are alive and the living are dead, 
until proven otherwise." 
 
¶B. "Your Highness, Saud Al-Faisal, It's Enough!" 
(Editorial by Tarmed Aqrawi - Sawt Al-Iraq - Voice of Iraq - 
http://www.sotaliraq.com/articles-iraq/nieuws .php?id=16652 ) 
 
"You speak of the Iraqi constitution as if Saudi Arabia has 
one! You have forgotten, maybe deliberately, that Saudi 
Arabia does not.not.not have a constitution and that the 
kingdom is ruled by a tribal, dictatorship-like, sectarian 
governing system that is apparently religious. In reality, 
princes and rulers eagerly indulge in a life of alcohol, 
gambling, and prostitutes. 
 
"Your highness, an Arabic proverb says, `He who lacks 
something cannot give it.' Iraqis know only too well that 
Saudi Arabia lacks a constitution; so before wasting your 
breath and advising Iraqis, why don't you start with 
yourself and your royal family and explain to them the 
meaning of a constitution. 
 
"Your highness, why don't you use your constitutional 
drafting experience to draft a Saudi constitution that would 
guarantee a decent life for Saudis instead of interfering in 
the lives of Iraqis? Don't your countrymen deserve this 
favor more than anyone else? Your highness, another Arabic 
proverb says, `A sick doctor shouldn't be treating people!' 
You speak of sectarianism in Iraq, well please allow me to 
ask you about who fueled sectarianism in Islam? Wasn't it 
the extremists supported by your kingdom with men and money? 
 
"Your highness, I would like to tell you something: if you 
wish to secure the region, you should grant Saudi Shiites 
their rights. We have a Sunni Endowment Council in Iraq. Do 
you have one for Shiites in Saudi Arabia?" 
¶C. "Our Government Is Busy .Please Do Not Disturb" 
(Editorial by Abdul Salam Salih - Watan 4 All - 
http://wattan4all.com/viewarticle.php?id=5263 &pg=articles ) 
 
"Iraq's current conflict of authority between the prime 
minister and the president of the republic descended to 
chaos at the headquarters of Al Sabah newspaper, the 
mouthpiece of the supposed government. It reflects the 
differences among current Iraqi government leaders, 
contributing to negative effects on Iraqi people who 
continue to suffer from a lack of security and necessary 
services. 
 
"Such difference among government figures will have negative 
effects on the whole electoral process, starting with the 
constitutional referendum and continuing to the major 
election that everybody is struggling to win. This chaos and 
conflict, centering on authority and positions and how to 
occupy them, will bring destruction to Iraq, which is 
already suffering from failures and disastrous consequences. 
 
"The fact that employees of the Iraqi embassy in Damascus 
helped organize a demonstration in support of the tyrant 
[Saddam Hussein] and his ousted regime shows scorn for Iraqi 
peoples' feelings, as well as for the current government. 
The major problem is that despite our government's advice 
and appeals, no one [in the government] is listening. Is it 
because our brothers are busy with more important things 
.distribution of posts? Certainly they are not busy with the 
distribution of ration cards items, for which Iraqis were 
begging from the state. 
 
"Such poor conditions and political disagreements will lead 
the country and its people to hell. Talking about 
accusations and counter-accusations over the disappearance 
of billions is endless, while so many of Iraq's people are 
living under the poverty line. The parties' [in]competence 
surface when disasters take place. All run to denounce and 
condemn these terrorist acts, as if mismanagement and poor 
choices were not the main reasons for these disastrous 
failures." 
 
¶D. "Why `No' to the Constitution?" 
(Editorial by Ziyad Cobrolo - Al-Jeeran - "Neighbors" - 
http://www.aljeeran.net/articles.php ) 
 
"It is known that the Iraqi National Assembly evaded an 
important responsibility by starting discussions on the 
draft constitution behind closed doors and with limited 
numbers of people participating for one or two days. The 
National Assembly was supposed to immediately distribute 
copies of this draft to the Iraqi people. Instead, they sent 
it to the U.N., as if there is plenty of time for this. We 
still do not know the reason for this act-why they sent this 
copy request for a twenty-page document! 
 
"Yes, we can see in this draft a lot of words and names we 
had not seen before. But when you scrutinize the draft 
constitution, you will not find anything you could call 
truth except for the ink and the paper on which the 
constitution was written. Everything is illusory. This is 
why we urge you to vote against the constitution: 
 
  "1). It indicates ethnic, religious, and ideological 
  affiliation and ignores Iraqi citizenship. 
 
  "2). Ambiguity surrounds this constitution; most of its 
  articles are linked to laws that will be legislated by 
  the Parliament's future majority. Constitutions and their 
  articles should be clear, not ambiguous. 
 
  "3). It instigates discrimination against ethnicities. 
 
  "4). While the last article of the Transitional 
  Administrative Law [TAL] indicates that it will be null 
  upon adoption of the new constitution, the draft excludes 
  item A of Article 53 of the TAL but does not exclude item 
  ¶C. In the same way, article 58 is excluded. In other 
  words, it allows for random migration until 2007. 
 
  "5). The peoples' will regarding Kirkuk's future is 
  postponed until after a census and referendum, which will 
  be held after this date. 
 
  "6). The draft, due to pressure from the United States of 
  America, will be submitted immediately to a popular 
  referendum, without giving it the chance to be discussed 
  freely and seriously-even by the MPs, whom the people 
  voted into Parliament to represent them. 
 
  "7). The complicated rule system in the draft is 
  unprecedented; implementing it will lead the country to 
  division in short time. 
"For all these reasons, every citizen who loves his country 
should go to polling centers and vote against this draft. 
Iraqi people should say `my will is above everything.' 
Otherwise, this beloved country, with all its fortunes, will 
fall to others. You, dear citizen, you will continue to be 
humiliated on you own land. the choice is in your hand." 
 
SATTERFIELD