05BAGHDAD4391
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 25, 2005
Tue Oct 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004391 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 25, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussions of Amr Musa's visit to Iraq; Ba'ath- 
inspired violence; and preparation for December elections 
were the major editorial themes of Iraqi, Arabic language 
websites on October 25, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.   "Musa's Visit to Iraq: Important Results" (Iraq 4 All 
  News, 10/25) 
¶B. "The Same Ba'athist Executioner" (Elaph, 10/25) 
¶C. "Arrest Al-Dhari and Save Iraq Before It Is Too Late" 
(Sawt Al-Iraq, 10/25) 
¶D. "How Do Our National Government and Political Forces 
  Prepare for the Coming Elections?" (Iraq Al-Ghad, 10/25) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Musa's Visit to Iraq: Important Results" 
(Editorial from Al-Ahram Newspaper, posted on Iraq 4 All 
News - http://iraq4all.org/viewnews.php?id=10442) 
 
"The Arab League Secretary General's visit to Iraq and his 
discussions with many Iraqi factions were vital, as he 
produced significant results regarding Iraqi stability and 
security. This tour contributed to the restoration of 
confidence between Iraqis and the Arab world after a period 
during which some Iraqis called for their country to pull 
out of its Arab surroundings. 
 
"It has also established the basis for an active Arab role 
in the Iraqi political scene, which should help direct 
political events and end violence. This visit is not the end 
of the road, but the beginning of an Arab effort to support 
Iraqis and leave current conditions behind so they can 
regain their independence and stability. 
 
"In addition to what was mentioned above, Musa's talks with 
different Iraqi groups played an important role in achieving 
just enough agreement to hold an accord conference in Cairo 
next month. This conference, with sufficient preparation, 
should push Iraqis of different political, religious, and 
ethnic backgrounds toward a common political vision for 
their country's future. It will be based on preserving the 
unity and sovereignty of Iraq and consolidating the 
democratic process that guarantees the coexistence of 
different groups. Coexistence will be based on citizenship 
rather than ethnic and religious differences and it will 
ensure equality among all Iraqis, without exception." 
 
¶B. "The Same Ba'athist Executioner" 
(Editorial by Balqes Hameed Hasan - Elaph - "Consensus" - 
http://www.elaph.com/ElaphWeb/ElaphWriter/200 5/10/100522.htm 
- London-based electronic newspaper published by Othman al- 
Omeir, former Saudi editor of Asharq Al-Awsat and Al- 
Majallah) 
 
"Many Arab political analysts and members of the media mock 
us when we say that Ba'ath party remnants are behind the 
majority of terrorist attacks in Iraq and that without their 
support for terrorists the continuous bloodshed and 
explosions would not be possible. At the same time, these 
same Arabs accuse us of treason and standing with 
Americans-only because we want to build our country with a 
democratic government elected by the people, as in any other 
civilized nation. 
 
"The situation in Iraq confirms Ba'athist involvement on a 
daily basis. They issue statements in the name of Izzat 
[Ibrahim] Al-Duri and others, conduct kidnappings here and 
there, gamble on civil war, spread chaos, and attempt to 
topple the new government. 
And today they request the aid of their old Arab allies, 
including politicians, and call for intervention in search 
of reconciliation that will provide them with the 
opportunity to reassume power and spread terror once again. 
 
"How can anyone believe in the innocence of Ba'thists, given 
the brutal killings of children, workers, and policemen and 
the abduction of scientists, intellectuals, and politicians? 
How can a foreign terrorist settle in Iraq and carry out his 
crimes without the assistance of people living in the 
country? Can such a terrorist cross the border with an RPG 
launcher or any other heavy weaponry? Where did the weapons 
of the former Iraqi army disappear to? Who took billions of 
Iraqi funds from banks? Don't any of these questions qualify 
as evidence for those who defend and sympathize with 
Saddam's gangsters? 
"Arabs should know that no one can remove the bitterness 
from the hearts of Iraqis who witnessed death 
everyday.Iraqis have no struggle amongst themselves; the 
struggle is between victimized people and criminals. How can 
Iraqi blood be subject to bargaining?" 
 
¶C. "Arrest Al-Dhari and Save Iraq Before It Is Too Late" 
(Editorial by Hassan Al-Zameli - Sawt Al-Iraq - "The Voice 
of Iraq" - http://www.sotaliraq.com/articles- 
iraq/nieuws.php?id=18041 - Produced by Faili Kurds, not 
affiliated with any political party) 
"This bastard dog and non-human is still crying at the top 
of his lungs against Iraq and Iraqis. He instigates and 
encourages terror with the assistance of Jordan and Saudi 
Arabia. Amr Musa sent a signal to America that security 
instability is governed by Egyptian intelligence. How come 
we did not hear any car bombs exploding next to Amr Musa's 
residence in Iraq, but when his visit ended the wave of car 
bombs started again? Isn't this a reason to reject the 
conference that they call `reconciliation' unless the Arab 
League condemns all explosions, terrorism, killings and 
destruction in Iraq? 
 
"Put Al-Dhari in the prosecution's cage with his disgraced 
master and you will see the source of the crime. America 
does not want to arrest Al-Dhari because conspiracy theories 
about the blood of innocent people will be revealed. America 
should know that if people's patience runs out, they will 
drown in their mistakes and, at that point, everything will 
be out of control." 
 
¶D. "How Do Our National Government and Political Forces 
Prepare for the Coming Elections?" 
(Editorial by Dr. Abdul Khalik Hussein - Iraq Al-Ghad - 
"Iraq of Tomorrow" - 
http://www.iraqoftomorrow.org/viewarticle.php ?id=index- 
20050110-28495 - Self-proclaimed independent, national 
electronic newspaper, promoting the spread of democracy and 
supporting federalism in a united Iraq) 
 
"Iraq is set to hold parliamentary elections on December 
15th, 2005 to elect permanent National Assembly members if 
the draft constitution is ratified, or a new temporary 
National Assembly if the draft is rejected. Do officials 
prepare for these desired elections, which we want to be 
another step on the path toward democracy and the 
establishment of a modern state? There is not doubt that 
elections are an important part of democracy; there is no 
democracy without elections; however, there can be elections 
without democracy. In the Ba'ath era there were elections 
without democracy. Now, in Iraq, there is a project to build 
a true democratic state; therefore, there are elections to 
choose municipal councils, local governments and the 
National Assembly. 
 
"But democracy loses its value if it is not accompanied by a 
popular perception of its importance to the democratic 
system.Political awareness must be promoted, or else 
democracy will be a means to serve political elitists who 
know how to manipulate people's emotions and feelings. The 
deposed fascist regime worked to deprive people of any means 
to learn about democracy. All media outlets were controlled 
by the ruling party, which sought to mislead people and 
spread fascist principles and individual worship. This led 
to paralysis of the mind, dependency, and carelessness and 
it undermined self-confidence. Ultimately, Ba'ath rule led 
to human destruction. 
 
"The ad hoc terror and spread of organized crime with which 
Iraqi people must live is proof that the new era was 
inherited from the former era. It is time for officials, 
political leaders, and cultural, social, and media 
organizations to play their roles in spreading political 
perceptions. They must educate citizens about their rights, 
duties, and responsibilities toward their compatriots and 
nation." 
 
SATTERFIELD