05BAGHDAD4172
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 10, 2005
Mon Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 004172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - October 10, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussions of civil status law in the draft 
constitution; civil democratic participation; and Iraq after 
the referendum were the major editorial themes of Iraqi, 
Arabic language websites on October 10, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.   "Apprehension . in Overtime" (Iraq 4 All News, 10/10) 
¶B. "Don't Rip Down the Constitution Advertisements" (Watan 4 
All, 10/10) 
¶C. "What Comes After the Constitutional Referendum" (Sawt Al- 
Iraq, 10/10) 
 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Apprehension . in Overtime" 
(Editorial by Fatih Abdul Salam - Iraq 4 All News - 
http://iraq4all.org/viewnews.php?id=10280 ) 
 
"I was listening to Iraqi President Jalal Al-Talabani's 
speech, at the Churchill Hotel in London, about supporting 
the constitution when an Iraqi lady asked: `What will the 
role of civil status laws be in dealing with women if the 
constitution permits courts to determine laws 
independently?' 
 
"This question has special impact because it comes at a 
critical time, only a few days before the constitutional 
referendum. It seemed to reveal a great deal of anxiety 
about the many possibilities to which the constitution could 
lead. The constitution opens the door to many 
interpretations and would require an authority greater than 
the constitution to sort out the loose ends. 
 
"This clever question was presented by a desperate woman who 
knew that no answer could be found in `overtime,' and 
millions of uneducated women will face the same question in 
coming days. A woman in an ethnically and religiously 
diverse society may not be able to guarantee her freedom of 
choice over the religious court that represents her, 
especially if members of her family oppose that option. And 
this is only one simple example of potential consequences 
overlooked by the constitution. 
 
"This lady's question draws attention to the fact that the 
constitution's articles cannot protect Iraq from division, 
nor can any other political hero. From an international and 
political point of view, Iraq is not divisible, but we 
should be wary of internal differences that would leave 
Iraqis uneasy regarding their social relations, as well as 
their civil rights, which could affect their families and 
society. 
 
"Civil status laws have been suppressed; there was no 
official declaration announcing their elimination in favor 
of an agreement that does not seem to be very strong.while 
not very weak either." 
 
¶B. "Don't Rip Down the Constitution Advertisements" 
(Editorial by Hamza Al-Shamkhi - Watan Lil Jamee - "Homeland 
4 All" - 
http://wattan4all.com/viewarticle.php?id=5646 &pg=articles ) 
 
"A referendum in any country, including Iraq, is a 
reflection of the democracy we all seek after an era of 
single-party dictatorship, accompanied by wars and 
destruction. Iraqis have the date of October 15th for their 
constitutional referendum; it will provide Iraqis with the 
opportunity to exercise their natural right to say `Yes' or 
`No' to the constitution, representing one stage of 
democracy. 
 
"Regrettably, we have seen and heard of organized groups 
that are ripping up referendum advertisements and posters in 
Iraqi cities in an attempt to terrorize and harass voters. 
They serve the interests of the enemies of Iraq and the 
democratic transformation; they are trying to escalate armed 
attacks and drag the country back to the times of 
dictatorship and war. At the same time, parties, political 
groups, and personalities have the right to oppose or 
express reservations over certain items of the constitution 
and they have the right to educate people to vote `No' and 
work to reach suitable alternatives. After that, Iraqis can 
choose their constitution freely and transparently instead 
of tearing down referendum advertisements, fighting voters, 
and using other methods that contradict a human's rights to 
vote and choose. 
 
"We should all stand in the face of these uncivilized and 
undemocratic methods that seek to deprive our nation of its 
right to choose its political path in the present and 
future, and derail the political process of Iraqis who seek 
a free, democratic, and federal Iraq. You should vote `Yes' 
or `No' instead of tearing down referendum and election 
posters." 
 
¶C. "What Comes After the Constitutional Referendum?" 
(Editorial by Saif Allah Ali - Sawt Al-Iraq - "Voice of 
Iraq" - http://www.sotaliraq.com/articles- 
iraq/nieuws.php?id=17074 ) 
 
"It is undoubtedly a sacred national duty for all Iraqis to 
vote in favor of the constitution; this will occur despite 
all the impediments to democracy and freedom that were set 
by enemies in Iraq, enemies in other Arab countries, and the 
Persians. This constitution will be accepted because it 
meets all aspirations of the Iraqi people who offered 
sacrifices for this great day. These sacrifices forced the 
most powerful country in the world to interfere to root out 
the regime that planted itself in Iraq after it [America] 
witnessed the injustice of Arab rule over Shiites and Kurds. 
 
"I am absolutely sure that America participated with all its 
might to save Iraq from Arab bastards; it brought in the 
Iraqi opposition parties who fled Iraq because of the former 
regime's oppression. It [America] formed a short-term and 
low-risk government knowing that most of its members were 
fortune seekers despite their patriotism; it gave them the 
opportunity to rule until the referendum. 
 
"After the referendum a new government will be made of 
`native' Iraqis only [as opposed to those who were living 
abroad] with foreign advisors. America will kill two birds 
with one stone: first it will curb the `foreign' government 
on the basis that it ruled long enough and proved its 
failure; second it will give the `native' patriots the 
chance to run the country on the basis that they are more 
aware of the problems than those who were abroad. This will 
bring stability to Iraq because it will satisfy all `native' 
parties. It is certain that the `native' government will 
strike with an iron fist everyone who toys with Iraqi 
security, especially if the government is a permanent 
elected government." 
 
KHALILZAD