05HELSINKI1116
FINNISH PRESIDENT HALONEN'S TRAVELS TO RUSSIA,
Wed Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 001116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/06/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KDEM SENV FI AJ EU RS LG UK EN AM
SUBJECT: FINNISH PRESIDENT HALONEN'S TRAVELS TO RUSSIA, 
GEORGIA, ARMENIA AND AZERBAIJAN 
 
REF: A. MOSCOW 12264 
 
     ¶B. HELSINKI 873 
 
Classified By: PolChief Gregory Thome, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: In late Sept. and early Oct., President 
Halonen has made official visits to Russia and to Georgia, 
Armenia and Azerbaijan.  In Russia, the GOF sees bilateral 
progress on environmental issues and border security, in part 
thanks to the good relations between the two presidents. 
However, Putin complained rather bitterly to Halonen that 
while he wants to focus on his domestic economic agenda, he's 
constantly distracted by "neighborhood" problems like unrest 
in the Caucusus and boundary disputes with the Baltics.  In 
the GOF's view, those issues remain problematic because the 
GOR has not initiated longterm policies aimed at resolving 
them.  In the Caucusus, Halonen's agenda included discussions 
of Armenia's relationship with Turkey and with the EU; 
Georgia's improving relationship with Ukraine and its 
tensions with Russia; and free and fair elections in 
Azerbaijan.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On Oct. 5, Presidential Chief of Staff Jarmo 
Viinanen and Special Advisor Paivi Kairamo-Hella briefed DCM 
and PolChief on Finnish President Tarja Halonen's official 
visits to St. Petersburg on September 22 and to Georgia, 
Armenia, and Azerbaijan Sept. 27-29. 
 
Finland/Russia: Increasing Environment and Border Cooperation 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
¶3. (C) In Russia, Halonen's meetings with President Vladimir 
Putin represented another in a series of what Viinanen 
characterized as productive and increasingly cordial meetings 
aimed at furthering cooperative initiatives, rather than at 
addressing areas of controversy.  The two presidents 
inaugurated a wastewater treatment facility as part of a 
joint Swedish-Finnish-Russian effort to improve water quality 
in the Baltic Sea.  The plant -- plans for which date back to 
Soviet times -- will treat the wastewater of 750,000 St. 
Petersburg residents that previously flowed into the Baltic 
untreated.  Finland has made substantial progress in focusing 
GOR attention on environmental issues and, in Viinanen's 
view, "once Putin became seized with the issue, things 
started to happen."  The health of the Baltic Sea remains a 
crucial regional issue, although one that has become less 
contentious over time as a bilateral irritant between Finland 
and Russia.  For example, Viinanen noted, Putin no longer 
accuses the Finns of seeking to "hamper Russia's economic 
development" when they raise environmental concerns. 
However, he added, the GOF remains very concerned about 
potential oil spills, particularly since Russia has made 
clear that its use of the Baltic as a major export route for 
crude will remain non-negotiable. 
 
¶4. (C) On border security, the GOF also continues to make 
progress in theory -- if not in practice.  According to 
Viinanen, Putin told Halonen that Russia remains committed to 
full cooperation and wants to see all border-crossing 
stations fully functional.  Unfortunately, the opening of the 
newest, best-equipped facility remains thwarted because 
Russia has failed to improve the road to it.  Viinanen said 
he expects Russia to find the funds, not only because of 
Putin's intense interest in improving both security and 
commerce, but also because high oil prices contribute to the 
GOR's ability to find the necessary funding. 
 
Russia and Its Neighbors: Putin Complains 
----------------------------------------- 
¶5. (C) Turning from bilateral issues to Russia's neighbors, 
Viinanen lamented that Putin appears unable or unwilling to 
develop strategies to resolve disputes with the Baltics and 
elsewhere.  Putin expressed to Halonen bitter frustration 
over his perception that he is continually being distracted 
from his efforts to expand the domestic economy and improve 
Russians' standard of living by boundary disputes and unrest 
on Russia's borders, Viinanen said.  A border treaty with 
Estonia remains unsigned and, as he has in the past (Ref B), 
Putin put all the blame for this on the Estonian legislature. 
 Likewise, Viinanen said Putin does not view the roles Russia 
has played in the disputed areas of Georgia as destabilizing 
or counterproductive, and seemed unwilling to abandon 
practices such as issuing passports to people in those areas. 
 (Comment: We recognize here that Viinanen's views do not 
track exactly with information reported in Reftel A.  End 
Comment.) 
 
¶6. (C) Viinanen's general assessment was that Russia is in 
large part responsible for many of its "neighborhood 
problems," mainly because it has not developed a coherent 
strategy for resolving them.  Each issue, regardless of the 
region, requires a long term political process that must be 
driven by Putin in order to be resolved, Viinanen opined; 
unless Putin is willing to put such processes in place, he 
will continue to find himself distracted from his domestic 
agenda.  If there was a bright spot, Viinanen did report that 
Putin remains extremely encouraged about his rapidly 
improving relationship with Latvia's President 
Vike-Frieburga.  In response to our question, Viinanen also 
said that Putin did not raise with Halonen the issue of 
Russian minorities in the Baltics. 
 
Finland and Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan 
------------------------------------------- 
¶7. (SBU) On the heels of her St. Petersburg trip, Halonen 
made her first official visit to the Caucusus.  This trip 
comes as the EU looks to establish a policy of engagement 
with the "new neighborhood," and as the GOF begins to explore 
its own options within that wider framework.  Finland took a 
particularly active role in working with the Baltic countries 
prior to their EU accession, although Viinanen cautioned that 
now is far too early to envision such robust Nordic 
cooperation in the Caucuses.  Georgia, Armenia and Azerbiajan 
are "too far away" and far too different from one another for 
the GOF to say what its or the EU's specific role in those 
countries will be at this point. 
 
¶8. (C) While in Armenia, Halonen suggested the country's 
leadership look forward, rather than backward, regarding its 
relationship with Turkey.  Continued hostility toward Turkey 
will ultimately prove counterproductive to Armenia's 
interests, especially as concerns its relationship with the 
EU.  According to Viinanen, President Kocharian acknowledged 
this, but noted that a radicalized Armenian diaspora 
continues to pressure the GOA regarding Turkey.  In 
Azerbaijan, Finnish press reports reported that Halonen 
openly called on the government to ensure free and fair 
elections.  To us, Viinanen suggested that both the 
government and the opposition have "taken a lesson from 
Ukraine" which may not necessarily be positive:  the GOAJ 
recognizes that widespread allegations of fraud could prompt 
an uprising such as occurred in Ukraine, he said; 
unfortunately, the opposition also recognizes this, and 
President Aliyev expressed concerns to Halonen that it might 
seek to make false claims of fraud in order to prompt a 
popular movement. 
 
¶9. (C) On Georgia, Viinanen lauded the GOG's ties with 
Ukraine and expressed the hope that reform efforts in both 
countries would prove mutually reinforcing.  President 
Saakasvili complained angrily to Halonen about Russian 
meddling in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, alleging that Moscow 
is intent on annexing the territories.  However, Viinanen 
noted that Saakasvili expressed willingness to entertain 
ideas of limited autonomy or other flexible measures to 
resolve the problems. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶10. (C) While Halonen's (and Viinanen's) impressions of 
Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia are those of relative 
newcomers to the region, we are encouraged by the GOF's 
efforts to establish dialogue.  As Viinanen noted, it is far 
to early to expect a Baltic-like Finnish engagement in the 
region, but as the EU develops its policy toward the 
neighborhood, any leadership role the Finns might wish to 
play would be welcome.  As for Russia, we note that the 
themes addressed differ little from those Putin and Halonen 
discussed during his late July visit here (Ref B). 
Nevertheless, while some have criticized Halonen for 
eschewing controversial bilateral issues, her efforts to move 
forward in mutually beneficial areas have built confidence on 
a bilateral and personal level.  End Comment. 
MACK