05ISLAMABAD15856
PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  TRANSPORTING TENTS FROM
Fri Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Islamabad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ISLAMABAD 015856 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA EAID PK PREF PREL SENV
SUBJECT: PAKISTAN EARTHQUAKE:  TRANSPORTING TENTS FROM 
CANADA 
 
REF: A. A) ISLAMABAD 15769 (NOTAL) 
     ¶B. B) BUTENIS-ENGELKEN OCT 20 E-MAIL 
 
¶1.  With snow already falling on some areas affected by the 
October 8 earthquake, getting winterized tents or other forms 
of shelter to those whose homes were destroyed is quickly 
emerging as a critical element of relief efforts.  Given the 
magnitude of the crisis -- the current estimate is three 
million people were left homeless by the quake -- we will 
clearly need to draw on tent supplies throughout the world, 
and call on the resources of the international community to 
help transport them to Pakistan. 
 
¶2.  GOP Vice Chief of Army Staff, Gen. Hayat, contacted 
Ambassador on October 19 and explained that a Mr. Khalid 
Osman, a Pakistani living in Toronto (tel:  416-938-6909) has 
raised funds and purchased 7500 winterized tents, each 
accommodating six people, and is now looking for assistance 
in transporting them from Canada to Pakistan.  (Note:  we 
have not been able to confirm the whereabouts of these tents 
or their suitability for the harsh winter climate of northern 
Pakistan.  end note.)  Apparently Mr. Osman contacted 
Pakistan International Airlines, which said it would take 
three months to transport all the tents -- clearly too long 
to meet the urgent need.  The GOP has asked for U.S. 
assistance in transporting those tents to Pakistan, but our 
own lift capability is already taxed. 
 
¶3.  Post would appreciate Department or Ottawa contacting the 
Canadian Government to ask that, as part of Canada's 
contribution to earthquake relief, it arrange to air lift 
these tents to Pakistan, either through milair or by 
chartering civilian aircraft.  Providing winterized tents for 
45,000 people would be a major step in addressing the shelter 
crisis. 
 
¶4.  On October 21, Embassy raised this with Canadian High 
Commission in Islamabad, which is now conveying Mr. Osman's 
request to Ottawa. 
 
¶5.  Early response would be appreciated so we can factor this 
into our own planning.  For Department and Embassy use: 
should the tents prove suitable for the affected areas, and 
Canadian Government not be prepared to tranport them to 
Pakistan, post will recommend using U.S. earthquake relief 
funds to charter aircraft to bring them to Pakistan. 
 
CROCKER