05MANAMA1571
American Imam in Bahrain Stresses Shared Values,
Sat Oct 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAMA 001571 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE for R (KHUGHES and DPOWELL), NEA/PPD, NEA/ARPI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL PGOV PTER OEXC BA
SUBJECT: American Imam in Bahrain Stresses Shared Values, 
Interfaith Dialogue 
 
Ref A: Manama 1292 
Ref B: Manama 1433 
 
¶1.  Summary:  U.S. speaker Imam Yahya Hendi, in public and 
private appearances across Bahrain, urged religious leaders 
to "put differences away," and to form a clear vision of the 
future based on foundations of political, economic, and 
social justice shared by Muslims, Christians, and Jews 
alike.  Imam Hendi was received as a special guest of the 
Ministry of Islamic Affairs, and was thus given 
extraordinary access to the most prominent religious leaders 
as well as student leaders, women activists, and 
journalists.  His remarkable two-day visit was punctuated by 
lectures at University of Bahrain, and the Beit Al Quran 
museum, remarks at an Iftaar hosted by the Ambassador, and 
culminating in a lecture at the Grand Mosque attended by the 
deputy Prime Minister.  In private meetings with government 
officials, Hendi discussed sectarian divisions in Bahrain 
and urged dialogue and reconciliation within Islam as well 
as with other religions.  End Summary. 
 
Reclaiming Islam from Extremists 
------------------------------------ 
¶2. On arrival in Bahrain Oct 19, Imam Hendi was received at 
the airport by the Ambassador and the Under Secretary of 
Islamic Affairs Dr. Fareed Muftah.  Hendi and Muftah 
discussed the growing influence of Muslims in America, and 
the important role they play in forging connections with the 
rest of the world.  Both Hendi and Muftah cited the need for 
more education to combat extremism. "It's about time we 
reclaim Islam from the extremists," Hendi said. 
 
Bridging Sectarian Divisions 
---------------------------- 
¶3. In a later meeting with Muftah, Hendi discussed sectarian 
divisions in Bahrain.  Hendi described the unity of Sunni 
and Shia in the U.S., and emphasized the importance of 
religious and political freedom. "A system not built on 
absolute political, social, and economic justice, is a 
system doomed to fail," Hendi said.  Mufta said Bahrain's 
Sunni and Shia communities could learn from this experience. 
In a later meeting with the Minister of Islamic Affairs and 
the Foreign Minister Hendi's assistance was requested in 
organizing a conference to facilitate a dialogue between 
Bahrain's sects and other religious communities.  NOTE:  A 
similar request involving sending Bahraini clerics to the 
U.S. was reported in Ref A, and requested by mission in Ref 
¶B. 
 
Positive Press Coverage: "A Different Image of America" 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶4. Hendi's lecture to over 300 people at the Grand Mosque, 
including the deputy Premier and the Foreign Minister, was 
aired by Bahrain TV three times on Friday, October 21.  All 
Arabic and English dailies carried extensive coverage of 
Hendi's visit, and the Imam conducted several interviews at 
a local press roundtable.  Bahrain state television recorded 
an hour-long interview with Hendi as well as his lecture at 
Beit Al Quran museum, both to be aired during the last week 
in Ramadan.  Mansoor Al-Jamri, editor of the independent 
Arabic daily Al Wasat, wrote in his weekly column about the 
Iftaar and Jama'a prayer at the Ambassador's residence: "The 
most amazing thing was to have a mixed group of Muslims pray 
and have Iftaar at the residence of the U.S. Ambassador. 
The overall atmosphere was filled with spirituality and 
conversations about religious tolerance and Islamic values. 
Imam Hendi represents a different image of America; America 
that likes to be called a "melting pot" for all races and 
religions.  This new face of America defies many concepts 
that were engraved in our minds.  America has become a 
country that melts Muslims and non-Muslims while we are 
still divided among our selves into smaller groups 
endlessly." 
 
¶5. Hendi attended a roundtable of Arabic and English print 
media October 20.  He tried to dispel impressions that 
Muslims have been under pressure to convert to Christianity 
in the U.S., noting the absolute religious freedom enjoyed 
by Muslims in the U.S.  On the issue of treatment of Muslims 
at Guantanamo Bay, Hendi mentioned a group of influential 
Muslims who have helped the U.S. draft a 48-page document 
instructing the U.S. military on issues such as handling the 
Quran respectfully.  He also said soldiers are instructed to 
comply with international law and incidents of abuse are 
being investigated.  He noted the number of Muslims working 
in the U.S. government and military is on the increase. 
 
 
"In the Spirit of Ramadan, Dialogue of all Religions" 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶6. Hendi's message of interfaith dialogue as a force for 
unity resonated with Bahraini audiences.  At the University 
of Bahrain, Hendi delivered his message to faculty and 
students from the Arabic and Islamic Studies Department. 
Hendi said Islam is going through a difficult period.  There 
is a great need for public dialogue, scholarship, and 
reconciliation.  Conflict and war are disabling our ability 
to deal with poverty and other important issues like the 
environment and education.  Islamic, Christian, and Judaic 
teachings are nearly identical in the call for unity, 
reconciliation, and peace.  Hendi also described the health 
of the seven million-strong Muslim community in America, 
including the increasing number of mosques and the 
availability of the Quran. He said Muslims in America, over 
time, are likely to become a much more politically 
influential minority.  On the issue of Iraq, he said 
"America is not interested in colonizing any nation." 
 
¶7. In addition to his lecture, Hendi held meetings with 
University President Sheikha Miriam Al Khalifa and Student 
Council President (a Salafi student of Islamic Studies) 
Ahmed Sultan Al-Harban. 
 
Ambassador's Iftaar: "Same origins.same destiny" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶8. Hendi's pivotal remarks at the Ambassador's Iftaar and 
discussions with key religious leaders, politicians, and 
opinion-leaders generated even more interest in the rest of 
his visit.  He received an invitation to Iftaar at the 
Minister of Islamic Affair's home the following evening, and 
positive commentary in the press.  "When people ask me where 
I am from, I often say I am from Dust.  I am Dustian," said 
Hendi, quoting the Biblical reference.  "We all have the 
same origins, and we all share a common destiny." 
 
¶9. Hendi wove together quotes from the Quran, the Bible and 
the Talmud in his remarks.  After the meal he participated 
in a lively discussion with a leading newspaper editor, 
members of parliament, and religious officials.  On parting, 
one participant remarked to Hendi: "It is clear that you are 
proud to be an American and proud to be a Muslim.  And we 
can all be proud of that." 
 
Women's Empowermnent 
-------------------- 
¶10. In a visit to the majlis of Ghada Jamsheer, head of the 
Women's Petition Committee (a group that has advocated for 
women's rights in matters of divorce, child custody, and 
alimony) Hendi discussed how Islam as a religion guarantees 
women complete political, social, and economic rights.  This 
precept has not always been followed by governments and has 
often been misinterpreted by religious leaders. "A woman 
should demand these rights just as she performs her prayers 
on time," he said. Members of the Supreme Council for Women, 
the government umbrella for women's advocacy groups, 
expressed interest in working with Hendi in the future. 
 
Grand Mosque: Reaching Across Faiths and Cultures 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
¶11. In his final appearance, Hendi gave an impassioned 
lecture to the packed Grand Mosque in downtown Manama, which 
the Ambassador attended.  Hendi varied his themes of Islam 
in America and interfaith dialogue, emphasizing the 
importance of Ramadan fasting and charity as a philosophy of 
living that all faiths share.  In discussions with leaders 
afterwards, including the Foreign Minister, Hendi addressed 
sectarian divisions in Bahrain.  The officials (The Ministry 
of Islamic Affairs is predominantly Sunni) talked about 
engaging in dialogue with the Christian church, and visiting 
mosques in the Shia community.  Officials also requested 
Hendi's assistance in organizing a conference on Interfaith 
dialogue. 
 
¶12. Comment:  We want to express our gratitude to IIP's 
Peter Benda and others who made the extra effort to bring 
Imam Hendi to the Gulf.  His program was an astounding 
success in advancing mission goals of promoting mutual 
understanding across cultures, engaging women and youth 
audiences, and promoting voices of tolerance to counter 
extremism.  Post plans for follow-on activities, including a 
special exchange program on "Interfaith Dialogue" bringing 
Bahraini clerics to the U.S.   Now that Hendi is a known 
quantity in Bahrain, other potential follow-on activities 
may include: placement of articles or video by Hendi in 
local media, webchats, and Hendi's possible participation in 
a conference on Interfaith Dialogue to take place in Bahrain 
later this year.  End Comment. 
 
MONROE