05MADRID3642
SPAIN:  URGING PA AUTHORITY PRESIDENT ABBAS ON
Tue Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181328Z Oct 05UNCLAS MADRID 003642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN:  URGING PA AUTHORITY PRESIDENT ABBAS ON 
GAZA DISENGAGEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 189905 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Spanish Foreign Minister Moratinos intends to 
reinforce the Quartet message and points similar to those in 
reftel to PA Authority President Mahmoud Abbas during Abbas' 
October 18-19 visit to Madrid, according to MFA Director for 
the Middle East and Africa Alvarro Iranzo.  Iranzo said 
Moratinos plans to underscore the need to take action to 
dismantle armed groups which undermine rule of law.  He added 
that Moratinos took every opportunity, incuding most recently 
publicly in Tunis, to underscore the need to for an end to 
violence and the need for "one law, one authority and one 
'legal monopoly' on armed force."  Iranzo noted that the 
Quartet statement contained several messages, including the 
need for both sides to fulfill their responsibilities. 
Polcouns responded that indeed that is part of the overall 
message, as we look for opportunities to capitalize on Gaza 
disengagement. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In his on-going dialogue with Abbas and the 
Palestinians (including in a meeting 5 weeks ago), Moratinos 
makes clear that the two Intifadas were failures and that 
violence is not only criminal, but counter-productive to the 
Palestinian cause, Iranzo said.  Iranzo also underscored to 
Polcouns the need for PA  security forces force to have all 
of the material means they need to respond to and control 
radical armed groups, adding that Israeli actions have at 
times prevented them from obtaining needed equipment. 
Nonetheless, Iranzo said Spain has been very active in 
supporting Palestinian security forces and said he believes 
General Ward is very happy with Spanish assistance, which is 
delivered on a bilateral basis and through EUCOPS, where 
Spanish experts are assisting the Palestinians in 
restructuring their security forces. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Iranzo said that Abbas needs some margin of 
maneuver and has to be careful as he seeks to restrain armed 
groups not to spark a civil war among the Palestinians. 
However, the need to give him a margin of maneuverability 
"has an expiration date" and he needs to take action. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Iranzo undertook to brief Polcouns after Abbas' 
two-day visit, in which Abbas will meet with Moratinos and 
with Spanish King Juan Carlos. 
AGUIRRE