05MADRID3692
SPAIN SEEKS US SUPPORT FOR ITS CANDIDACY TO THE UN
Fri Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

211531Z Oct 05UNCLAS MADRID 003692 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SP UNGA
SUBJECT: SPAIN SEEKS US SUPPORT FOR ITS CANDIDACY TO THE UN 
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
 
 
 ¶1. (U) Post received the following diplomatic note from the 
Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs on October 20, 2005 
seeking support for the candidacy of Spain to the Human 
Rights Commission of the United Nations. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin text of Spanish note: 
 
14 October 2005 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation 
General Direction for the United Nations, Human Rights, and 
Multilateral Organizations 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation sends 
greetings to the Embassy of the United States of America and 
has the honor of mentioning that the Government of Spain has 
presented its candidacy to the Human Rights Commission for 
the period 2007-2009, for one of the vacancies that will be 
provided for in the elections planned at the time of the 
ECOSOC meeting in Spring 2006. 
 
The candidacy of Spain constitutes one more piece of evidence 
of the firm commitment of the Government of Spain to the 
promotion and protection of human rights on all levels. 
During the past years, Spain has adopted a very active 
position in this area, putting into practice innovative 
measures directed towards guaranteeing real equality of 
citizens and assuring the universal and effective enjoyment 
of fundamental rights and liberties. 
 
These measures, which have placed Spain among the principal 
member states of the international community with respect to 
the promotion and defense of human rights, are projected by a 
dedicated commitment on the part of he Government of Spain 
for multilateralism, in which the United Nations system 
occupies a prominent place. On each of the three occasions 
when Spain has been a member of the Human Rights Commission, 
and during the periods as an observer, Spain has actively 
participated in the work of the Commission, making obvious 
its commitment to this forum. In this time of change and 
reform of the United Nations, Spain is one of the countries 
which works the most to make it so human rights continue to 
hold a central role in the activities of the organization. 
 
The Government of Spain, with the objective of giving 
continuity and impetus to its unrenouncable commitment in 
favor of human rights, would be very grateful for the 
valuable support of the United States of America for its 
candidacy. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation takes 
advantage of this opportunity to reiterate to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the testament of it most 
distinguished consideration and esteem. 
 
Embassy of the United States of America 
Madrid 
 
End text. 
 
¶3. (U) Post has faxed a copy of the note to Spain desk. 
AGUIRRE