05MUSCAT1540
OMAN SPEAKS OUT ON IRAQ REFERENDUM
Sat Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Muscat
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

151323Z Oct 05UNCLAS MUSCAT 001540 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/I, NEA/PPD, AND NEA/ARPI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPRC IZ MU
SUBJECT: OMAN SPEAKS OUT ON IRAQ REFERENDUM 
 
REF: A. MUSCAT 1534 
 
     ¶B. STATE 189909 
     ¶C. STATE 188987 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) As requested in several demarches, the Omani 
government gave strong public encouragement for the Iraqi 
constitutional referendum process in the days leading up to 
the October 15 balloting.  Editorials have hailed the 
referendum as a historic opportunity to secure future Iraqi 
stability, and denounced armed groups that target civilians 
and reject the peaceful political process.  End summary. 
 
------------------------- 
The Government Speaks Out 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Further to ref A report on the Ambassador's October 
13 discussion with Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs, 
and consonant with demarche requests in refs B and C, the 
Omani government and press featured a flurry of statements 
and articles praising the historic opportunity of Iraq's 
October 15 constitutional referendum. 
 
¶3. (U) All major Omani media publicized a Foreign Ministry 
statement on October 13 under the headline, "The Sultanate 
expresses its optimism and hopes for a new era of stability." 
 A representative excerpt on October 14 stated, "The 
Sultanate expressed yesterday its optimism with regards to 
the agreement reached among Iraqi political leaders about the 
voting on the draft of the constitution which is due 
tomorrow.  A statement from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
said that the Sultanate hopes that the new (constitutional 
compromise) will be a start for a new era that will 
contribute to establishing peace and stability in brotherly 
Iraq." 
 
-------------------- 
Favorable Editorials 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) October 15 editorials in the state-owned "Oman" and 
privately owned "Al-Watan" newspapers were supportive of the 
Ministry's statement and the referendum.  Calling it a 
"decisive day for Iraq's future and for the region," the 
editorial in "Oman" extolled: "It is important and necessary 
that Iraqis vote today for the sake of unity, progress and 
reinventing life, and to disappoint those groups who care 
only about their interests and want Iraq to enter into an 
endless dark tunnel." 
 
¶5. (U) The "Al Watan" editorial on October 15 focused 
somewhat more on its call for the withdrawal of foreign 
forces from Iraq, though it hailed the referendum as one of 
several elements that will lead to a new Iraq.  Both 
editorials denounced armed opposition groups in Iraq, with 
"Al-Watan" calling for "cleaning Iraq of all armed groups 
targeting civilians and seeking to impose their opinion using 
a rifle." 
 
¶6. (U) The Embassy delivered ref B demarche October 15, and 
will monitor the press and government for post-referendum 
statements and reactions. 
BALTIMORE