05PARIS7182
FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE
Thu Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 007182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
ABUJA FOR POL-MIL OFFICER DANIEL AMBROSE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC FR
SUBJECT:  FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE 
CHECK ON TAA 1551-05 
 
REF: STATE 171558 
 
¶1. Per reftel, Post Blue Lantern Action Officer attempted to 
contact MOD officials both directly and indirectly to inquire 
about French company Avon Communications S.A.  However, to date, 
the MOD has been unresponsive.  The Avon company executive we 
spoke to (see paras 4 and 5 below) said that Avon has years of 
experience working for the French Navy. 
 
¶2.  Searches of various French business databases and 
directories did consistently confirm that the company was at the 
address given in reftel, duly registered and operating since 
January 1994.  Robert Avon is listed as the President; Pascal 
Avon is listed as the Administrator Director General; and the 
total number of company employees is given as 14.  Company 
activities listed include storage, maintenance, and 
telecommunications services.  According to French business 
directory www.bottin.fr, the company had a total annual turnover 
of 4.259 million euros and net earnings of 483,000 euros for 
2003, the only year with financial data listed. 
 
¶3.  A similar database called "Kompass" also confirmed the 
company's address and principals.  In addition, it gave the 
company's website:  www.avon-com.fr   This website, which 
includes a "Northrup Grumman Electronic Systems Sperry Marine" 
logo gives "service contact" Patrick Campagnoli and provides his 
mobile phone number 33-6-13-36-92-09 and email P_Campagnoli@avon- 
com.fr  The website appears to give no further information or 
links.  Our consul in Marseille visited the company site in the 
"Village d'Entreprises Saint Henri" and confirmed their place of 
business. 
 
¶4.  Consul Marseille met with Avon Communications Director 
General Pascal Avon on October 14.  According to him, the 
company installs, maintains and repairs electronic navigational 
systems on boats.  They also do some work on airplane systems, 
but not as much (they have some dealings with Eurocopter).  Avon 
represents Sperry Marine (part of Northrop Grumman) and has 
worked with them for many years all over the world, but 
especially in Francophone Africa and the Middle East.  They work 
in both the military and private sectors.  They have several 
years of experience working for the French Navy installing and 
maintaining navigational systems and, according to Mr. Avon, 
have almost a monopoly on this work.  They work primarily on 
ships built in France, wherever they may be located.  Their 
customers include the French Navy, DCN, THALES, and other 
foreign Navies:  Morocco, Senegal, and Mauritania, among others. 
 
¶5.  Mr. Avon also said that they work on merchant marine vessels 
and private yachts. He noted that they had a booth at the recent 
Monaco Yacht Show.  Avon has been working with the Nigerian Navy 
since 2001.  According to Mr. Avon, the Nigerians decided they 
wanted to overhaul and upgrade their old, French-built ships and 
Avon began by installing Sperry Marine civilian navigational 
systems.  Now they want to install "MK 39 MOD 3A Ring Laser" 
Inertial Navigation Systems, which is the purpose for this 
agreement.  Only Avon's technicians (French) will be doing the 
actual installation.  Mr. Avon did say they may hire someone 
locally, but it would be strictly in as a very low-level 
handyman assistance role.  Avon Communications seems to be a 
thriving business.  They have offices in Le Havre, Brest, Saint 
Naziare, and Antibes, in addition to their main office in 
Marseille.  Since 1994, it has grown from a one-person repair 
company to what it is now with 18 full time employees.  They 
work primarily with Sperry Marine.  Lastly, Mr. Avon mentioned 
that they have signed similar TAA's in the past and understood 
our licensing process. 
 
Stapleton