05PARIS7146
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq - Saddam Trial UNESCO -
Wed Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 007146 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq - Saddam Trial UNESCO - 
Cultural Diversity Transatlantic Relations 
PARIS - Wednesday, October 19, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iraq - Saddam Trial 
UNESCO - Cultural Diversity 
Transatlantic Relations 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The trial of Saddam Hussein which opens today is the lead 
front-page and editorial story. Some commentators agree that 
"a hastily put together trial is better than none" while 
others emphasize that "America's fingerprints are all over 
this trial." Still others note that "how the trial is 
conducted will determine Iraq's fate." (See Part C) 
 
Le Monde devotes its lead to a poll by the Human Security 
Center of the University of Vancouver which concludes that 
conflicts have been reduced by 40 percent since 1992. The 
editorial comments: "While Cold War diplomacy was a source of 
conflicts, diplomacy since 1990 has constantly tried to be a 
generator of peace. Remaining threats are nuclear 
proliferation, terrorism, and the fact that the world's number 
one power continues to question today's international order, 
including the UN which has considerably helped the world to 
put out some of its fires." Le Monde interviews Gareth Evans 
of the International Crisis Group: "The fact that the U.S. has 
authorized the resolution on Darfur and on the ICC marks a 
great change in Washington's attitude, which has come about 
since Secretary Rice's arrival at the State Department." 
 
Le Monde also carries on its front page an article entitled: 
"The U.S. Isolated at UNESCO." The convention on cultural 
diversity adopted at UNESCO elicits several articles and 
commentaries, which all point to America's thwarted efforts. 
(See Part C) Le Monde carries an op-ed by Culture Minister 
Donnedieu de Vabre titled "Cultural Diversity Is Not 
Arrogance." "UNESCO, which was created after the war aimed to 
serve world unity. It now must serve plurality. And this is 
not only a cultural project. It is also political in the 
widest sense of the word, because it is the foundation of 
peace. Cultural diversity is not arrogance. It is not a reflex 
of survival. It is an emergency in order to stop the spiral of 
integrism and trigger the spiral of peace and humanism." 
In right-of-center Les Echos analyst Jacques Hubert-Rodier 
writes a commentary titled "The Franco-American Quarrel Is 
Symbolically Over." (See Part C) 
 
The economic papers report that "France is isolated in its 
attempts to control European Commissioner Mandelson's freedom 
in international negotiations, and specifically in the 
negotiations on agricultural subsidies." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iraq - Saddam Trial 
 
"Let's Let the Iraqis Do Their Job" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/19): "No 
matter what the situation on the ground, the Iraqis deserve to 
know the magnitude of what they have endured. The defense will 
harp on the conditions of the trial. But if Saddam is being 
tried at all it is thanks to the U.S. Army. Other dictators 
summarily executed were not so lucky. The Tribunal must avoid 
serving as a sound box for the Sunni insurrection. It must 
also keep from turning into a sideshow once the accused begins 
to tell his stories of past complicity with France and the 
U.S. For Iraq to emerge as a nation that respects the right of 
law, the trial must be irreproachable. Only then will we be 
able to say that a war that was waged under false pretexts has 
had a positive effect. Let's give the Iraqis a chance to do 
their job, remembering that the people of the Middle East are 
watching." 
 
"Imperfect" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (10/19): 
"Saddam's trial will be no exception to the rule of an 
imperfect justice. But it is better than no justice at all. 
Having said this, it is also true that it will be difficult 
not to see the trial as a travesty of justice. America's 
attempts to not appear as being both judge and jury are not 
convincing. The former dictator will be judged by his enemies, 
Shiites and Kurds, and by the Americans. An international 
court would have been more convincing. This trial cannot serve 
as a foundation for the right of law in Iraq: it will 
exacerbate Sunni bitterness. Its only merit is that it will 
serve as a teaching tool and remind everyone of what it was to 
live under Saddam." 
"Justice First and Foremost" 
Bruno Frappat in Catholic La Croix (10/19): "Neither hate nor 
vengeance must guide this trial. And those who will treat 
Saddam as he never treated his opponents must be honored. Yet 
this trial should never serve as a case study in law schools. 
It was put together by Paul Bremer under conditions which do 
not grant it legitimacy. But the need for this trial goes 
beyond justice; there is a political stake: while Iraq has not 
yet found the peace and stability promised by the Bush 
administration, how the trial is conducted will determine the 
future of Iraq. A wise and non-hysterical trial will 
demonstrate maturity. A hasty one will be a missed 
opportunity." 
 
UNESCO - Cultural Diversity 
 
"A Strong Sign" 
Jean-Claude Raspiengeas in Catholic La Croix (10/19): "The 
U.S., dead-set against the UNESCO convention, proposed a 
number of amendments and increased its pressure to minimize 
the import of the text. In the end, 151 nations made a strong 
gesture to say that activities of the mind could not be 
reduced to trade goods. This diplomatic breakthrough is to be 
noted. A diplomatic treaty is always indicative of a temporary 
power struggle. The U.S. cannot accept the idea that one of 
its principal and most influential export sectors could be 
contained. Having returned to UNESCO in order to fight this 
battle, the U.S. put all of its efforts to avoid this outcome. 
So much so that it upset its allies. Europe, urged by France 
and joined by Canada, put aside its differences in order to 
speak with one voice. Next comes the battle for the 
ratification." 
 
"A Diplomatic Battle And America's Obstruction Efforts 
Amplified the Convention's Import" 
Natalie Nougayrede in left-of-center Le Monde (10/19): "Until 
the end, France's idea of `cultural exception,' recently 
renamed `cultural diversity,' elicited the opposition of the 
U.S. which feels that UNESCO's role is not to serve as an 
arena to resolve international trade issues. French diplomacy, 
strongly assisted by Canada, managed to raise support for a 
text that has become emblematic in the battle against 
globalization. French diplomatic circles could barely hide 
their glee as the U.S. found itself isolated. A diplomatic 
source added that this was all the more ironic that 
paradoxically, it was the U.S. obstruction efforts which gave 
the text such import." 
 
Transatlantic Relations 
 
"The Franco-American Quarrel Is Symbolically Over" 
Jacques Hubert-Rodier in right-of-center Les Echos (10/19): 
"France and the U.S. have operated a spectacular 
rapprochement. Secretary Rice's visit to Paris served to 
illustrate the joint determination in keeping Iran from 
acquiring nuclear weapons. Bilateral military relations have 
also improved, as indicated recently by General Bentegeat who 
was awarded a medal in the U.S.: in short, the Atlantic 
alliance has not exploded. The Americans themselves recognize 
the `spectacular contribution' made by France to NATO. The 
differences that remain are greatly minimized. including about 
Iraq. The hatchet between Paris and Washington has been 
buried. The reconciliation is real, even if it is due in part 
to lower opinion ratings for both national leaders." STAPLETON