05QUITO2405
CAMPAIGN AGAINST SHARK FIN TRADE TARGETS PUBLIC
Fri Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 002405 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID EFIS ECON PGOV EC
SUBJECT:  CAMPAIGN AGAINST SHARK FIN TRADE TARGETS PUBLIC 
 
REF: 04 QUITO 2923 
 
¶1. Summary: On October 17 Environmental NGOs initiated a new 
campaign to conserve the dwindling shark population in 
Ecuadorian waters.  Sharks are highly sought after for the 
price their fins bring on international markets.  Lax 
enforcement has hampered efforts to reduce shark fishing, 
despite an October 2004 Presidential decree banning the sale 
or export of shark fins.  The campaign, which includes 
television spots with Ecuadorian soccer players, is an 
effort to pressure the GOE into action.  End Summary. 
 
CALLING ON THE PEOPLE 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. Backed by the star power of Ecuador's top soccer players, 
environmental groups renewed their efforts to conserve 
Ecuadorian shark populations by initiating a new campaign on 
October 17.  The objective of the campaign, lead by the NGO 
WildAid, is to associate Ecuadorian's emotions and pride in 
their soccer idols with the plight of sharks.  The idea is 
to build widespread public pressure to force the GOE into 
protecting the shark populations. 
 
¶3. The central message in the campaign's six different 20- 
second television advertisements is "as soccer united us, 
unite today on behalf of sharks."  The television campaign, 
which shows graphic images of shark fin extraction, will be 
followed up with a series of exhibitions and concerts in a 
number of Ecuadorian cities.  Campaign organizers will 
circulate petitions during these public events that 
encourage the GOE to design a national plan to oversee the 
fishing sector and monitor shark populations. 
 
STRONG INCENTIVES TO FISH SHARKS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Campaign organizers face an uphill battle to stop the 
shark fin trade.  The incentive to fish sharks originates in 
China, where shark fins are considered a delicacy.  Demand 
is high for shark fin soup which, with its alleged 
aphrodisiac qualities, is considered a necessity at any 
wedding.  It is estimated that the market for shark fins 
more than tripled from 1980 to 2000, reaching almost 12,000 
tons.  The market in Hong Kong continues to grow 5% per 
year. 
 
¶5. The demand for shark fins sends Chinese buyers to 
Ecuador, among other countries, ultimately resulting in 
declines in shark populations.  Press releases associated 
with the campaign note that in the North Atlantic, for 
example, populations for different shark species have 
dropped 60-90% over the last 20 years.  From 1997 to 2003, 
official Ecuadorian shark fin exports to China and Hong Kong 
were 850 tons, which represents 1.7 million sharks.  Given 
the large illegal export of shark fins in Ecuador, real 
figures are much higher. 
 
¶6. Galapagos fishermen have long relied on sea cucumbers for 
a majority of their income.  However, Ecuadorian sea 
cucumber populations are declining -- they are commercially 
extinct on the coast and nearly so in the Galapagos, where 
the overall catch fell by 75% from 2002 to 2004.  As a 
result, fishermen in Ecuador are turning more and more to 
the shark fin trade for high-value catch.  Chinese 
businessmen encourage the practice, providing loans to 
fishermen to invest in better equipment that will increase 
their catch.  Members of the Galapagos fishing communities 
have acknowledged to Econoff the important role that 
visiting Chinese businessmen play in financing and 
encouraging the shark fin trade. 
 
GOE INACTION 
------------ 
 
¶7. The October 2004 Presidential decree banning the export 
and internal sale of shark fins was an important step in 
developing a regulatory regime to stop the shark fin trade 
(reftel).  However, the GOE has expended little effort in 
enforcing the ban.  Even when arrests are made, judicial 
follow-up is almost non-existent. 
 
¶8.  For example, in June 2005 a fishing boat was discovered 
during a shark fin operation that already collected fins 
from 30,000 sharks.  While government officials have pointed 
to this case to demonstrate active enforcement of the ban, 
the facts to not support them.  To begin with, the boat was 
only boarded because government officials thought that it 
was involved in narco-trafficking.  Moreover, no action was 
taken against involved parties until a month later, when 
public pressure and attention from the press led to the 
arrests of the boat captain and a customs official who were 
involved in the scheme.  Activists remain concerned that the 
case may die in the judicial system. 
 
¶9.  As a result of weak enforcement, fishermen show little 
concern for being caught engaged in illegal fishing.  In 
September 2005, for example, two tour guide associations 
went public with evidence indicating that crew members of a 
tourist boat were illegally fishing for sharks in the 
Galapagos.  Many in the Galapagos acknowledge that this 
practice is not uncommon.  An accusation has been brought to 
the prosecutor by the Galapagos National Park (GNP), but 
little follow-up has occurred.  If anyone is found guilty, 
it likely will be the ship staff.  Tour operators, 
responsible for the boat's operations, are unlikely to be 
affected. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. Despite the involvement of high-profile soccer players, 
nothing concrete is likely to come of this campaign against 
the shark fin trade in the short-term.  Economic incentives 
in the shark fin trade are too strong.  Nonetheless, by 
targeting the general public, the campaign will help develop 
a long-term appreciation and concern for conservation. 
 
JEWELL