05TAIPEI4399
Relocation of National Tainan University further
Mon Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 004399 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
DEPT FOR EAP/TC, INR/EAP 
 
FROM AIT KAOHSIUNG BRANCH OFFICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TW
SUBJECT:  Relocation of National Tainan University further 
Intensifies Mayoral Election in Tainan 
 
Ref:  TAIPEI 3916 
 
 ¶1.  Taiwan's Education Minister Tu Cheng-sheng on October 
23 announced at the site of the National Tainan University's 
future campus in Chiku, Tainan County that the university's 
relocation project will be started in 2006 and completed in 
2014 with NT$5.7 billion from the Executive Yuan (EY). 
Minister Tu also disclosed an official letter with President 
Chen Shui-bian's comment, which urged the Executive Yuan to 
give full support to facilitate relocation of the 
university, assuring Tainan county residents that the 
university relocation will take place. 
 
¶2.  Tainan Mayor Hsu Tian-tsair, who is running for re- 
election, swore publicly that he would resign if the 
university was moved out of Tainan City.  In response to the 
Minister's announcement, KMT Tainan mayoral candidate Chen 
Jung-sheng urged Hsu to resign to take political 
responsibility as well as to fulfill his own promise, which 
was made during an interpellation with City Councilor Chiang 
Chang-yuan on September 26.  The KMT Candidate further 
criticized incumbent DPP Mayor Hsu Tian-tsair as incapable 
of securing one of the city's most valuable assets and its 
cultural and educational resources (see reftel). 
 
¶3.  Taiwan Solidarity Union mayoral candidate Chien Lin Hui- 
chun also criticized Mayor Hsu for failing to keep secure 
the metropolitan university.  Chien Lin urged Mayor Hsu to 
seek support from all Tainan-elected legislators of 
different political parties to press the central government 
to keep the university in the city. 
 
¶4.  In response to criticism from the opposition, Tainan 
Mayor Hsu Tain-tsair said he did not oppose the relocation 
project since he regarded it as an expansion of the 
university campus.  Hsu asserted that he would strive to 
preserve all the campus, excluding the dormitory area, and 
to best use the facilities of the university by integrating 
its educational resources with local industries. 
 
¶5.  The opposition has been watching closely the development 
of the university relocation issue.  On September 20, KMT 
Tainan mayoral candidate Chen Jung-sheng, in conjunction 
with KMT and PFP city council caucuses, initiated a 
signature drive urging the Ministry of Education to change 
its policy of retrieving two thirds of the university 
campus's land in the city.  Protesting the EY's confirmation 
of the policy, on October 27 KMT Legislator Wang Yi-ting 
from Tainan City, in conjunction with other KMT legislators 
in a legislative session, cut the first phase of the 
project's budget.  Wang urged the Ministry of Education to 
seek alternatives to keep the presence of the university in 
Tainan City. 
 
¶6.  Local residents in Chiku Township expressed huge 
dissatisfaction over the boycott of the relocation budget by 
the Legislative Yuan.  Learning that the boycott was 
originated by KMT legislators, KMT Tainan County Councilor 
Chou Si-hai pointed out that the issue is no longer an issue 
between political parties; rather it's an issue between the 
city and the county.  DPP Tainan County Magistrate Su Huan- 
chih responded that he has no clue about the new development 
and will not map out solutions until he obtains more 
information on the Legislative Yuan resolution. 
 
 
THIELE 
 
PAAL