05TAIPEI4067
AIT PREPARATIONS FOR AVIAN INFLUENZA
Tue Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004067 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W, EAP/RSP/TC AND OES/IHA 
 
HHS PLEASE PASS TO ERIKA ELVANDER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMED AMGT CASC ECON SENV SOCI TBIO TW WHO
SUBJECT: AIT PREPARATIONS FOR AVIAN INFLUENZA 
 
REF:  A) TAIPEI 03713 B) TAIPEI 02931 C) SECSTATE 79781 D) 
SECSTATE 181885 
 
¶1.  Summary.  This cable reports on AIT's preparations to 
respond to a potential avian influenza (H5N1) pandemic.  The 
basic assumption is that AIT would draw down and drastically 
reduce its services in the event of an outbreak.  Based on 
reftel D, AIT will revisit our current plans, which include 
a tripwire cable for proposed recommendations to the 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) at various stages of a 
potential avian influenza (H5N1) outbreak (reftel b).  AIT 
has also developed an avian influenza (H5N1) communication 
strategy for AIT and broader American community.  End 
Summary. 
------- 
Actions 
------- 
¶2. AIT has completed and submitted a tripwire cable 
regarding proposed recommendations to the Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) at various stages of a potential avian 
influenza (H5N1) outbreak (reftel b).  Following up on the 
tripwire cable, AIT/T and AIT/K have drafted essential 
personnel rosters.  Our working assumption is that AIT will 
do everything it can to limit the number of people who would 
come into work by limiting services to only the most 
essential including:  American citizen services and 
emergency visa services, management support (to assist those 
working in consular and, if warranted, evacuees), medical 
services for our AIT community, and security (to keep the 
building and community safe).  If we determine in 
conjunction with the Department of State that it is possible 
and prudent, we would also consider recommending that we 
evacuate non-essential staff and family members.  Much along 
the line of the new guidance in reftel D, AIT EAC has 
discussed the probability that evacuation might not be 
feasible or prudent.   In this case, the prophylactic use of 
oseltamivir would be unworkable.  We have begun discussing 
alternate approaches and look forward to more detailed 
direction in the forthcoming "Avian Influenza Guide for 
Department of State Medical Services Personnel." 
¶3. AIT has also developed an avian influenza communication 
plan.  In accordance with this plan, on September 30, AIT 
held two town hall meetings for the AIT community to answer 
questions about avian influenza (H5N1).  To ensure all 
Americans in Taiwan have access to the information shared at 
the town hall meetings, AIT has posted a list of Department- 
cleared questions and answers on Avian influenza on our 
website.  We have also added links to the World Health 
Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, and 
Taiwan's Center for Disease control to the AIT website. 
¶4. In addition, AIT's Regional Medical Officer has briefed 
the Taipei American Chamber of Commerce and the Taipei 
American School on AIT's preparations.  AIT has also begun 
informal discussions with other representative offices.  We 
are scheduling additional meetings to brief all of these 
groups as we obtain new information. 
¶5. Finally, AIT has reviewed all Taiwan's preparations plans 
and reported on them in reftel A.  AIT will update 
Washington on AIT and Taiwan preparations as they evolve. 
-------- 
Supplies 
-------- 
¶6. The Department has provided AIT with 150 courses of 
oseltamivir.  We have currently identified 45 US Direct Hire 
and 84 LES essential employees including including 7 
screeners and 3 Health Care Workers.  We have also estimated 
that, even if a draw down were implemented, 21 eligible 
family members would remain and require medication.  Based 
on the new guidance contained in reftel D, AIT will 
reconvene the EAC to reevaluate our current plans.  In 
addition to oseltamivir AIT has stockpiled the following 
personal protective equipment (PPE): 
  -    3920 N95 masks 
  -    70 gowns 
  -    200 pairs of gloves 
  -    26 pairs of washable goggles 
  -    130 12 oz bottles of hand sanitizer 
  -    1446 Packs of oseltamivir 75 mg (Tamiflu) #10/pack 
  -    4 one gallon bottles of bleach solution 
¶7. AIT has also ordered an additional: 
  -    660 N95 masks 
  -    1280 gowns 
  -    1150 pairs of gloves 
  -    30 pairs of washable goggles 
  -    450 flu vaccines 
¶8. AIT is planning on ordering additional supplies to 
support essential staff.  AIT is further prepared to furnish 
a supply of telephones for visiting CDC/WHO etc (likely from 
current TDY supply and/or from potential departing US 
employees). 
Paal