07ANKARA719
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8912
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0719/01 0881255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291255Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1507
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7932
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2421
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1801
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5829
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5582
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2202
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MARCH 29, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
US Senate Passes Draft on Dink and Turkey 
All papers report on Wednesday the US Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee passed a draft that condemns the assassination of 
Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink, asks Turkey to scrap the 
controversial article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code, and encourages 
Turkey to establish diplomatic, political, and trade ties with 
Armenia.  Papers note that in the bill, a direct reference to 
Armenian "genocide" was "softened" to read "legal action was 
launched against Dink under article 301 for calling the 1915 
Armenian massacres 'genocide.'"  It's unclear when the draft will be 
raised on the Senate floor for approval, say papers. 
 
Erdogan Meets Talabani, Abbas, Haniyah in Riyadh 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan and Iraqi President Jalal 
Talabani met in Riyadh on Wednesday on the sidelines of the Arab 
League summit talks in the Saudi capital.  Iraq's Foreign Minister 
Hoshyar Zebari also joined the meeting in which regional matters, 
including Kirkuk, were discussed.  "It was a very positive and 
constructive meeting.  We agreed on resolving problems through 
dialogue.  Mr. Erdogan and I can solve all problems by speaking with 
each other, there's no reason for tensions," Talabani was quoted as 
saying.  Papers also report Talabani said, referring to the PKK, 
"Those who stand against Turkey stand against us." 
 
On the other hand, Yeni Safak reports that at the summit talks, 
Erdogan also met with Palestine President Mahmoud Abbas.  Prime 
Minister Ismail Haniyah also joined the meeting.  Erdogan reportedly 
invited both Palestinian leaders to Turkey. 
 
Paper Discloses Buyukanit Speech 
Liberal Radikal carries on page one a speech  delivered by Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) chief General Yasar Buyukanit on March 16 at the 
War Academy in Istanbul.  The speech was not made public.  In his 
speech Buyukanit said the Turkish military will continue to express 
concerns over the protection of Turkey's unitary structure and the 
basic characteristics of the state.  He said the Turkish military is 
a "constitutional institution," and it will do its job whenever 
necessary.  "The Turkish military knows the Constitution and the 
laws as well as those who remind us of the regulations.  We don't 
need such warnings," Buyukanit stressed.  Buyukanit also said it 
must be accepted that the problems seen today actually stemmed from 
the "wrong solutions" applied in the past: "It's a fact that we have 
created today's situation in northern Iraq by supporting the 36th 
parallel in 1991.  We cannot blame others for our own mistakes." 
Buyukanit claimed the release of the PKK members detained [in 
Europe] indicated that some "feeble measures" adopted in foreign 
countries against the terror organization actually aimed to 
"camouflage" support given to the PKK.  He added, "PKK terrorism is 
an issue which must be evaluated separately from the developments in 
northern Iraq.  The terrorist organization finds support there, and 
is being kept on hand with the hope that it can be used when the 
time comes."  With regard to Cyprus, Buyukanit said the Annan Plan 
was "not a fair and lasting" one.  "The plan had derogations which 
would please both sides in Cyprus.  If it was accepted, all 
derogations could be scrapped with an application by any Greek 
Cypriot national to European courts, ripping from Turkish Cypriots 
all the rights they thought they had acquired," Buyukanit 
emphasized.  On Afghanistan, Buyukanit said he had earlier objected 
to NATO demands to send additional troops.  "Turkey is the most 
prestigious country in Afghanistan.  For example, Alliance member 
troops fighting against terrorists in the Kandahar province wear 
Turkish flag armlets while on duty.  We have notified Turkish 
Foreign Ministry of this, because if they do something 
inappropriate, the blame will be put on Turks," the TGS chief 
maintained. 
 
UK Freezes Ties with Iran 
Sabah, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Yeni Safak and others:  British Foreign 
 
ANKARA 00000719  002 OF 003 
 
 
Secretary Margaret Beckett announced yesterday that Britain has 
 
SIPDIS 
suspended all diplomatic ties with Iran.  Meanwhile, meeting with 
Iranian Foreign Minister Mottaki in Riyadh yesterday, PM Erdogan 
requested information about the seized British sailors.  Mottaki 
informed Erdogan about the sailors' whereabouts and said that they 
were safe.  Sabah reports that British Prime Minister Tony Blair 
said that he had a phone conversation with PM Erdogan to discuss the 
British sailors and Erdogan is in touch with the Iranian government 
on the issue. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iran, Israel-Palestine 
Fikret Bila commented in the mainstream daily Milliyet (3/29): 
"Turkey is exerting diplomatic efforts towards Iran regarding the 
detained British sailors.  The Turkish Foreign Ministry claims these 
efforts are out of humanitarian concerns, not a go-between 
mechanism.  In fact, Iran has experience in managing crises like 
this.  Their tactic is to wait until the very last phase of a crisis 
and then start to take steps toward a solution at the very last 
minute.  This same tactic is being applied to the crisis with the 
Britain sailors.  In the first stage, Iran pursued a harsh attitude 
and rejected British requests and insisted the sailors had entered 
Iranian territorial waters.  When the crisis is reaching its peak, 
Iran announces that it will release a female sailor.  Similarly, 
Iran has been presenting an inflexible stance in tensions with the 
US and the UK. Later, it moves to a softer policy line once its 
voice heard long enough in international public opinion.  With this 
crisis management style, Iran is trying to make itself recognized as 
an important regional player." 
 
Ergun Babahan observed in the mainstream daily Sabah (3/29):  "As is 
apparent once again at the Arab League summit, there is no way to 
ensure peace in the Middle East unless the Israel-Palestine issue is 
fully resolved.  Despite numerous efforts so far on an international 
scale, including the Madrid Conference and the Oslo Peace Process, 
the Palestine problem remains the same.  The people of Palestine 
continue to live under a brutal Israeli supervision and to struggle 
with poverty.  And Israel still cannot accept the terms of a plan to 
establish genuine peace with Palestine.  Interestingly enough, the 
entire world is pressuring Hamas to recognize Israel while there is 
no serious attempt to convince Israel to recognize a Palestine state 
with the 1967 borders.  Another interesting concept is that both the 
US and Israel campaigned for free elections in Palestine and later 
denied to recognize the free will of Palestinian people.  It should 
not be surprising in today's world since norms and attitudes are 
distorted.  For instance, coming all the way from America to invade 
Iraq can be presented as an operation for freedom while resisting 
against an occupation is presented as terrorism.  This is where we 
are in today's world.  As for the Palestine issue, Arab nations have 
broken their silence and have started to take some concrete action. 
The peace plan presented by the Arab League in Riyadh was prepared 
with clear and precise language which calls for Palestine and Israel 
live together and to respect each other's existence.  Even though 
the plan is realistically formulated, its implementation is still 
unlikely.  There is no sign from Israel that it will give up the 
occupied lands as long as it enjoys full support from the US." 
 
ATC - Gates Remarks 
Sabah, Aksam:  Speaking at the American-Turkish Council's (ATC) 
annual conference, US Defense Secretary Robert Gates was quoted as 
saying that 'Turkey is a very valuable ally from every angle. 
Despite the struggles US-Turkey relations have had in recent years, 
our military, economic, political and personal ties remain strong. 
Turkey provided the US access to Iraq and Afghanistan through one of 
its air bases, without that access operations in Iraq would be 
exceedingly more difficult and vastly more expensive.  The situation 
on Turkey's border with Iraq's Kurdish region is of particular 
concern.  Every Turkish citizen killed by the PKK is a setback for 
success in Iraq and a setback in our relationship with Turkey. 
Retired General Ralston was assigned as special envoy for countering 
the PKK, but we know that more needs to be done on this issue.' 
 
ANKARA 00000719  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
The Armenian Church on Akdamar Island will be Opened Today 
Sabah, Milliyet, Bugun, Posta, Hurriyet and others:  The 
inauguration of the newly renovated Akdamar Church in Van will take 
place today.  Participating in the ceremony will be Turkish Culture 
Minister Atilla Koc, Armenian Deputy Culture Minister Gagic 
Gyurjyan, Turkish - Armenian Patriarch Mesrob II, representatives of 
the Armenian Diaspora and of foreign missions in Turkey.  The US 
will be represented by US Embassy Deputy Chief of Mission Nancy 
McEldowney.  Papers highlight that no cross will be placed on top of 
the Church despite requests from the Armenian community.  Milliyet 
reports Turkish Foreign Ministry Spokesman Levent Bilman said that 
'the request to place a cross on the top of the church was conveyed 
to the Foreign Ministry through the Culture Ministry and that the 
issue is under study.' 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 6.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Mustafa Ozturk has been arrested in Erzurum in connection with the 
murder of Armenian journalist Hrant Dink.  Ozturk, a key suspect in 
the killing, was earlier interrogated and released by the court. 
 
- In a meeting with labor union representatives, CHP's Haluk Koc 
said Prime Minister Erdogan acts "like a sultan," and advised 
Erdogan to "read the constitution three times a day." 
 
- Turkey's elite businessmen's grouping TUSIAD said there were signs 
of election-oriented economy, warning such moves would harm Turkey. 
 
 
- Health Minister Recep Akdag said Turkey is to operate hospitals 
abroad, adding the first hospital will be opened in Sudan. 
 
- Three PKK terrorists preparing for bomb attacks have been captured 
in Istanbul.  Police have discovered seven shelters of PKK 
terrorists in the southeastern province of Batman. 
 
International News 
 
- Iranian Foreign Ministry said Tehran does not heed the 
intermediation of third countries in the hostage sailors crisis with 
Britain. 
 
- At least 50 people were killed and 120 wounded in three separate 
car bomb attacks in the northern Iraqi city of Talafar. 
 
- EU has approved the opening of talks with Turkey on enterprise and 
industrial policy chapters, introducing, however, two benchmarks for 
completing the talks. 
 
- Police carried out over 30 raids in four European countries, 
investigating alleged Mafia involvement in EU security and building 
contracts worth millions of euros. 
 
WILSON