07ANKARA558
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2727
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0558/01 0711505
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121505Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1294
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7885
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2300
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1734
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5796
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5546
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2169
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, MARCH 12, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Iraq's Neighbors Meeting 
All papers report Iraqi government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh, 
following the meeting of Iraq's neighbors in Baghdad over the 
weekend, said that the foreign ministers of Iraq's neighbors and G-8 
countries were now expected to gather in Istanbul.  The US came 
together for the first time with Iran and Syria at the meeting.  US 
Ambassador to Baghdad Zalmay Khalilzad said the venue and date of 
the next Iraq meeting has not been set yet.  Turkey offered to host 
the meeting in Istanbul and should it take place, Secretary Rice has 
already stated she would attend, Khalilzad told a news conference. 
Several papers over the weekend reported it was not clear whether or 
not the next meeting will be held in Istanbul.  Monday's Radikal 
notes the US was pressing for the meeting to be in Istanbul, while 
Iran and Iraq want it to be held in Baghdad.  Hurriyet ties the 
objection coming from Tehran to the mysterious disappearance of the 
Iranian deputy defense minister Ali Reza Ashgari in Istanbul last 
month.  The foreign ministers of Iraq's neighbors may meet in Cairo 
before the Istanbul conference.  Papers commented over the weekend 
Ankara seems satisfied that the importance of protecting Iraq's 
territorial integrity has now become a pressing item for other 
countries as well. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the PKK, Baghdad Iraq Conference 
Gungor Mengi wrote in the mainstream daily Vatan (3/11):  "The 
whereabouts of terrorists that threaten Turkey are a well known 
fact.  There are about 3,500 armed terrorists, but only 500 of them 
are using the Kandil mountain area in Northern Iraq while the rest 
are scattered near Turkey's border with Iraq.  The impact of a 
terrorist threat is very serious and every passing day Turkish 
people become more convinced that PKK terrorism is being protected 
by the US and Northern Iraqi Kurds, and is being used as a trump 
card against Turkey.  Turkey does not want to create a tiff with 
Washington, and in the end this position allows the PKK to be more 
expansive in its activities.  The US knows about anti-Americanism in 
Turkey is because of the PKK issue and that relations with the 
Turkish state will deteriorate unless steps are taken against the 
terror problem.  No government can allow terrorism to continue, 
particularly in an election year.  Therefore, the recent warnings 
about the terrorist organization by Turkish military officials 
should be seen as a hint for further action.  The US, this time, 
should cooperate with the Turkish military, and this will help 
America to win the hearts of Turks." 
 
Murat Yetkin commented in the liberal-intellectual daily Radikal 
(3/10):  "The Iraqi neighbors' conference was held in Baghdad and 
for the first time, the US participated.  In the past, the US was 
not happy about this kind of meeting and did not think there would 
be results.  The official US participation in the meeting this time 
indicates a significant change in American policy.  If all goes 
well, the preliminary meeting will be followed first by a higher 
level and then a ministerial level summit which Secretary Rice is 
expected to attend.  This means Secretary Rice will sit at a table 
with her Syrian and Iranian counterparts.  If that happens, Iraq's 
political and geographical integrity will be ensured on an 
international scale and the Iraq issue will receive the focus of the 
international community.  Will all of this produce relief in Turkey, 
especially concerning the fight against PKK terrorism?  According to 
Turkish envoy Gen. Baser, some results have been achieved with the 
cooperation mechanism between Turkey and the US.  He expressed 
satisfaction about his meeting with General Ralston in Istanbul, 
calling it a turning point for getting concrete results.  The 
efforts to maintain Iraq's stability and integrity are very much in 
Turkey's interests.  Thus, Turkey should watch for new developments 
resulting from last weekend's Baghdad meeting." 
 
Wexler: 'US Should Not Lose Turkey' 
Robert Wexler, the co-chairman of the Turkish Caucus in the US 
Congress, told mainstream Sabah in Washington the US should not lose 
 
ANKARA 00000558  002 OF 003 
 
 
an important ally such as Turkey.  "There is no sense in further 
complicating matters at a time when logistic support to the 
thousands of US troops in Iraq is provided through Turkey.  Looking 
at Russia's rising influence in the region, the strained atmosphere 
in the Middle East, and the increasing Sunni-Shiite conflict, we 
need Turkey's support more than we did in the past," Wexler said. 
He added he believed US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi will not insist 
on passing the Armenian resolution.  "First we must keep our 
promises to Turkey.  Turkey is the most important strategic ally of 
the US after Israel.  It is also undoubtedly the most modern and 
progressive Muslim country," Wexler emphasized. 
 
Erdogan: "Turkey Doesn't Attack its Neighbors" 
Milliyet, Hurriyet, Radikal and others:   Following FM Gul's remarks 
on Iran, in an interview with Arabic daily Al Anba, PM Erdogan said 
that Turkey will not let its soil be used for an attack against its 
neighbors and expressed his hope for a peaceful solution on Iran's 
nuclear program.  Erdogan added that countries have the right to use 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and noted that Turkey and Iran 
are in good relations and the two countries have developed 
mechanisms with the purpose of cooperation in the field of security. 
 
 
Presidential Elections 
Hurriyet, Milliyet:  On his way back from Baku, PM Erdogan, 
answering a question whether there might be a surprise name in the 
Presidential election, said 'our lives are full of surprises.  There 
might be a surprise name'.  Close circles to the PM interpreted 
these comments as 'Erdogan has not decided on his candidacy yet'. 
Meanwhile, the main opposition party CHP leader Baykal said on 
Sunday at a party meeting that 'the premier, as if the problem isn't 
stemming from his own candidacy, is trying to divert attention 
through calling on the CHP to disclose its candidate.  There is no 
such concern in the public.  The President should be elected through 
compromise, not conflict'. 
 
Swiss Court Sentences Turk for Denying Armenian Genocide Claims 
All papers over the weekend and today report a Swiss court sentenced 
Dogu Perincek, head of the leftist-nationalist Turkish Workers' 
Party, for denying that mass killings of Armenians by Ottoman troops 
in 1915 amounted to genocide.  Perincek was sentenced to a 90-day 
suspended jail term and a fine of 3,000 Swiss francs.  The Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) said in a statement, "The court case was 
inappropriate, groundless and controversial," adding the verdict 
cannot be accepted by the Turkish people.  Perincek said he would 
appeal the verdict. 
 
TV News: 
(NTV, 8 A.M.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkey's counter-terrorism envoy Edip Baser has pointed to the 
moves to set up an independent Kurdish state in northern Iraq, 
stressing that this was a priority threat against Turkey's security. 
 
 
- On Sunday, doctors and health workers staged a protest 
demonstration in Ankara in a last warning to the government before 
going on a work slow down strike on Wednesday. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan will travel to Syria on April 3 for the 
opening of a new soccer stadium in Aleppo.  Erdogan will be joined 
on the trip by Turkish soccer team Fenerbahce for a friendly match 
with a Syrian team. 
 
- A Russian cargo ship carrying 22,000 ton of wheat collided with a 
private yacht in Istanbul causing the USD 300,000 yacht to sink into 
Bosphorus waters. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000558  003 OF 003 
 
 
International News 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Papadopoulos said he will start woring on 
opening the Limnidi border gate between the two sides in Cyprus. 
 
- American Enterprise Institute's Michael Rubin criticized the US 
for encouraging Kurdish illusions for independence. 
 
- Al-Qaida's second in-chief Ayman al-Zawahiri has accused the 
Islamist Hamas movement of surrendering to Israel by reaching a deal 
with rival Palestinian faction Fatah. 
 
- French President Jacques Chirac announced Sunday that after 12 
years as president he would not seek a third term. 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON