07DAMASCUS292
Syria/Kuwait, Syria/Pakistan, Syria/Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq,
Sun Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0292/01 0841350
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251350Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3185
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6658
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4416
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3031
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7573
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1637
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4975
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1184
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7311UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000292 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Kuwait, Syria/Pakistan, Syria/Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq, 
Palestinian Territories, Iran (3/23-25) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Mar. 25 reported VP Shara's visit to 
Kuwait on Mar. 24 to convey a message from President Asad to the 
Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah, on 
bilateral coordination prior to the upcoming Arab summit in Riyadh. 
During the meeting Shara reviewed the latest regional developments, 
stressing the necessity of bilateral coordination to consolidate 
joint Arab action.  Sheikh al-Sabah reiterated the importance of 
combining Arab efforts in the face of challenges to which the Arab 
nation is exposed.  Shara conveyed similar messages from President 
Asad to the leaders of Algeria, Libya, Sudan, Yemen, and Bahrain 
last week.  The Kuwaiti Ambassador to Syria, Fahad Awadi, welcomed 
the visit, telling the Kuwaiti News Agency, Kuna, on Mar. 24 that 
Shara's visit also comes within the framework of bilateral 
consultation between the leaderships of both countries with regard 
to issues of mutual concern, in line with the distinguished 
relations between Syria and Kuwait. 
 
On Syrian/Pakistani relations, papers reported that the Pakistani 
Ambassador to Syria, Munzer Shafik, has stressed his country's 
support for the restoration of the occupied Syrian Golan and usurped 
Arab rights.  In a statement to reporters on Mar. 23 on the occasion 
of Pakistan National Day, the Pakistani ambassador described 
bilateral relations as distinguished in the political sphere and 
stressed his country's interest in developing relations in various 
economic spheres as well.  He indicated that the exchange of visits 
by businessmen allows the two countries to explore investment 
spheres and to become acquainted with each other's products, with 
the aim of boosting the volume of bilateral trade. 
 
Papers also reported that an international conference on water 
started on Mar. 22 in the Turkish city Antalya.  Syria took part in 
the conference through a delegation headed by Minister of Irrigation 
Nader al-Buni.  The conference, organized by the Turkish Water 
Directory in cooperation with the World Commission on Water, 
discussed means of protecting water and dealing with river floods. 
Representatives from 65 countries and 800 experts in water 
participated in the conference, which was inaugurated by Turkish 
Premier Receb Tayyeb Erdogan, as part of the celebration of World 
Water Day. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad sends a message to Emir of Kuwait, Sabah al-Ahmad 
al-Jaber al-Sabah, conveyed by VP Shara, on coordination between the 
two brotherly countries at the forthcoming Arab summit.  Kuwait 
satisfied with development of relations with Syria.  Emphasis on 
Arab coordination on the eve the forthcoming Arab summit" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 3/25) 
 
"Arab Foreign Ministers finalize the final agenda of the Arab 
summit.  Al-Riyadh finalizes preparations to host the summit" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 3/25) 
 
"Arab League SecGen Amr Mousa:  The Arab countries are convinced 
that Israel is not ready for peace" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
3/25) 
 
"The Forthcoming Arab Summit will reject sanctions on Syria" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 3/25) 
 
"President Lahoud is to attend the Arab summit and will speak in the 
name of all Lebanese" (Government-owned Tishreen, 3/25) 
 
"Bolton:  The US administration is proud that it rejected a 
ceasefire during the war on Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
3/23) 
 
"US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice speaks of launching the Arab 
peace initiative and does not rule out US solutions" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 3/25) 
 
"Minister of Irrigation Nader al-Buni:  Water is a bridge for 
cooperation among Syria, Iraq and Turkey" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 3/25) 
 
 
"Leader of the Iraqi Muslims Scholars Sheikh Hareth al-Dari:  We 
highly appreciate Syria's pan-Arab positions regarding the Iraqi 
people" (Government-owned Tishreen, 3/25) 
 
"Two US soldiers and scores of Iraqis killed in Baghdad and 
al-Anbar.  Democrats to Bush:  Stop wars of arrogance" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 3/25) 
 
"The UN Security Council imposes new sanctions on Iran.  Iranian 
Foreign Minister Mottaki:  UN Security Council Resolution No. 1747 
undermines credibility of the UNSC" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
3/25) 
 
"Iraqi Premier is injured in an assassination attempt in the Green 
Zone;  three US soldiers killed.  Bush will veto any resolution of 
the US House of Representatives that links financing of war on Iraq 
with scheduling troop withdrawal from Iraq" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 3/24) 
 
"Germany and Belgium normalize relations with the Palestinian 
government in anticipation of its practical role.  The Palestinian 
government expresses hope for continuing Arab support" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 3/24) 
 
"The UN Human Rights Envoy:  Israel is racist and its policy is 
colonial" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 3/23) 
 
"The Lebanese opposition is committed to sit-ins and dialogue" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 3/23) 
 
"Lavrov:  The US Anti-Missile Shield poses a threat to Russia's 
security" (Government-owned Tishreen, 3/24) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"What Is Left in Bush's Sack?" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishrin, wrote (3/24): 
"The US House of Representatives' legislation on Iraq is a new slap 
to President Bush's administration....  Although the bill is not 
binding, it shows the weak performance of this administration at 
home and abroad and the extent of the American official and popular 
rejection of the mad and reckless policies that neoconservatives 
draw up.... 
 
"These policies bring Americans nothing but shame, disgrace, and 
hatred of the peoples of the world, and bring the peoples of the 
world nothing but death, destruction, and ethnic and sectarian civil 
wars.... 
 
"The US defense secretary stated that his country is able to wage a 
new war.... Robert Gates deserves the Nobel Prize for insolence and 
disdain for the will of nations, especially the will of the American 
people.... 
 
"While the American people are demanding withdrawal from the Iraqi 
quagmire, the Bush administration is talking about a new quagmire 
and a new war, as if it lives in another age and another world.... 
 
"The Bush administration has not learned from the lessons of Iraq or 
from its failure in Lebanon...." 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
"Those Who Are Harmed by a Solution" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
Muhammad Ali Buzah, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawrah, 
wrote (3/23):  "Pro-government leaders in Lebanon are rejecting 
every solution to the existing crisis and pursuing a policy of 
 
maneuvers and foot-dragging pending better circumstances and 
regional and international developments that allow them to continue 
the obstruction, cancellation, confiscation, unilateralism, and the 
drowning of Lebanon in the whirlpool of chaos and denominational 
division.... 
 
"The organized hysterical escalation by the government team is 
pushing Lebanon toward further tension, complication, and explosion 
under management and operational orders from Washington and 
Paris.... 
 
"This team must not be allowed to go too far in the plan of 
destruction, internationalization, Judaization, and sedition.... It 
must be exposed, renounced, and indeed called to account for what it 
committed against Lebanon and its people and national resistance. 
 
"This is the responsibility of the Lebanese people with all their 
groups and sincere and honorable nationalist forces...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
"Will the Governing Team Respond to Berri's Call?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (3/23):  "The statement by Speaker of the Lebanese Parliament 
Nabih Berri, in which he confirmed the unconstitutional, subversive, 
and obstructive practices of Fu'ad Al-Saniora's government, shows 
that this government is leading Lebanon to the abyss.... 
 
"Leaders of the March 14 forces are mortgaging Lebanon's sovereignty 
to foreigners....  Some of these leaders were inflated by the West, 
so much so that they talk and act as if they represent all the 
Lebanese, although their past and present prove that they do not 
represent even the groups to which they are affiliated.... 
 
"We wonder if these leaders will respond to Berri's call for 
dialogue to bring Lebanon out of its crisis or will continue to work 
for domestic strife and receive orders from Paris and Washington, 
and consequently Tel Aviv..." 
 
Corbin