07ISTANBUL209
SCA'S FEIGENBAUM AND DEUTSCH IN ISTANBUL:
Thu Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO6284
PP RUEHAST RUEHDBU
DE RUEHIT #0209/01 0741251
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151251Z MAR 07
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6738
INFO RUEHAST/USO ALMATY PRIORITY 0082
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6259
RUEHAH/AMEMBASSY ASHGABAT PRIORITY 0116
RUEHKB/AMEMBASSY BAKU PRIORITY 0014
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 0058
RUEHEK/AMEMBASSY BISHKEK PRIORITY 0034
RUEHDBU/AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE PRIORITY
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0259
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0351
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT PRIORITY 0146
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI PRIORITY 0137
RUEHYE/AMEMBASSY YEREVAN PRIORITY 0084
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITY
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 0059UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ISTANBUL 000209 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA FEIGENBAUM 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TX
SUBJECT: SCA'S FEIGENBAUM AND DEUTSCH IN ISTANBUL: 
BUSINESS AND GULENIST SCHOOLS IN CENTRAL ASIA 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 488 
     ¶B. ANKARA 489 
     ¶C. ISTANBUL 106 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  SCA DAS Evan Feigenbaum and Senior 
Advisor Robert Deutsch held meetings in Istanbul February 27 
with business and NGO interlocutors regarding Central Asia 
(reftels), with a heavy focus on Turkmenistan.  Businessman 
Ahmet Calik counseled a step-by-step approach to working with 
the new Turkmen president, Gurbanguly Berdimuhammedov, 
predicting it could yield positive results, not least for 
U.S. and Turkish business interests.  At a meeting with the 
Gulenist Journalists and Writers Foundation, foundation 
officials described the group's schools in Central Asia, 
noting that they had enhanced Turkish influence in the region 
through education.  Feigenbaum and Deutsch also met with Dr. 
Oktay Varlier of Alarko Contracting (also Chairman of the of 
the Turkey-Kazakhstan Chamber of Commerce) and Professor 
Demir of Galatasaray University.  End summary. 
 
POLITICS AND BUSINESS IN TURKMENISTAN 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Businessman Ahmet Calik, who previously met with 
Feigenbaum in Ashgabat three weeks after the Turkmenbashi's 
death, described the business climate and political change in 
Turkmenistan following installation of Berdimuhammedov. 
Calik -- whose business Calik Holding is perhaps the most 
experienced western partner in Turkmenistan, with extensive 
business activities in textiles, gas, oil and construction -- 
said the new president wanted to accomplish positive things 
for the country.  He had placed new and good people in key 
oil and gas-related positions.  That said, foreign investment 
opportunities would come gradually, in a step-by-step 
fashion; first, laws on investment and the government's 
overall outlook needed to change.  Calik noted that, working 
from the base of Turkmenistan, his firm was interested in 
energy and construction opportunities elsewhere in Central 
Asia.  He noted, for instance, that he was exploring the 
opportunity presented by Afghanistan's Sherbergan gas field. 
Deutsch outlined our regional initiatives, particularly with 
respect to transmission of electricity from Central Asia to 
South Asia and the investment opportunities both in 
transmission and in development of additional generation 
(including the potential for coal based thermal power in 
Tajikistan.)  Calik indicated an interest in pursuing these 
opportunities.  (Note:  Following the meeting, we provided 
Calik and another business contact made during the visit, 
Alarko's Dr. Varlier, with further information and contact 
information for Tajikistan's projects.) 
 
¶3.  (SBU) New partnerships in oil, gas, power plant 
construction, and textiles were possible in Turkmenistan; the 
government would, most likely, follow a measured approach to 
attracting new foreign investment.  Berdimuhammedov would 
certainly fulfill existing contracts, i.e., with Gazprom, but 
would open new contracts to greater international 
competition.  It was too soon to expect big changes in 
Turkmenistan, Calik said, but U.S. advice on how to assure a 
smooth transition to a more open economy would be very 
helpful to Berdimuhhamedov's government.  U.S. and western 
businesses should approach opportunities "diplomatically," 
employing a focused effort to build relationships and 
networks, Calik suggested.  Turkey, he added, could have a 
positive influence in encouraging improved 
Turkmenistan-Azerbaijan relations.  Despite past tensions, 
the time had come for talking, relationship building, and 
cooperative business projects.  This could even include 
Georgia as a possible transit point for cross-Caspian Turkmen 
gas. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The dawn of a new period in Turkmenistan under a 
new president would be important.  Calik approved of the U.S. 
 
ISTANBUL 00000209  002 OF 003 
 
 
strategy to engage frequently and often through focused 
visits to Ashgabat in the weeks since Turkmenbashi's death. 
The future of U.S.-Turkmen, or for that matter 
Turkish-Turkmen relations, he predicted, would be shaped by 
the way they begin during this critical transition period. 
"Democracy" might come to Turkmenistan, he added, but through 
a step-by-step process that would foster an environment more 
conducive to it.  Rather than holding back or stepping away 
from a still-authoritarian but changing Turkmenistan, the 
U.S., he said, should remain engaged.  "What happens now is 
important," said Calik.  "People are anxious for democracy, 
but they need a positive experience of it."  Calik counseled 
against isolating Turkmenistan, arguing that political change 
was more likely if the United States, Turkey, and others were 
heavily engaged there.  Believing strongly in the importance 
of personal contact, Calik said he travels to Ashgabat two to 
three times a month. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Calik concluded that the new president had 
displayed positive self-confidence since moving out from the 
shadow of the former president.  Berdimuhammedov had managed 
his role over the last 10 years well, avoiding open clashes 
with Niyazov.  But his first year in office would be 
important and there was no guarantee of success.  Now his own 
man, he could be expected to honor the Niyazov-era deals and 
projects, but then move on and forward in his own way. 
 
JOURNALISTS AND WRITERS FOUNDATION -- FETHULLAH GULEN SCHOOLS 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) At a meeting with the Journalists and Writers 
Foundation to explore educational development in Central Asia 
(ref A), President Harun Tokak and colleagues from the 
foundation openly credited Fethullah Gulen with the vision to 
open schools in Central Asian countries just after the fall 
of the USSR.  The reason was straightforward:  beat the 
Iranians to Central Asia with the "smiling face of Islam" 
Turkish style, rather than the more severe version propounded 
by Iran.  After the fall of communism, Gulen had predicted, 
Central Asians would turn anew to religion.  He envisioned 
two ways to spread Turkey's brand of Islam:  through business 
dealings and education.  Gulen put his focus on education via 
"Gulenist" schools, active since 1985.  According to Tokak, 
Gulen believes Turkey should be a global actor and therefore 
needs to be active "everywhere."  A principle of the Gulenist 
outlook is that, despite wars, the earth is big enough for 
all major religions:  Jews, Christians, even atheists. 
Therefore, a "clash of civilizations" is not a given. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) With 500 schools in 80 countries, including four 
Central Asian countries (note: except Usbekistan, which has 
especially tense relations with Turkey, end note) the Gulen 
schools are meant to be "temporarily" under the control of, 
and supported by, business backers of Fethullah Gulen, 
according to Tokak.  For instance, of the 14 Gulenist high 
schools founded in Azerbaijan in 1992, all began with a core 
faculty comprised of teachers from Turkey; 80 percent of the 
core teachers in those schools are now Azeri.  (Note:  An 
American Fulbright scholar told CG Istanbul that Gulenist 
schools are meant to be financially self-sustaining through 
tuition within a few years of opening.  End note.)  Tokak 
said a core curriculum is taught in all countries with 
English the language of instruction.  Subjects including math 
and the sciences are conducted in English and comprise part 
of this core curriculum.  Turkish language is an elective in 
all Gulenist schools.  Classes in region-specific civics and 
survey courses on religion are taught by teachers from the 
local community and in the local language.  When Gulen 
schools opened in Turkey in 1985, teachers were recruited 
from among graduates of the best English-language 
universities in Turkey including Bogazici and Bilkent 
Universities.  Within a few years, the emphasis on excellence 
made the schools a success with students routinely winning 
 
ISTANBUL 00000209  003 OF 003 
 
 
awards, particularly in open math and science competitions. 
That kind of record began to draw students from the top 
echelon families in given countries, including the political 
elite.  The schools still recruit from top English-speaking 
Turkish universities for faculty in new schools. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) But Tokak pointed out Gulen schools' teachers are 
not only disciplined but above all, are "moral" role models. 
They spend time with students outside the classroom and 
regularly visit with parents in their homes.  No sectarian 
religion classes are part of the curriculum, but the staff 
teaches (or influences) in Gulenist Islam by such example. 
Gulenists promote their ideas through good examples and 
lifestyle, not through formal "preaching," Tokak explained. 
The schools incorporate whatever curriculum is required in 
the local community but publish their own math and science 
textbooks, often locally to take advantage of lower printing 
costs.  History texts, according to Tokak, eliminate 
sentences that would "promote hatred."  There is an emphasis 
on basic, humanitarian values, he noted. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Comment.  Istanbul interlocutors suggested that 
Turkey's 1990s-era euphoria over renewed ties with Central 
Asian countries came down to earth with the realization that, 
in most of these new countries, people could not actually 
communicate directly with Turkish speakers.  The realization 
that Soviet-controlled societies would take time to adjust to 
the world beyond their borders also made trade and exchanges 
more difficult than initially anticipated.  Gulenist 
education is also considered successful in Turkey, although 
it is precisely the teachers' influence outside the classroom 
that makes it controversial here.  The Gulen schools, whether 
with original faculties composed of Turks, or in continuing 
iterations employing locally-hired faculty drawn from their 
own graduates, provide a potent and continuing influence in 
most of Central Asia. 
JONES