07JAKARTA672
INDONESIA ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP)
Thu Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0672/01 0671008
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081008Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3669
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0230
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 2206
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT 0320
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 0455
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 3905
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 5771
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0292
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 3879
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0425
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 2241
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 1881
RUEAWJB/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
"NOTE BY CIB: DO NOT/NOT PROCESS. GIVE TO INR DUTY OFFICER FOR GUIDANCE" 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
SUBJECT:  INDONESIA ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) 
REPORT, March 2005 to March 2006 
 
REF: A. STATE 17811 
 
     ¶B. 06 JAKARTA 13324 
     ¶C. 06 JAKARTA 2849 
     ¶D. 05 JAKARTA 12001 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Indonesia remained a major sending country for international 
trafficking in persons (TIP) and faced a very significant internal 
trafficking problem.  Indonesia was also a receiving country for 
trafficked prostitutes, though their numbers were very small relative t 
Indonesian victims.  The Government of Indonesia (GOI) recognized 
trafficking as a crime and a serious national issue, and took 
significant strides this year in law enforcement, against 
corruption-related complicity, and by completing a final draft in 
February 2007 of a strong, comprehensive anti-trafficking 
bill. Indonesia has not, however, met minimal TIP standards under U.S. 
law. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Indonesia achieved modest to significant progress in 
combating trafficking in specific areas over the past year, with strong 
political will evident at top levels of government and at many local 
levels.  The House of Representatives (DPR) completed the final draft i 
February 2007 on a strong comprehensive anti-trafficking bill, which is 
scheduled for consideration by the full House and likely passage on 
March 20, 2007. 
 
This bill is expected to give law enforcement the clear mandate needed 
to go after all forms of trafficking, including debt bondage and sexual 
exploitation.  The Yudhoyono administration's political will to 
eliminate trafficking was demonstrated in the past year.  In August 
2006, President Yudhoyono issued a presidential decree on reform policy 
on placement and protection system of Indonesian migrant workers to 
provide more comprehensive protection of migrant workers and better 
coordination among agencies.  The President furthermore has appointed 
senior level officials in key positions with clear instructions to 
eliminate trafficking, resulting in noticeable progress. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Law enforcement against traffickers increased in 2006 over 
2005, with arrests up 29 percent from 110 to 142, prosecutions up 87 
percent from 30 to 56, and convictions up 112 percent from 17 to 36. 
The average sentence in these cases was 54 months in prison compared to 
30 months in 2005, a 55 percent increase. The government trained over a 
thousand law enforcement officials on fighting trafficking, oftentimes 
in inter-agency courses also attended by NGOs. The numbers of special 
anti-trafficking police and prosecutors increased.  The National Plan 
of Action (NPA) bore fruit in more effective national coordination. As 
President Yudhoyono's clear stance on clean government filtered down 
this year through the ranks, corrupt officials complicit in trafficking 
have been fired, prosecuted or transferred, an opening salvo against 
official impunity. 
Cooperation among various government offices and international NGOs at 
Indonesian diplomatic missions in key sending areas resulted in an 
increase of rescued victims, and more humane repatriation. Ministry of 
Manpower and national police took initial steps to cooperate in 
providing protection of trafficked migrant workers by signing a Februar 
2007 MOU which provides for joint enforcement at all transit airports 
and ports. 
 
Under the 2006 Presidential migrant worker protection decree, an agency 
to place and protect Indonesian migrant workers began operating in 
early 2007 with an initial inter-agency meeting and public policy 
statements promising to protect workers from exploitation.  Under MOUs 
with international donors, the GOI began funding this year the 
psychological rehabilitation of trafficking victims, a third or more of 
the cost of their medical treatment, and health services in Malaysia, i 
addition to the law enforcement costs of dozens of police investigators 
and prosecutors dedicated to trafficking at the national level, as well 
as a significant increase in local anti-trafficking police units across 
the country. The number of women's police desks helping victims 
skyrocketed to 280 in 2006, while national trafficking police 
 
investigators nearly doubled to  20. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Significant progress in a comprehensive and coordinated 
attack  on trafficking took place at the provincial and local levels as 
NPA local task forces took root in communities across the country, 17 a 
last count. Local task forces resulted in good cooperation among law 
enforcement agencies, social service providers and NGOs in many 
communities as these task forces met frequently. Some provincial 
governments contributed funding to anti-trafficking efforts and also 
passed local laws to protect citizens from trafficking, not waiting for 
the passage of national legislation.  These efforts took place both 
under the leadership of the national Ministry of Women's Empowerment an 
spontaneously at the local levels due to grassroots civil society 
campaigns.  Brisk media coverage of trafficking continued, led by both 
government and NGO campaigns.  The GOI made good progress in sheltering 
victims abroad, repatriating victims and expanding victim services for 
both externally and internally trafficked persons.  A fourth integrated 
medical recovery center opened to treat victims. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Indonesia made limited or no headway on other difficult anti- 
trafficking steps. Illegal involvement of individual security force 
members and corrupt officials in prostitution linked to trafficking 
remained unchecked.  Progress is just beginning to curb corruption that 
allows Indonesians to be easily trafficked abroad, last year's efforts 
focusing on children and to a lesser extent on women.  While the 
Ministry of Manpower continued crackdowns on illegal activities of 
migrant manpower agencies, there was no official recognition of the 
reality that Indonesia's migrant worker system does not protect workers 
from exploitation, debt bondage and other abuses.  The numbers of cases 
of severe abuse of trafficked victims overseas, particularly those in 
Malaysia and Saudi Arabia, remained alarming.  An MOU with Malaysia 
signed in May 2006 ceded some basic workers' rights to employers making 
it easier for Indonesians to be trapped in human bondage. Government 
spending on trafficking is far from covering minimal needs, and there i 
an urgent need for the government to take over services now being funde 
by foreign governments and international NGOs. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Within the context of the country's emerging democracy, 
Indonesia's anti-trafficking commitment faced the same serious 
constraints affecting other issues of national importance:  endemic 
corruption, the weakness of government structures and law enforcement a 
all levels, limited public budgets, poverty, a weak public education 
system, and competing priorities from other urgent issues. 
Nevertheless, Indonesia made some significant gains in the fight agains 
trafficking in persons . Indonesia continued to welcome and cooperate 
with international anti-Trafficking assistance, and anti-trafficking 
partnership with the U.S. Mission and U.S. grantees remained strong. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Indonesia has made important strides in trafficking, all the 
more so if the anti-trafficking bill passes in March 2007, but will 
still need to address some major hurdles: 
 
--Implementation of the anti-trafficking law, which will require both 
continued political will and socializing the law among law enforcement 
officials and civil society. Indonesia will need continued 
international support in this effort. 
--Greatly accelerated efforts to combat the corruption that feeds 
trafficking, particularly among law enforcement officials, including 
the military and ministry of manpower officials. 
--Increased GOI funding for law enforcement against traffickers and for 
rescue, recovery and reintegration of victims. At the same time, this 
is a great financial burden for a country struggling with so many other 
pressing issues.  International support will be required for the next 
few years to allow the GOI time to budget for these needs. 
--A migrant manpower recruitment and placement system that protects 
and benefits the workers rather than exploiting them to the benefit of 
the manpower agencies and employers. 
--Much greater awareness of the trafficking problem and cooperation in 
combating it by a few receiving countries which account for the vast 
majority of human bondage of Indonesians. 
--More exploration of the issue of debt bondage by domestic workers 
within Indonesia, particularly children, and enforcement of existing 
laws to protect those workers. End Summary. 
 
 
------- 
SOURCES 
------- 
 
¶8.  (U) The U.S. Mission in Indonesia contacted and received 
information from many GOI sources specifically for the preparation of 
this report, including:  the People's Welfare Coordinating Ministry, th 
Women's Empowerment Ministry (hereinafter the Women's Ministry), the 
National Police (POLRI), the Attorney General's Office (AGO), the 
Manpower and Transmigration Ministry (the Manpower Ministry), and a 
number of local government offices, including in East Java and North 
Sumatra. Valuable information came from international and domestic NGOs 
including the International Catholic Migration Commission (ICMC), the 
American Center for International Labor Solidarity (ACILS), Save the 
Children- USA, and The Asia Foundation. Mission research also included 
valuable input from international organizations such as the 
International Labor Organization (ILO), UNICEF, and the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), the latter of which was particularly 
helpful in providing law enforcement statistics. A breakdown of Mission 
hours spent in preparation of the report will follow separately. 
 
¶9.  (U) The report text follows the general outline of themes and 
questions provided in ref A instructions. Each section begins with a 
capsule "update" that briefly summarizes the most important new 
information included in the text. 
 
¶10.  (U) The Jakarta Mission point of contact on the TIP issue is 
Political Officer Stanley Harsha, tel. (62) 21-3435-9146, fax (62) 
21-3435-9116. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Report text: 
 
----------------------------------------- 
¶I.  OVERVIEW OF INDONESIA'S ACTIVITIES TO 
    ELIMINATE TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
----------------------------------------- 
 
UPDATE 
------ 
 
The past year did not witness significant change in overall trafficking 
patterns in Indonesia.  There is a continuous trend of Indonesians seek 
ing work abroad as high unemployment and poverty pushes workers 
overseas. 
 
The GOI curtailed the practice of allowing young women to travel to 
Japan under the guise of "cultural performers," according to 
immigration and Women's Empowerment Ministry officials, resulting in a 
decrease in reported trafficked women in Japan.  Anti-trafficking polic 
complained during a February 2007 meeting that the problem persists of 
West Kalimantan women being trafficked to Taiwan as contract brides who 
end up either being forced into prostitution or used by their spouses 
for a couple of years and then sent home; a November 2006 ACILS/ICMC 
report "When They Were Sold" confirms this. According to NGOs, export 
of "cultural performers" to Japan, who oftentimes end up being 
trafficked into prostitution, persisted despite official claims that 
this type of practice was stopped in 2006. Ministry of Manpower 
statistics on problems with workers returning from Taiwan and Singapore 
document a high number of cases of sexually transmitted diseases. 
 Reports have begun trickling into NGOs of women displaced by a mudflow 
disaster near Surabaya being forced into prostitution because of 
economic hardship, but it was too early to document this.  Domestic 
trafficking continued to be concentrated in prostitution, with rampant 
complicity by security officials. An Atma Jaya University study in late 
2006 documented illegal methods used by manpower agencies to keep 
workers in debt bondage from the time they are recruited, also 
documented by ACILS/ICMC.  The Ministry of Manpower remained passive 
this year in stopping these and other abuses, its raids on manpower 
agencies having no effect on trafficking. Cases of severe abuse of 
Indonesians trafficked abroad, particularly to Malaysia and Saudi 
Arabia, continued unabated.  The GOI made significant progress in 
efforts by its Mission in Malaysia to protect, treat and repatriate 
 
victims. 
 
A new witness protection law enacted in August, 2006 should give 
prosecutors more leeway in providing testimony against traffickers 
while protecting victims by such means as allowing use of videotaped 
testimony. Many local governments and communities became galvanized to 
stop trafficking in 2006 as public consciousness grew perceptibly. A 
number of provincial and local governments passed anti-trafficking or 
women and child protection laws.  Local governments also increased 
funding for prevention and treatment, and are carrying out coordinated 
efforts between civil society and government. Civil society across 
Indonesia kept the media spotlight on trafficking, resulting in many 
in-depth reports on television and in print.  The visits to Indonesia b 
TIP envoy Ambassador John Miller and a UN special envoy brought 
attention to crucial trafficking issues to officials and the public, 
while U.S. Ambassador to Indonesia Lynn Pascoe raised the trafficking 
problem and the urgent need to pass the anti-trafficking bill during 
numerous meetings with several ministers.  The message that trafficking 
is a top bilateral issue and multilateral issue for the U.S. was clearl 
appreciated by all relevant senior government officials. 
 
President Yudhoyono took action to protect migrant workers through an 
August 2006 decree to provide them more comprehensive protection and 
by giving strong messages to senior officials to eliminate trafficking. 
 
Honest, conscientious officials were appointed at senior levels with 
the political will to carry through.  For the first time this year, 
significant numbers of police, prosecutors and immigration officials 
understood the wider meaning of human trafficking and began working 
together, and this education process began reaching hundreds of judges. 
Under the leadership of the Ministry of Women's Empowerment and a 
Parliamentary special committee on anti-trafficking, work on the 
comprehensive anti-trafficking bill proceeded at a feverish pace from 
October to date, fully taking on board civil society's suggestions to 
strengthen the legislation. 
The bill was delayed only by final efforts to ensure the bill's 
language would cover all the crucial elements and could be clearly 
understood by law enforcers. Indonesian and international NGOs deemed 
the bill to be strong in all major aspects.  The bill is now scheduled 
for final debate and possible passage on March 20. 
 
For the third year in a row, the Ministry of Women's Empowerment 
published a report in 2006 on efforts to fight trafficking covering the 
period of April 2005 to March 2006.  The GOI reported for the first 
time this year the anti-trafficking budget for the Ministries of Women' 
Empowerment and the Coordinating Ministry for Social Welfare, totaling 
$4.8 million for 2007. End update. 
 
INDONESIA FACES SIGNIFICANT TRAFFICKING CRIMES 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
Indonesia, a developing country and emerging democracy with the world's 
fourth largest population, is a place of origin for a significant 
number of internationally trafficked women and children, and to a lesse 
extent men. Indonesia is also a transit and destination country for 
international trafficking, although foreign victims are very small in 
number relative  to Indonesian victims. Very significant incidents of 
trafficking occur within Indonesia's borders, including for 
prostitution.  Different regions of the country are identifiable as 
sending, transit and/or receiving areas for internal as well as 
international trafficking.  There were no reports during this period of 
trafficking in territory outside of GOI control. 
 
Source region, transit region and receiving region of trafficking in 
persons in Indonesia 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Update 
------- 
 
Source regions:  Various official data and observations by ACILS/ICMC 
(November 2006, When They Were Sold) indicate that all provinces of 
Indonesia are both sources and destinations. An ACILS analysis of 
Department of Social Affairs data on women and girls entering 
prostitution in 1994-95 and 2004 found it difficult to draw any firm 
conclusions.  The biggest increase in prostitution in recent years has 
been into South Sumatra and Bangka Belitung, followed by Jakarta, Riau 
and Riau Islands.  However, places which traditionally have had high 
levels  of prostitution such as East Java and West Kalimantan continue 
to be destinations for traffickers even if the absolute numbers of 
prostitutes is not increasing because of the high replacement rate of 
prostitutes in such places. On the other hand, in more isolated places 
such as Bangka Belitung, Riau Islands, Halmahera, Moluccas and Papua, 
traffickers find it easier to isolate and hold women and girls in 
captivity, the ACILS study points out. 
 
Eastern Indonesia continues to be a source area, transit point and 
destination for victims of human trafficking.  East and Central Java, 
North Sulawesi, Bali and Nusa Tenggaram, East Kalimantan and West 
Kalimantan provinces are among the source areas for both domestic and 
international human trafficking.  East Java and Central Sulawesi are 
transit points and used for "socialization" of women being trafficked 
for commercial sex work domestically and around Southeast Asia. 
 Surabaya and Bali remain destinations for domestic trafficking victims 
for both commercial sex work and child labor. 
 
Transit regions: A November 2006 ACILS report concludes that most 
trafficking to Malaysia and Singapore follows two major routes, known 
as the eastern and western corridors. The western corridor is composed 
of two departure points:  Batam Island, Riau and Entikong, West 
Kalimantan for travel by air from Kuching to Kuala Lumpur.  Nunukan, 
East Kalimantan is the eastern corridor departure point to Malaysia and 
Brunei. There are various air, sea and land routes from other points in 
Indonesia to these departure points. Domestic trafficking routes are 
varied and not well defined. Receiving regions: According to latest 
available IOM statistics covering March 2005 to October 2006 of 1,650 
victims it has assisted, the destinations were as follows: 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Destination  Freq  Percent 
-------------------------------------- 
Malaysia     856    63 
Indonesia    432    32 
Saudi Arabia 41     3 
Japan        15     1 
Syria        8      1 
Kuwait       4      0 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Types of Problems Saudi Kuwait UAE Taiwan Malaysia Singapore 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Salaries not paid 895    208   156  30     47        34 
Sexually abused   707    47    62   43     17        18 
Abused            668    93    91   61     47        36 
Work not in accordance 
with training/promises 
                  625    92    80   283    91        108 
injured at work   769    73    72   103    110       64 
--------------------------------------------- - 
End update. 
 
RELIABLE STATISTICS UNAVAILABLE 
------------------------------- 
 
Reliable statistics or estimates of the overall number of victims 
remain unavailable, in large part because of the illegal and informal 
nature of trafficking, the lack of systematic research, and frequent 
definitional problems.  The sources available for information on the 
prevalence of TIP include GOI agencies (particularly the Women's 
Ministry and the People's Welfare Coordinating Ministry), domestic and 
international NGOs and international organizations, including UNICEF, 
IOM and ILO.  Most organizations' estimates rely upon a combination of 
extrapolation, field experience, press reports and anecdotal evidence. 
 Some of these organizations will not provide estimates due to the 
uncertainty of their information.  Definitional problems, often 
including a lack of distinction between humaQtrafficking, lesser abuse 
 
of workers, and illegal migration make some estimates very unreliable. 
Crude estimates of the prevalence of TIP vary tremendously, but most 
indicate the number of victims in the upper tens of thousands or higher 
. In past years, GOI documents referenced various estimates of the tota 
number of victims, usually in the hundreds of thousands, without 
providing details for these figures.  The GOI's 2005-2006 TIP report 
did not offer an estimate of victims.  GOI officials charged with the 
issue  state that they do not have reliable, overall estimates of the 
number of victims. 
Other non-governmental estimates of the overall number of TIP victims 
exist, but do not have a strong basis in systematic research.  Migrant 
worker advocacy groups occasionally cited very high and seemingly 
inaccurate numbers.  To the extent that such organizations do not 
differentiate between trafficking and lesser abuses of migrant workers, 
their figures represent gross overestimates. 
 
INTERNAL TRAFFICKING MOST SIGNIFICANT 
------------------------------------- 
 
Update 
------ 
 
While reliable figures do not exist, many anti-trafficking 
organizations believe the number of victims of internal trafficking 
exceeds the number of Indonesians trafficked overseas.  The U.S. 
Mission's observations support this conclusion. Internal trafficking is 
largely in prostitution. 
Exploitation and abuse of children in the fishing industry and of women 
and girls in domestic servitude are serious abuses as reported in a 
June 2003 Human Rights Watch report and a February 2007 Amnesty 
International report, but links to trafficking are not extensive. 
As ACILS reports (November 2006 "When They Were Sold"), the movement of 
women and girls is more aided by friends and relatives than by 
professional recruiters, and the lack of an elaborate recruiting 
process and fees paid by employers prohibits large profits by would be 
traffickers. 
 
Forced labor and worst forms of child labor better describes the 
situation in the fishing industry and domestic servitude than does 
trafficking. End update. 
 
BOUNDARY ESTIMATES 
------------------ 
 
Some groups have developed boundary estimates for groups vulnerable to 
trafficking. ICMC and ACILS, in their 2003 book entitled "Trafficking 
of Women and Children in Indonesia," identified three categories that 
generate the greatest number of TIP victims: female migrant workers, 
prostitutes and child domestic workers.  (There are other categories 
that also generate TIP victims, but not are included in these ICMC/ACIL 
boundary estimates.)  ICMC/ACILS estimated that between 2.4 to 3.7 
million women and children worked in these sectors.  Within these 
boundaries, the total number of children ranges from 254,000 to 422,000 
. ICMC/ACILS point out that these are not estimates of the number of 
victims (for example, most female migrant workers are not trafficked), 
but they do provide an indication of the potential impact of traffickin 
on  a large number of women and children. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
TABLE 1:  WOMEN AND CHILDREN IN SECTORS 
          VULNERABLE TO TRAFFICKING 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
SECTOR                  Women Children   Children 
------                  --------------   -------- 
In-country Sex 
   Workers          130k - 240k      39k - 72k 
Female Migrant 
   Workers          1.4 - 2.1 mil.     n/a 
In-country domestic 
  workers           860k - 1.4 mil.  215k - 350k 
                    ---------------  ----------- 
                    2.4 - 3.7 mil.   254k - 422k 
SOURCE:  ICMC/ACILS, 2003 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
DATA ON PROSTITUTION 
-------------------- 
 
Prostitution constitutes a major source of concern for TIP in Indonesia 
 due to the number of women and children involved; the clandestine, 
abusive and often forced nature of this work; the prevalence of 
organized crime; and the frequent awareness and/or complicity of 
officials and security forces (police and military) in prostitution. 
 The boundary estimates for domestic sex workers are somewhat more 
precise than for other areas. ICMC/ACILS in 2003 estimated between 
130,000 to 240,000 in-country prostitutes.  A number of studies have 
consistently found that on average children make up some 25 to 30 
percent of persons working as prostitutes. Using 30 percent, ICMC/ACILS 
arrives at boundary estimates of some 39,000 to 72,000 child 
prostitutes.  This range also corresponds generally with a UNICEF 
 estimate.  Underage prostitutes (those under 18 years of age) are by 
definition TIP victims under the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 
¶2000. 
 
The ILO generated data on the incidence of the worst forms of child 
labor, including child trafficking for prostitution, through a series o 
"rapid assessments" conducted in 2003. The ILO carried out the 
assessments in limited geographic areas of concern for specific types o 
child labor. For child trafficking into prostitution, the ILO assessmen 
focused on Java, home to 60 percent of Indonesia's population.  The ILO 
field research generated "best guess" estimates for child prostitutes i 
these provinces, noted in Table 2. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
TABLE 2:  ESTIMATES OF TOTAL NUMBER OF PROSTITUTES 
          AND CHILD PROSTITUTES ON JAVA 
 
LOCATION      TOTAL         TOTAL     PERCENT 
              PROSTITUTES   UNDERAGE  UNDERAGE 
--------      -----------   --------  -------- 
West Java:    31,380         9,000       29 
Jakarta:        28,620         5,100       18 
East Java:    14,279         4,081       29 
Central Java:  8,495         3,177       37 
Yogyakarta     1,106           194       18 
              -----------   --------  -------- 
              83,880        21,552        26 
 
SOURCE:  ILO RAPID ASSESSMENTS, 2003 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
STUDY ON PAPUA 
-------------- 
 
In remote Papua, a 2005 ICMC field study estimated that there were over 
3,000 internally trafficked women and girls in the sex trade, including 
some 1,000 child prostitutes, in the area's seven largest population 
centers. Almost all child street prostitutes were of Papuan origin.  In 
contrast, most victims in karaoke bars and brothels originated from 
Indonesian areas outside Papua, with the greatest number coming from 
North Sulawesi. The victims normally arrived by ship, often with false 
promises of employment.  Internal migrant workers generated much of the 
demand for prostitution.  Geographic isolation, economic 
underdevelopment, and lack of civil society concern increased the 
severity of trafficking conditions in Papua. 
 
Update 
------ 
 
Riau Progress Limited 
--------------------- 
 
The Riau islands including Batam, Tanjung Pinang, Bintan and Karimun, 
a transit and destination area, did not make substantial progress in 20 
¶06. In Batam, the results of anti-trafficking activities have been 
 
mixed. NGOs report