07MANAGUA637
NICARAGUA-VENEZUELA AGREEMENT ON TECHNICAL
Fri Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0637/01 0682300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 092300Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9405
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0996
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 000637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, OES 
HHS FOR OGHA/LHOFFMAN, RCORREA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO OSCI EAID ECIN NU VE
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA-VENEZUELA AGREEMENT ON TECHNICAL 
COOPERATION IN HEALTH AND MEDICINE 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  As part of a series of ALBA agreements 
between Nicaraguan and Venezuela signed on January 11, 2007, 
Nicaraguan and Venezuelan Ministers of Foreign Relations also 
signed an Agreement on Technical Cooperation in the Areas of 
Health and Medicine.  The agreement sets out a general 
framework for undertaking cooperative activities and 
exchanges, and mentions a number of specific activities.  A 
joint oversight commission will monitor and oversee 
activities under the agreement. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) An Agreement on Technical Cooperation in the Areas 
of Health and Medicine was one of a series of thirteen 
commitments with Venezuela negotiated by the Ortega 
government before it came to power on January 10, 2007. 
Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign Relations Samuel Santos and 
Venezuelan Minister of Foreign Relations Nicolas Maduro Moros 
signed the agreement on January 11, 2007.  The substance of 
the agreement, along with the other commitments made that 
day, was kept from the public for weeks.  This cable reports 
on an unsigned copy of this agreement obtained by the Embassy. 
 
Preambular Language 
------------------- 

¶3. (SBU) Preambular language speaks to the desire to forge 
closer cooperation in the fight against poverty and 
inequality through coordinating bilateral and international 
efforts to implement efficient policies, programs, and 
projects in the area of health and medicine.  The two 
countries recognize that cooperation helps to integrate the 
societies of the two countries and strengthen the promotion 
of health. 
 
Article 1: Cooperation 
---------------------- 

¶4. (SBU) The parties pledge to promote and intensify 
cooperation in the area of health through a mutually 
collaborative relationship directed toward education and 
training, as well as the exchange of knowledge, experiences, 
services, supplies, and technology, according to the 
principles of equality, mutual respect for sovereignty, 
reciprocity, and conforming to respective internal laws and 
what is envisioned by this agreement. 
 
Article II: Activities 
---------------------- 

¶5. (SBU) The parties agree that said cooperation will 
comprise the following areas: 
 
-- education and training of human resources, 
   through the undertaking of workshops, 
   intensive courses, undergraduate and post 
   graduate studies in general medicine, 
   pediatric cardiovascular surgery and 
   anesthesia, general odontologia, blood 
   disease therapy, radiology, anesthesia, 
   health services administration, 
   epidemiology, and occupational health; 
 
-- exchange of experiences and information, as 
   well as technical advisories and research in 
   health policy and information systems, 
   management and organization of public health 
   systems, diseases, immunizations, a 
   reduction in maternal and infant mortality, 
   sanitary control (including medical 
   registries, manufacturing good practices, 
   and certification of product quality); 
 
-- surgical attention for patients with 
   congenital cardiopathies at the Latin 
   American Children's Cardiological Hospital 
   Gilberto Rodriguez Ochoa; 
 
-- strengthening the public health system of 
   Nicaragua, through cooperative projects as 
   described at Barrio Adentro; 
 
-- technical assistance in health, providing 
   benefits to both parties, among those 
   highlighted is the supply of 
   pharmaceuticals for the control and 
   prevention of diseases, such as HIV/AIDS; 
 
-- technology transfer in areas of common 
   Agreement as defined by the parties; 
 
-- other areas that may be proposed and 
   considered of mutual interest by parties 
   to this agreement. 
 
Article 3: Responsible Authorities 
---------------------------------- 

¶6. (SBU) Responsible entities are the Nicaraguan Ministry of 
Health and the Venezuelan Ministry of Health. 
 
Article 4: Programs of Action 
----------------------------- 

¶7. (SBU) The parities will jointly elaborate specific 
programs of action, containing activities and projects to be 
developed, with a description of objectives, an 
implementation period, work plan, estimated costs, financial 
resources, technical requirements as well as other conditions 
that may be established, and designating the financial and 
operational obligations of each of the parities.  Responsible 
authorities will have the right to evaluate programs and make 
necessary recommendations to their respective governments to 
improve the execution of programs. 
 
Articles 5-7: Oversight 
----------------------- 

¶8. (SBU) The parties will joint create an oversight 
commission, staffed by representatives from the ministries of 
health in both countries.  Members shall be nominated within 
30 days of entry into force of this agreement.  Among the 
functions of this oversight commission will be to coordinate 
activities within the framework of this agreement and present 
a biannual report to the parties in the agreement that 
reflects, advances, and recommends actions to achieve the 
objectives of this agreement.  The oversight commission will 
meet alternatively in Venezuela and Nicaragua as agreed by 
the parties.  The host country will be responsible for 
conducting the meetings. 
 
Article 8: Intellectual Property 
-------------------------------- 

¶9. (SBU) The activities mentioned in the current agreement 
will be subject to judicial requirements in both countries, 
especially activities in reference to the transfer of 
technology or products that involve patent or intellectual 
property rights.  The parties will take precautions that they 
consider convenient with the purpose of preserving genetic 
material originally under their protection or conservation. 
In as much as scientific and technological information 
exchange is concerned, the parties will designate, when they 
judge necessary, restrictions for their diffusion. 
 
Article 9: Disputes 
------------------- 

¶10. (SBU) Disputes will be resolved through direct diplomatic 
negotiations between the parties. 
 
Article 10: Amendments 
---------------------- 

¶11. (SBU) Agreement may be modified by mutual consent. 
Modifications will enter into effect via Article IX 
negotiations. 
 
Article 11: Entry Into Force, Duration, Renewal 
--------------------------------------------- -- 

¶12. (SBU) This agreement enters into force upon the last 
communication between the parties notifying the fulfillment 
of all constitutional and internal legal requirements.  The 
duration of the agreement is 5 years; renewal for equal 
periods is automatic, unless either party notifies the other 
of its intention at least six months before the termination 
of the agreement.  Either party may withdraw from this 
agreement three months after written diplomatic notification. 
 Withdrawal will not affect projects and programs still being 
implemented, unless the parties say otherwise. 
TRIVELLI