07MANAGUA645
NICARAGUA - VENEZUELA ENERGY SECTOR COOPERATION
Fri Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0645/01 0682332
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 092332Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9418
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1009
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 000645 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, EEB/ESC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET EAID MCC NU VE
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA - VENEZUELA ENERGY SECTOR COOPERATION 
AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0639 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0640 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  As part of a series of Bolivarian 
Alternative agreements between Nicaragua and Venezuela signed 
on January 11, 2007, respective Ministers of Foreign 
Relations also signed an Energy Sector Cooperation Agreement. 
 The agreement sets out general areas for cooperation, 
including the refining, distribution, supply, and marketing 
of petroleum products.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Energy Sector Cooperation Agreement was one of a 
series of thirteen commitments with Venezuela negotiated by 
the Ortega government before it came to power on January 10, 
¶2007.  Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign Relations Samuel Santos 
and Venezuelan Minister of Foreign Relations Nicolas Maduro 
Moros signed the agreement on January 11, 2007.  The 
substance of the agreement, along with the other commitments 
made that day, was kept from the public for weeks.  This 
cable reports on an unsigned copy of this agreement. 
 
Preambular Language 
------------------- 

¶3. (SBU) Preambular language stresses ties of friendship and 
cooperation, and the role that the energy sector can play in 
social development.  Both countries pledge to collaborate on 
the implementation of policies having to do with the 
sovereign use of natural resources.  The parties declare 
their political will to pursue regional energy integration 
within a framework where PETROCARIBE (a Venezuelan regional 
energy initiative) can contribute to energy security, 
socioeconomic development, and the transformation of society, 
such that the quality of life is improved and people 
participate in the determination and construction of their 
own destiny.  The principles of cooperation, complementarity, 
self determination, solidarity, and respect for sovereignty 
are enunciated. 
 
Article 1: Objective 
-------------------- 

¶4. (SBU) The objective of this agreement is to promote and 
intensify bilateral energy cooperation through a broad and 
sustained process of integration and cooperation in the 
energy sector.  The parties will work together to find ways 
for oil, gas, and electricity to contribute to regional 
development initiatives, particularly through PETROAMERICA 
and PETROCARIBE.  Regional energy policy will be coordinated 
based on principles of equality, mutual respect of 
sovereignty and reciprocal advantages, in accordance with 
respective internal legislation foreseen by this agreement. 
 
Article 2: Modalities 
--------------------- 

¶5. (SBU) To accomplish political and commercial energy 
integration, the parties will pursue the following activities: 
 
-- strengthen energy relations between the two countries 
through joint enterprises, service enterprises, and other 
sectors of mutual interest; 
 
-- create joint enterprises between Venezuelan Oil Company 
(PDVSA) and state entities designated by the Government of 
Nicaragua to develop projects for the refining, distribution, 
supply, and marketing of petroleum products; 
 
-- optimizing gasoline supply chains within the internal 
market of Nicaragua; 
 
-- supplying petroleum and refined products in quantities 
agreed upon by the parties, and establishing payment 
mechanisms; 
 
-- evaluating projects for the construction of a transport 
terminal for liquefied propane gas. 
 
-- evaluating the possibility of the direct supply of gas to 
Nicaragua via land, a transcaribbean gas pipeline, or sea, of 
liquefied natural gas. 
 
-- optimizing the infrastructure of distribution and supply 
terminals of crude oil and petroleum products; 
 
-- cooperating in the generation, transport, and distribution 
of electrical power in Nicaragua; 
 
-- cooperating in other ways that the parties mutually agree. 
 
 
Article 3: Complementing Agreements 
----------------------------------- 

¶6. (SBU) To execute cooperation foreseen in this agreement, 
the parties may adopt complementing agreements. 
 
Article 4: Competent Entities 
----------------------------- 

¶7. (SBU) Competent authorities for this agreement are the 
Nicaraguan National Energy Commission and the Venezuelan 
Ministry of Energy and Petroleum.  These entities may 
delegate the execution of this agreement to respective state 
enterprises, which may determine specific conditions required 
for cooperation. 
 
Article 5: Control and Follow Up 
-------------------------------- 

¶8. (SBU) To assure prompt execution of this agreement, 
competent authorities will meet on agreed dates alternatively 
in each country, and establish executive working groups to 
realize cooperation in different sectors. 
 
Article 6: Utilization of Information 
------------------------------------- 

¶9. (SBU) Parties may freely utilize all information exchanged 
under this agreement, except when one of the parties 
establishes restrictions, or reserves the use or 
distribution, or that which is classified as confidential. 
In no case shall such information be transferred to a third 
party without the written consent of the relevant party. 
 
Article 7: Financing 
-------------------- 

¶10. (SBU) Each party will pay for expenses resulting from 
cooperative activities by their own competent authorities, 
unless another modality is agreed upon in writing. 
 
Article 8: Labor Relations 
-------------------------- 

¶11. (SBU) Commissioned personnel by each party will continue 
under the direction of the institution to which they belong, 
and the laws, regulations, and standards of that institution. 
 Personnel may not dedicate themselves to any activity 
outside their functions, nor may they receive remuneration 
outside that which has been established, without prior 
authorization from the competent authorities.  Each of the 
parties is responsible for labor accidents and damages to 
their own property, independent of the place where it may 
occur, unless it is a consequence of grave negligence or 
hurtful conduct, in which case corresponding indemnities 
should provide cover. 
 
Article 9: Third Parties 
------------------------ 

¶12. (SBU) This agreement does not preclude similar agreements 
with third parties. 
 
Article 10: Sovereignty 
----------------------- 

¶13. (SBU) Nothing in this agreement affects the sovereign 
rights of Venezuela or Nicaragua over their natural resources. 
 
Article 11: Termination and Modification 
---------------------------------------- 

¶14. (SBU) This document may not be terminated or modified 
without previous written consent by the other party. 
 
Article 12: Disputes 
-------------------- 

¶15. (SBU) Disputes will be resolved through friendly 
diplomatic negotiations. 
 
Article 13: Amendment 
--------------------- 

¶16. (SBU) The agreement may be amended through common 
agreement. 
 
Article 14: Entry Into force, Duration, and Termination 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 

¶17. (SBU) The duration of the agreement is five years, 
automatically renewed for consecutive periods of one year 
unless one party notifies the other six months in advance of 
its intention not to renew it.  Either party may withdraw 
from the agreement sixty days after having notified the other 
party.  Termination of the agreement does not imply the 
termination of ongoing projects and programs agreed upon 
during agreement, which shall continue until completed unless 
the parties agree otherwise. 
TRIVELLI