07NAIROBI1224
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR MELISSA LEDESMA-LEESE
Thu Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNR #1224/01 0741300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151300Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8308UNCLAS NAIROBI 001224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP - PASS TO MELISSA LEDESMA-LEESE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: CA CMGT KFRD OTRA KE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR MELISSA LEDESMA-LEESE 
 
REF: A. STATE 27459 
 
 
 ¶1.  Embassy Nairobi grants country clearance and welcomes 
Melissa Ledesma-Leese, arriving April 26 and departing April 28, 
¶2007.  Country clearance is granted subject to the actual security 
situation at the time of proposed travel.  The embassy switchboard 
number is 254-20-363-6000 and the after-hours number is 
254-20-363-6170. Point of Contact is Etienne LeBailly, work 
International Voice Gateway (IVG) telephone number 8-871-6020, cell 
phone 254 724-253-181. 
 
¶2. Security Assessment: 
- There is currently a travel warning in effect for Kenya, which 
states that "American Citizens should evaluate their personal 
security in light of continuing terrorist threats and the limited 
ability of the Kenyan authorities to detect and deter such acts." 
The U.S. Government continues to receive indications of terrorist 
threats in the region aimed at American and western interests, 
including civil aviation, and that the Kenyan government might not 
be able to prevent such attacks. 
 
- Nairobi is designated a critical threat post for transnational 
terrorism and crime by the Department of State.  All TDY visitors 
who will be in Kenya for more than 2 weeks are required to attend a 
security briefing by the RSO  at the regularly scheduled security 
briefing at 9:00 a.m. on Thursdays.  Personnel on official USG 
business are required to stay in RSO approved hotels.  You may 
obtain the list from your sponsoring office. 
 
- Violent crime in Nairobi is sharply rising.  Carjacking, in order 
to commit an armed robbery, is the most common form of crime in 
Nairobi.  In virtually every instance, carjackers use weapons to rob 
and carjack their victims.  Most victims, if they are completely 
cooperative, are usually released unharmed, with their vehicles. 
However, victims are sometimes tied up and put in the back seat or 
trunk of their own car.  Criminals who commit these crimes will not 
hesitate to shoot a victim who is the least bit uncooperative, or 
may appear to hesitate before complying with their assailant.  The 
RSO recommends that if confronted with a criminal incident, victims 
acquiesce immediately and quietly.  Put your hands where they can be 
seen and avert your eyes.  Though this does not guarantee your 
personal safety it is more likely you will survive the incident. 
 
- Street crime is particularly bad in downtown Nairobi and Uhuru 
Park and mission personnel are strongly urged to avoid the downtown 
area after dark.  Throughout the country reports of group attacks 
and muggings are on the rise.  Pickpockets and thieves carry out 
"snatch and run" crimes on city streets and near crowds.  Large 
public functions are particularly vulnerable to rings of organized 
thieves.  Visitors have found it safer not to carry valuables, but 
rather to store them in hotel safety deposit boxes or in room safes. 
 The RSO recommends leaving all important documents (passports, 
plane tickets, etc.) in a hotel safe and not wearing any jewelry on 
the street.  In addition, visitors should avoid hanging a camera 
around their necks, handbags on the backs of chairs, carrying a 
protruding wallet, and carrying or showing large amounts of money in 
public. 
 
- While traveling in vehicles, doors should be kept locked and 
windows rolled up at all times.  Highway bandits are active on roads 
leading to the border areas and some areas in the northeastern 
portion of the country require special RSO approval prior to travel. 
 
 
- The Government of Kenya (and the Mission firearms policy) 
prohibits the importing and carrying of firearms except for U.S. law 
enforcement officers engaged in protective security or investigative 
duties. 
 
¶3.  Climate:  Weather conditions in Nairobi are sunny and 
mild year-round with daily temperatures ranging between 50 
and 80 degrees Fahrenheit.  In April and May, it rains 
frequently and daytime temperatures are lower.  From June 
through September, dry, but often cloudy weather persists 
with cool nights. From October through November there is 
occasional rain, but most days are sunny and warm. 
 
¶4.  Health:  Due to the high altitude, Nairobi is not a malarial 
area and malaria prophylaxis is not needed; but the risk of 
malaria outside Nairobi is significant.  Therefore, if you are 
planning to travel outside Nairobi, particularly to areas below 
3,500 feet elevation, it is advisable to begin using oral malarial 
medication before arrival and for four weeks following departure. 
In addition, every effort should be made to use insect repellents, 
proper clothing, and barriers which discourage/prevent mosquito 
bites.  Travelers should also carry immunization records with valid 
yellow fever immunization as well as being current with other 
inoculations.  The embassy medical unit advises that local tap 
water is not potable.  Bottled water is safe to drink and can be 
purchased in local hotels, restaurants and grocery stores. 
Individuals with sickle cell trait should carefully consider the 
altitude of this post.  Short-term (TDY) assignments carry an added 
risk because of the lack of time for acclimatization.  Dehydration 
and stress from exercise or illness compound the basic risks of high 
altitude.  For more information about sickle cell trait, contact 
your health unit or the medical clearances section of the Office of 
Medical Services. 
 
¶5.  Internal travel: 
- Due to the dangerous driving conditions in Nairobi and in Kenya in 
general, post policy prohibits TDY'ers from driving USG or rental 
vehicles.  Waivers may be granted for operational reasons if 
approved by the RSO and the Front Office.  If riding with others or 
hiring a driver, note that it is inadvisable to travel at night 
outside well-traveled areas due to the lack of lighting, road signs, 
and warning signals on broken down vehicles.  Many drivers exercise 
poor judgment and drive too fast.  Traffic accidents are common. 
Public ground transportation in Kenya, particularly after dark, 
should be avoided for safety and security reasons.  Travel via 
passenger train in Kenya is considered unsafe by the RSO, 
particularly during the rainy seasons.  The trains and tracks lack 
routine maintenance and safety checks. 
 
- GSO has contracted with Jim Cab Services to provide additional 
transportation services for the mission.  In the absence of special 
arrangements for use of official vehicles, TDYers and visitors will 
be expected to use this service for their transportation 
requirements.  Because TDY transportation is reimbursed as part of 
the individual's travel expenses, TDYers will pay for their 
transportation directly to Jim Cab when the services are rendered. 
Landline numbers for Jim Cab are 712-2565, 712-1205 or 712-0344; 
cell phone numbers are 0722-711001, 0722-714246 or 0733-735499. 
Never get into any taxi that has anyone other than the driver in it 
as carjackers sometimes use taxis to carjack other vehicles. 
 
¶6.  Money matters: 
- For better exchange rates, it is recommended that money 
changing/accommodation exchange be undertaken through our 
contracted bank, the Commercial Bank of Africa (CBA).  CBA 
has branches in the US Embassy building and the USAID 
building.  CBA,s hours of operation are Monday through 
Thursday, 9 AM to 12 noon and 1 PM to 3 PM; Friday, 9 AM to 
12 noon.  For TDYers, CBA will cash up to 500 US dollars per day and 
will change cash or traveler,s checks or personal checks.  If you 
are using personal checks, an exchange application form must be 
filled in and approved by the Financial Management Officer prior to 
visiting the bank.  Your control officer will provide the form or 
you may pick up a copy in the Financial Management Center.  Certain 
ATM machines in town will accept US ATM and credit cards. 
 
- Credit cards are accepted at major hotels and restaurants, with 
VISA and Mastercard being the cards of choice. 
 
- The current rate of exchange is approximately 70 shillings to the 
US dollar. 
 
¶7.  General: 
- AEA Morale Store:  TDY membership in the American Employees 
Association (AEA) is available for five U.S. dollars per week or one 
dollar per day.  The AEA Morale Store offers a limited supply of 
liquor, soda, beer, snacks, Embassy souvenirs, and Kenyan crafts. 
All products are sold in U.S. dollars.  Cash and travelers checks 
are accepted; no personal checks are accepted. 
 
- APO Use:  TDY personnel wishing to use the APO are required to 
present a copy of their TDY/leave orders to the APO supervisor. 
Military members must also produce a valid ID card. 
 
¶8.  Entry requirements:  A visa to enter Kenya is mandatory.  This 
applies to U.S. citizens arriving for any purpose and regardless of 
type of passport.  Travelers may obtain a visa in advance at a 
Kenyan embassy or consulate. Alternatively, a visa can be obtained 
at the airport for a voucherable charge of 50 U.S. dollars, but 
lines may be long and processing time slow.  Evidence of yellow 
fever immunization is usually requested upon entry to Kenya. 
 
¶9.  Departure:  Each person departing Kenya (regardless of 
age or type of passport) must pay a 20 U.S. dollar departure tax 
payable in Kenya shillings or U.S. dollars, unless it has been 
included in the price of your ticket.  Further, there is 500 Kenya 
shilling (approximate) departure tax imposed on all domestic 
flights. 
SLUTZ