07PHNOMPENH468
TIP CASE RAISES CORRUPTION CONCERNS IN SIHANOUKVILLE
Mon Mar 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO4918
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0468/01 0850250
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 260250Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8240
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000468 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS AND EAP/RSP 
STATE PASS TO USAID/ANE 
BANGKOK PASS TO CHRISTOPHER SONDERBY AND ICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN KJUS CB
 
SUBJECT:  TIP CASE RAISES CORRUPTION CONCERNS IN SIHANOUKVILLE 
 
REF: A) 06 PHNOM PENH 1954 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Despite overwhelming evidence in favor of 
conviction, a trafficking in persons (TIP) trial in Sihanoukville 
resulted in the acquittal of two defendants and a third being 
sentenced to a two-year prison term for the lesser charge of 
pimping.  The judge's irregular behavior in the courtroom and soft 
ruling raise questions about corruption in this case.  While 
government cooperation on TIP issues is strong in Phnom Penh, 
allegations of corruption in the judicial system -- and particularly 
in this municipal court in southern Cambodia -- remain a serious 
concern.  End Summary. 
 
Underage Vietnamese Sex Workers Rescued from Guesthouse 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On November 23, 2006, an informant, who was a rescued 
trafficking victim herself, told International Justice Mission (IJM) 
staff that underage Vietnamese girls were engaged in forced sex work 
at the O Pi Guesthouse in the city of Sihanoukville on Cambodia's 
southern coast.  After a preliminary investigation substantiated the 
allegations, IJM alerted the police who raided the guesthouse on 
December 12.  In addition to rescuing six young Vietnamese women, 
police arrested four suspects and seized a number of pornographic 
videos and condoms.  During initial questioning by the police, the 
six young Vietnamese women gave false names and claimed to be over 
18 years old.  However, during subsequent questioning by the 
investigating judge, the six quickly admitted that they had been 
coached by O Pi Guesthouse staff to lie about their names and ages. 
In fact, five of the six were between the ages of 15 and 17.  The 
rescued girls also said that they had been coerced into the brothel, 
beaten if they refused sex with customers, and forcefully detained 
at the brothel.  The girls are currently in NGO shelter care and 
hope to rejoin their families in Vietnam. 
 
Irregular Court Behavior Suggests Corruption 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) During the first day of the hearing on March 9, 2007, 
irregular behavior by the presiding judge, Thak Kim Sea, led IJM 
staff to become concerned that he had accepted a bribe in return for 
light treatment of the case.  After listening to testimony from Be 
Si Vanna, the Chief of Sihanoukville anti-TIP Police, that the 
victims initially claimed to be over 18 years of age after the raid 
on the guesthouse, the judge asked the young women a series of 
leading questions.  He chastised them for "destroying their 
credibility" by initially lying to the police about their names and 
ages, and he inappropriately asked each if she had been a virgin 
prior to working at the guesthouse.  The young women held up well 
under such hostile questioning, with one responding to a question 
about why she hadn't asked for help by reminding the judge that she 
could not effectively communicate with her clients nor most of the 
community because she spoke only Vietnamese.  The judge then asked 
the girls to produce their Vietnamese identification cards.  When 
they were produced, he questioned their veracity and took them to 
the Vietnamese consulate over the lunch break to verify that they 
were indeed legitimate. 
 
¶4.  (U)  In the afternoon, the judge accused IJM staff of violating 
their Memorandum of Understanding with the government by not 
informing the police about the tip-off that led to the raid.  In 
reality, the agreed practice (as followed by IJM in this case) is to 
alert the police only after a preliminary IJM investigation 
substantiates the tip.  When the trial resumed the following week, 
the judge ordered the informant to appear -- a request that IJM 
viewed as immaterial.  The request was also unprecedented in the 104 
TIP cases with which they have been involved in Cambodia since 2003. 
 In addition, during the course of the trial, one observer described 
Prosecutor Meas Sophea as less than enthusiastic in prosecuting the 
case. 
 
¶5.  (U)  When the trial resumed on March 16, Judge Thak Kim Sea 
challenged the presence of a large group of expatriate and Cambodian 
observers -- including staff from IJM and another anti-TIP NGO, 
Action Pour Les Enfants (APLE), and Poleconoff and LES.  He 
originally said that they had not asked for permission to attend the 
hearing, but eventually allowed observers to remain.  (Note:  Under 
the Cambodian constitution, all criminal hearings are open to the 
public.  End Note.)  He then proceeded to question the informant, 
attacking her credibility over her lack of identification and her 
poor recollection of how many times she had met with IJM staff. 
 
Two Acquitted, One Convicted on Lesser Charge 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) In rendering his decision on March 16, the judge noted that 
the six victims did not approach IJM for help and reminded observers 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000468  002 OF 002 
 
 
that in fact the informant had reported that another young woman, 
who was never found, was being held at O Pi Guesthouse.  He noted 
that the young women were all 15 years or older, and said that, as 
Vietnamese citizens, they were legally adults under Vietnamese 
family law, thereby making them old enough to consent to engage in 
sex work.  The judge chastised IJM for not cooperating properly with 
the Cambodian authorities and assisting "only Vietnamese girls." He 
suggested that IJM work against foreigners who come to Cambodia to 
"abuse drugs and to commit other illegal acts." 
 
¶7.  (U)  The judge then acquitted the owner of the guesthouse and 
another employee of all charges, and convicted one guesthouse 
employee of a lesser charge of pimping, ordering her to serve a 
two-year prison term plus a three-year suspended sentence, and to 
pay a total of USD 2,250 in punitive damages to the six victims. 
Prosecutor Meas Sophea was unsure if he would appeal the verdict. 
(Note:  The fourth suspect had been released several months ago, but 
IJM was unclear if charges had been dropped or if he had simply been 
released on bail.  The court did not appear to expect him to attend 
these hearings.  End Note.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Sihanoukville Municipal Court has become notorious for 
its unprofessional prosecution of TIP cases.  In 2005, Judge Thak 
Kim San berated an IJM staff member for posing as a sex client, 
noting that without a client there could be no crime.  The president 
of the court, Svay Si Sarot, granted bail on medical grounds to an 
accused Amcit pedophile named Terry Smith and his girlfriend, an 
alleged trafficker, last year.  Smith was later rearrested and 
deported to the U.S. to face PROTECT ACT charges while his 
girlfriend remains at large (reftel A).  It is notable that 
Prosecutor Meas Sophea and Sihanoukville anti-TIP police chief Be Si 
Vanna, who were both involved in the Smith case, were also involved 
with this latest poorly prosecuted TIP case in Sihanoukville. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) While the Cambodian government, and particularly the 
Cambodian police, has made laudable progress in combating 
trafficking in persons in Phnom Penh, TIP problems in Cambodia's 
provinces remain and may be growing in Sihanoukville.  This case, 
along with a recent report by APLE referencing continued problems 
with police and judicial authorities, highlights that all is not 
right in Cambodia's bustling beach resort.  With the recent opening 
of Sihanoukville's airport, the city's attraction to tourists will 
only grow.  Unless the RGC takes concrete action to stem TIP and 
addresses the issue of corruption, the government risks further 
embarrassing court cases and worsening relations with those NGOs 
handling TIP issues.  We will reinforce those points in our next 
meetings with MoJ and MoI officials. 
 
MUSSOMELI