07QUITO482
ECUADOR 2007 TIP REPORT
Thu Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0482/01 0602215
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 012215Z MAR 07 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6424
INFO RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 6472
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 2395
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ MAR 0443
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA PRIORITY 1446
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 1958
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS QUITO 000482 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USAID 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, WHA/PPC, WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF
 
SUBJECT:  ECUADOR 2007 TIP REPORT 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 202745 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Over the past year, Ecuador has achieved 
significant and sustained progress in the areas of prevention, 
protection, and prosecution of TIP.  GOE commitment to combat 
TIP is evidenced by former President Palacio's signing of the 
National Anti-TIP Plan on August 30, 2006. The GOE has 
implemented comprehensive anti-TIP legislation and continues to 
vigorously investigate and prosecute offenders. More than 100 
police, prosecutors and judges underwent intensive training to 
combat TIP, resulting in more than 100 TIP cases currently in 
process; there were two TIP convictions and sentencings in 
September and December 2006. Specially appointed prosecutors are 
leading prosecution efforts.  The Attorney General's Office 
tracks data on TIP complaints, arrests and prosecutions. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The GOE, via INNFA, launched in November 2006 a US $1 
million national anti-TIP and anti-alien smuggling campaign 
targeting vulnerable audiences in all 22 provinces.  In August 
2006, the Ecuadorian Public Ministry established a 36-member 
police unit for Victim and Witness Protection. GOE-supported 
shelters for TIP victims protected 27 TIP victims in 2006. 
Senior government officials, including the former President, 
First Lady, and cabinet members spoke out publicly many times 
about the problem.  President Rafael Correa took office took 
office January 15 and already several senior ministers of 
government have expressed GOE commitment to continue the fight 
against trafficking in persons.  End Summary. 
 
¶3.  (U) This report provides responses keyed to the TIP 
questionnaire contained in RefTel.  Nominations of heroes and 
best practices follow at Para 8.  Point of contact is Erik 
Martini, IVG 644 ext. 4424, fax:  +593-2-254-0712.  Hours spent 
on this report:  USAID officer 30, NAS Officer 5, POLOFF 20, 
POLCHIEF 5. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Overview of Activities to Eliminate TIP: 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶A. Is the country a country of origin, transit, or destination 
for internationally trafficked men, women, or children? 
Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for each group; 
how they were trafficked, to where, and for what purpose.  Does 
the trafficking occur within the country's borders?  Does it 
occur in territory outside of the government's control (e.g. in 
a civil war situation)?  Are any estimates or reliable numbers 
available as to the extent or magnitude of the problem?   What 
is (are) the source(s) of available information on trafficking 
in persons or what plans are in place (if any) to undertake 
documentation of trafficking? How reliable are the numbers and 
these sources? Are certain groups of persons more at risk of 
being trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus girls, 
certain ethnic groups, refugees, etc.)? 
 
Ecuador is a country of origin, transit, and destination for 
trafficked women and children.  The most comprehensive TIP study 
of Ecuador was undertaken by the International Labor 
Organization (ILO) in 2003.  This report by a respected 
international organization remains the benchmark of research 
into the trafficking problem and is widely regarded as accurate. 
The research showed that approximately 5,200 youth and 
adolescents -- between age 15 and 17 -- are commercially 
sexually exploited in Ecuador.  Studies also show Ecuadorian 
youth sent to Spain, Italy, Venezuela, Peru and Colombia for 
labor or commercial sexual exploitation. 
 
More recent TIP research was completed by the ILO in May 2006, 
studying 9 selected cities throughout Ecuador: Ambato, Otavalo, 
Riobamba, Quito, Santo Domingo de los Colorados, Guayaquil, 
Manta, Machala and Lago Agrio.  The study confirmed extensive 
routes of internal trafficking between these cities and found 
evidence that Ecuadorians were trafficked out of Ecuador to 
Colombia and Venezuela and Colombians were trafficked into 
Ecuador. 
 
In addition to the baseline studies that were conducted in Santo 
Domingo de los Colorados and Ibarra, Foundation Esquel, together 
with Foundation Esperanza (Hope) and the Municipal Childhood and 
Adolescent Advisory Board of Tena, will conduct a baseline study 
of the situation of commercial sexual exploitation of minors and 
adolescents in Tena, province of Napo. The objectives of the 
study will be to raise awareness of public sector officials and 
civil society organizations through training; to formulate a 
Local Action Plan to combat CSEM; and to promote a local public 
policy and training to increase the presentation of complaints 
and accusations of CSEM crimes. 
 
¶B. Please provide a general overview of the trafficking 
situation in the country and any changes since the last TIP 
Report (e.g. changes in direction).  Also briefly explain the 
political will to address trafficking in persons. Other items to 
address may include:  What kind of conditions are the victims 
trafficked into?  Which populations are targeted by the 
traffickers?  Who are the traffickers?  What methods are used to 
approach victims? (Are they offered lucrative jobs, sold by 
their families, approached by friends of friends, etc.?)  What 
methods are used to move the victims (e.g., are false documents 
being used?). 
 
The human trafficking pattern in Ecuador does not appear to have 
changed significantly since the 2006 TIP Report.  The GOE 
continues to show its resolve to take action against 
trafficking. 
 
There is a high incidence of internally trafficked children and 
adolescents who are sold into sexual slavery. Conditions that 
victims are trafficked into are illustrated in a January 2006 
DINAPEN raid that led to the rescue of 11 minors between the 
ages 14-17. According to the GOE TIP prosecutor, Thania Moreno, 
the accused controlled the girls, moving them from city to city 
within Ecuador and forced them into prostitution. One victim 
stated that "once Qhired' and regardless of age, the club 
converted into a prison. The girls could not leave: there they 
slept and ate." False documents were obtained in Quito and 
Guayaquil. Out of the 11 victims, three were from Santo Domingo, 
Pichincha province, two from Buena Fe, Los Rios province, one 
from Quevedo, Los Rios province, one from Guayaquil, Guayas 
province, one from Chone, Manabi province, and the three 
remaining from various cities in the Amazon region. 
 
On September 9, press reported the following testimony from a 
victim: "I was recruited by my boyfriend," Valeria (fictitious 
name), a 14-year-old, noted.  A friend of my brother courted me 
and brought me to Crucita (Manabi province) with the promise 
that I would have a better life in the capital.  Little by 
little he began to hit me and forced me to work in a brothel.  I 
also had to give him money--$25 for each act.  After an 
operation by DINAPEN, he is now in prison and I almost can't 
sleep at night for the fear of seeing him again." 
 
The TIP study completed by the ILO in May 2006 and a 2006 study 
by Our Youth Foundation, also provide insight into trafficking 
targets, traffickers, and methods used to approach victims. 
 
Traffickers tend to recruit targets in extremely poor 
communities.  They target vulnerable adolescents, enticing them 
with promises of work, wealth and success.  TIP victims at a 
Quito shelter tell of being approached by friends at bars who 
offered them jobs and opportunity.  Poor parents also sell their 
adolescent children to traffickers who tout the chance of 
legitimate employment and adventure abroad. 
 
The most vulnerable trafficking targets include 
institutionalized and abandoned children of emigrants, children 
of prostitutes, and young migrants. Areas with high rates of 
human trafficking in Ecuador include border communities, 
villages near tourist areas and major corporations, the 
highlands, and urban coastal communities. In Santo Domingo, 
Pichincha province, there is a high incidence of internally 
trafficked children and adolescents who are exploited for sexual 
slavery. These victims arrive in Santo Domingo from various 
parts of Ecuador in transit or as a final destination. 
Traffickers post job announcements along the lampposts of Santo 
Domingo's streets "seeking young attractive women for better 
paid jobs." Machala and Guayaquil are referred to as recruitment 
centers, places of origin for a number of victims trafficked 
internally and internationally. In the highlands there are 
reports of minors from indigenous villages, located in and 
around Otavalo, trafficked to other Latin American and European 
countries (e.g., Spain, Italy). 
 
In Riobamba children are lured into labor exploitation at 
agricultural or animal fairs, attended by primarily poor 
indigenous families. Traffickers offer parents better living 
conditions (work, food, education, travel, etc.) in exchange for 
monthly or yearly payments (US $800 to $1000 annually). 
Traffickers typically provide an initial up front cash amount to 
parents in exchange for consent to leave with the child. 
Interviews with parents also suggest that traffickers have 
approached the child directly, luring them with offers of money, 
without consent of the parents. 
 
In Quito, ads placed on lampposts and in bus terminals often 
seek girls, offering work, housing, food and commission Q cases 
which lead to sexual enslavement of minors. Recruiters also may 
be girls convincing potential Qworkers' by offering an easy way 
to earn money to get a cellular phone, new clothing, etc. These 
recruiters often earn a commission for bringing in other girls 
who eventually end up working in brothels. Organized crime 
groups also operate and traffic girls between Quito and Santo 
Domingo de los Colorados. 
 
In Lago Agrio a young girl from Cali, Colombia was forced into 
prostitution after a neighbor asked permission to take the child 
to the beach. The girl was taken instead to a brother where she 
was held in sexual slavery. 
 
In a documentary, the NGO Our Youth Foundation highlighted 
methods to lure victims.  A typical ruse deals with a boyfriend, 
who falls in love with a young girl promising her a better life 
and lucrative job if they move away to another city. In the 
city, the money soon runs out and the boyfriend tells the girl 
that she must work so they can make ends meet. He often 
indicates that he has located a job for her Q and presents a 
uniform from a cabaret or night club. Reluctantly, she accepts, 
thinking that it will only be for a short while until they find 
something better and get back on their feet. After a couple of 
nights, she is forced