07SHANGHAI167
FORMER DEPUTY SECRETARY ZOELLICK SHANGHAI VISIT
Mon Mar 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO5089
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGH #0167/01 0850842
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260842Z MAR 07
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5632
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0907
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0512
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0495
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0520
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0618
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0420
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 6006UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SHANGHAI 000167 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM, EB, AND E 
TREASURY FOR ADAMS 
USDOC FOR ITA A/DAS MELCHER, MCQUEEN 
NSC FOR HUBBARD AND TONG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH
SUBJECT: FORMER DEPUTY SECRETARY ZOELLICK SHANGHAI VISIT 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified - please protect accordingly.  Not 
for dissemination outside USG channels. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Former Deputy Secretary of State Robert 
Zoellick delivered a well-received speech at the third annual 
Barnett-Oksenberg Lecture in Shanghai on March 21.  Zoellick 
called for China to play a more cooperative role on Korea, Iran, 
Sudan and energy security.  The text of the speech can be found 
on the Consulate website at 
http://shanghai.usembassy-china.org.cn.  CPC Central Committee 
Member Zhao Qizheng responded to the speech by acknowledging 
that China was acting responsibly.  While developing the economy 
continued to be China's main focus, it was an active member of 
the UN Security Council, and was playing a more active role on 
global issues such as the environment, terrorism, and stopping 
the spread of communicable diseases.  Zhao also noted that China 
was more comfortable working bilaterally rather than 
multilaterally on issues.  Zoellick's speech received wide and 
positive press coverage, with some local papers calling the 
"responsible stakeholder" concept "a great legacy" he left to 
the U.S.-China relationship. End Summary 
 
--------------- 
Zoellick Speech 
--------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) During his speech entitled "China-U.S. Relations: From 
Shanghai Communiqui to Global Stakeholders" delivered at the 
third annual Barnett-Oksenberg Lecture in Shanghai on March 21, 
former Deputy Secretary Robert Zoellick urged China to become a 
more active player in the international arena.  The 
Barnett-Oksenberg Lecture is an annual lecture organized by the 
National Committee on U.S.-China Relations and the Shanghai 
Association of American Studies to commemorate the anniversary 
of the signing of the Shanghai Communiqui.  Zoellick said he 
introduced the concept of a "responsible stakeholder" because as 
China succeeds and its influence grows, it has an interest in 
working with other major countries to sustain and strengthen the 
international system.  The concept of "responsible stakeholder" 
did not apply only to China, but other participants that derived 
benefits from the international system including the United 
States, the EU, Japan, Russia, and India.  He identified four 
areas in which the United States and China had mutual interests 
and should act as "shared stakeholders."  These areas were 
Korea, Iran, Sudan and energy security.  The text of the speech 
can be found on the Consulate website at 
http://shanghai.usembassy-china.org.cn. 
 
---------------- 
China's Response 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) CPC 16th Central Committee Member Zhao Qizheng 
provided a response to Zoellick's speech at the event.  Zhao 
agreed that the "responsible stakeholder" concept was a useful 
and pragmatic tool that was very popular in China.  He said that 
China was, indeed, acting responsibly.  First, China was acting 
responsibly by developing its economy, which was its top 
priority.  It was also important to resolve domestic problems 
such as the gap between the coastal areas and interior and 
income disparities.  Second, China had become more active in the 
United Nations Security Council and had contributed a large 
number of peacekeepers to UN missions.  Third, China had become 
more active in cooperating on global problems such as 
environmental disasters, terrorism, and stopping communicable 
diseases. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Zhao agreed that it was important to have more 
cooperation between the United States and China.  He admitted 
that China was a bit defensive in the past, but said that this 
was in reaction to the U.S. policy of "congagement," which was a 
combination of containment and engagement.  He compared the 
U.S.-China relationship to a car and said that both drivers (the 
United States and China) needed good coordination to smoothly 
drive the car.  He noted that there were apprehensions on both 
sides about the relationship and more should be done to enhance 
mutual trust.  He noted that there could be more cooperation in 
areas such as energy security.  He also supported events such as 
 
SHANGHAI 00000167  002 OF 003 
 
 
the Barnett-Oksenberg lecture which provided people from both 
countries the opportunity to exchange ideas. 
 
----------------- 
Audience Reaction 
----------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Audience members, which included prominent Shanghai 
academics and business leaders, reacted positively to Zoellick's 
and Zhao's comments.  Questioners asked for views on U.S. policy 
towards China and also for views on China's foreign policy.  One 
audience member noted that as China becomes more active 
internationally, it would inevitably begin to interfere in the 
domestic affairs of other countries, which would contradict 
China's current non-interference policy.  Another asked whether 
the U.S.-China relationship was at stake because of Taiwan. 
 
¶6.  (U) Zoellick said that U.S. China policy was a general 
success, but that both sides needed to carefully manage the 
relationship, especially as China continues to become more 
influential.  He also noted that China has had extraordinary 
economic success and had become more skilled in multilateral 
diplomacy.  He was disappointed, however, that China had not 
been very active in the WTO Doha process.  In regard to 
non-interference, the norms of the international system have 
evolved and the UN Charter as well as other international law 
allow for interference in the internal affairs of other 
countries.  In addition, the world had become more integrated 
and it was impossible to discuss issues such as migration, 
energy, avian influenza, and greenhouse gases without touching 
on the internal issues of other nations.  He noted that these 
types of global issues required policymakers to think beyond 
categories and required countries to work as partners. 
 
¶7.  (U) Zhao said that just because China was not as vocal as 
the United States on international issues, it did not mean that 
China was not interested in international affairs.  China and 
the United States had different value systems and China did not 
like to make too many remarks that were not well thought 
through.  He added that China also preferred working on issues 
bilaterally rather than multilaterally.  Turning to the Doha 
round and Sudan, he said that China was not speechless.  On 
Iran, China has taken a strong interest in developments in Iran 
and has worked on the issue in both bilateral and multilateral 
channels. 
 
------------------- 
Academic Roundtable 
------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Prior to his speech, Zoellick participated in a 
roundtable with Shanghai academics and business leaders. 
Zoellick said there were three major developments that would 
shape the future: the struggle for the "soul of Islam", the rise 
of China, and how the United States would use its influence to 
deal with these changes.  He noted that Muslims were now trying 
to determine what being a Muslim meant and the United States and 
other countries including China could influence this debate.  On 
the rise of China, China has had phenomenal growth but faces 
serious internal challenges including job-creation demands, 
energy, environmental, health-care and educational problems. 
The "responsible stakeholder" concept was an attempt to help 
China, a rising power, to integrate itself in the international 
system.  Turning to the United States, Zoellick noted that 
Americans had anxieties about China's rise.  In addition, while 
the rest of the world saw the United States as the main catalyst 
and prime beneficiary of globalization, many in the United 
States had mixed views towards globalization. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences Vice President 
Huang Renwei asked for more clarification on the meaning of 
"responsible stakeholder", specifically, if China's 
responsibilities were internal or global.  Fudan University 
Center for American Studies Director Shen Dingli said that China 
was happy that the United States considered China to be a 
stakeholder and thought of China as a friend.  However, other 
people believed that the United States itself was not a 
"responsible stakeholder."  Specifically, the United States had 
 
SHANGHAI 00000167  003 OF 003 
 
 
acted irresponsibly by starting a war in Iraq, not criticizing 
former Japanese Prime Minister Koizumi for visiting the Yasukuni 
shrine, for putting financial sanctions on North Korea, and 
selling weapons to Taiwan.  Zoellick noted that the definition 
of what a "responsible stakeholder" should come from a discourse 
and not be determined by one party.  He also defended U.S. 
policies in Iraq, Korea, Taiwan and Japan. 
 
--------------------- 
Glowing Press Reviews 
--------------------- 
 
¶10.  (U) Zoellick's speech received wide coverage in the local 
Chinese press.  Local press reports noted Zoellick's emphasis on 
the significance of the close connections between the two 
countries, call for more international responsibilities to be 
borne by China, and positive comments on the Bush 
Administration's China policy.  Local papers also reported on 
Zoellick's decision not to go back into politics.  The concept 
of "stakeholder" proposed by Zoellick was also viewed by some 
papers as "a great legacy" he left to U.S.-China relations. 
JARRETT