07SOFIA364
BULGARIA'S PROSECUTOR GENERAL: WHAT A DIFFERENCE A
Mon Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO2271
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHSF #0364/01 0781025
ZNY CCCCC ZZH ZEL
R 191025Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3421
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SOFIA 000364 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOJ FOR SWARTZ, OPDAT/ICITAP FOR JONES, ALEXANDRE, 
EHRENSTOMM, ACKER 
 
C  O  R  R  E  C  T  E  D    C  O  P  Y (ADDED PARA MARKING FOR PARA 1) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2017 
TAGS: PGOV KJUS KCRM EU BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA'S PROSECUTOR GENERAL: WHAT A DIFFERENCE A 
YEAR MAKES 
 
REF: 2006SOFIA198 
 
SOFIA 00000364  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Amb. Beyrle, for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  A year into his term, Bulgaria's Prosecutor 
General Boris Velchev is staying true to his goal to reform 
the dysfunctional Prosecution Service and make it an 
effective law enforcement and judicial tool.  He has 
improved the country's image abroad by candidly speaking 
out against corruption and organized crime (OC), and has 
rebuilt some public confidence by cleaning up the 
prosecution service: 12 corrupt prosecutors have been fired 
or forced to resign, and 10 are under investigation. 
Despite noteworthy progress, Velchev still faces major 
hurdles, most notably the internal opposition loyal to his 
predecessor, an overwhelming case backlog, and lack of 
legally-admissible evidence against the big players. 
Though major OC figures and corrupt government officials 
are in his sights, the going is slow.  Perseverance, 
political backing, and plenty of money will all be 
essential to get the job done. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
THE CRIME FIGHTER WHO IS RESTORING BULGARIA'S REPUTATION 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
¶2.  (C)  Boris Velchev's appointment as Prosecutor General 
(PG) in February 2006 was a breath of fresh air for both 
Bulgarians and European Union representatives.  A former 
legal advisor to President Purvanov and a respected 
academician, Velchev was an outsider to the system.  His 
immediate predecessor, Nikola Filchev, left office in near- 
disgrace, accused of deliberate manipulation of cases, 
arbitrary decisions, and failure to prosecute a single 
major organized crime figure.  The Prosecution Service was 
widely considered a political instrument used for personal- 
score settling and crime-hiding.  The service's failure to 
indict a single suspect in over 120 contract killings, many 
in broad daylight, was a glaring testament to its utter, 
deliberate mismanagement. 
 
¶3.  (U) An outsider to the Prosecution Service, Velchev had 
to confront hacks cultivated by his predecessor in a system 
tightly bound by legislative limitations on investigations. 
Over the past year, Velchev has polished up the image of 
the prosecution service and built up public confidence in 
the institution.  He became the first high-level official 
to speak openly about the links between organized crime and 
the political elite, underlining that Bulgaria would be "a 
much safer country if a few dozen people were sent to 
jail."  He created an Anti-Corruption Unit within the 
Prosecution to focus specifically on organized crime, 
corruption, and money laundering.  Velchev also reached out 
to other government watchdog agencies to establish more 
formal information sharing.  His energy and resolve in 
tackling high-profile shortfalls in the prosecution service 
may have spared the country a prosecution safeguard clause 
to its EU membership. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Velchev's actions are catching the public's 
attention.  Local media and NGO observers favorably note 
the greater prosecutorial transparency and activism.  The 
media regularly reports on important criminal cases as the 
prosecutors begin to speak candidly on record.  A July 2006 
survey attested to the improved public perceptions -- 
Velchev was ranked fourth most popular public official, 
after President Georgi Purvanov, Sofia mayor Boyko Borisov, 
and Culture Minister Stefan Danailov. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
CRIME FIGHTING STARTS WITH HOUSE CLEANING 
----------------------------------------- 
¶5.  (U)  Velchev's first priority remains to clean up the 
corrupt ranks of the prosecution service.  Shortly after 
assuming office, he ordered an internal inspection and 
requested a special investigation of contacts between 
magistrates and individuals suspected of engaging in 
criminal activities.  The results came four months later, 
when, for the first time ever, the Prosecution Service 
admitted to unethical ties between senior prosecutors and 
individuals under investigation.  The inspection showed 
that two high-ranking prosecutors had close ties with a 
local businessman -- with a mafia-style nickname "Mazzola" 
-- who had been investigated for 14 different crimes. 
Velchev swiftly requested the dismissal of one prosecutor, 
while the other voluntarily resigned.  The internal 
inspection continues to bring results -- to date, seven 
prosecutors have resigned, five were dismissed (including 
two of Filchev's close circle), and at least 10 have been 
 
SOFIA 00000364  002 OF 003 
 
 
investigated for malfeasance. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Velchev also established a special unit of 
prosecutors-investigators, his own innovation, to pursue 25 
high-profile cases of corruption, organized crime, money 
laundering, and smuggling.  The special unit of five young 
prosecutors is headed by Sofia deputy regional prosecutor 
Bozhidar Dzhambazov.  (Dzhambazov is also in charge of the 
most publicized corruption case against former chief of 
Sofia's Heating Utility Company Valentin Dimitrov, accused 
of gross embezzlement.)  Five months after its launch, the 
unit produced its first results -- an indictment against a 
former Sofia regional prosecutor for abuse of office and 
another indictment against eight persons involved in a 
major contraband scheme. 
 
----------------------- 
FACING TOUGH BATTLES... 
----------------------- 
¶7.  (C)  Despite noteworthy progress in cleaning up the 
Prosecution Service, Velchev still faces major hurdles. 
One challenge is internal to the Service, where Filchev's 
followers view reforms with suspicion and are responding 
with bureaucratic inertia or rear-guard action.  Two of 
Velchev's deputies, Mitio Markov and Hristo Manchev, are 
Filchev's cronies whom Velchev cannot touch until the end 
of their five-year elected terms in 2009.  Velchev has 
worked to diminish the old guard's influence by empowering 
a younger generation of prosecutors, like Dzhambazov. 
These new ranks are extremely loyal to Velchev and readily 
implement his reforms, yet even they admit that systemic 
change has not yet reached full momentum. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Another hurdle is the atrocious backlog of cases, 
which, according to Velchev, has acquired the proportion of 
an "epidemic." Some 10,000 cases have gone past the statute 
of limitations, effectively rendering the perpetrators 
pardoned.  In a particularly notorious case, a suspect was 
murdered before the prosecutor indicted him for any of the 
seventeen charges against him.  While Velchev publicly came 
down on the errant prosecutor, the case highlighted the 
extent of the problem. 
 
¶9.  (C)  Perhaps Velchev's greatest disappointment is the 
Prosecution's failure to indict a single major organized- 
crime figure.  As he acknowledged in a recent interview, 
"the 'thick-necks' are continuing to parade their 
impunity."  This is a hard blow for a man who'd hoped to 
move against a major OC player within months of starting 
office (reftel).  Part of the challenge is inexperience -- 
many police investigators and prosecutors lack the 
necessary expertise to conduct complex organized-crime 
investigations.  Yet another is political will -- many of 
the erstwhile criminals have become powerful businessmen, 
and some are now generous political sponsors. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
... AND CORRUPT OFFICIALS 
----------------------------------------- 
¶10.  (C)  Velchev openly admits that corruption exists all 
across the political spectrum and is vehement that "there 
will be no protection for anyone if there is evidence that 
a crime has been committed."  So far, eleven MPs have been 
stripped of immunity on Velchev's request, including an MP 
elected on the ticket of the Socialist-led Coalition for 
Bulgaria.  (That MP, Toma Tomov, is the only Roma member of 
the National Assembly.)  Nevertheless, progress on 
investigations has been sluggish, and only one case, that 
of an Ataka MP accused of pedophilia, has reached the trial 
stage.  While publicly Velchev is optimistic about bringing 
more corrupt officials to trial, privately he is frustrated 
by lack of solid evidence against major political players. 
"The files are empty," he recently vented to the 
Ambassador; indeed, no serious observer doubts that the old 
guard simply emptied the case folders. 
 
--------- 
COMMENT 
--------- 
¶11.  (C)  Velchev is solidly in the reformers camp, but he 
operates in a political environment that often ties his 
hands.  He has done well in areas directly under his 
control -- the Prosecution Service is in better shape than 
it was last February, and some of the most blatant 
offenders have been removed in disgrace.  Yet his 'war' 
against organized crime and public corruption moves slowly, 
primarily because of the major interests involved.  His 
greatest challenge is the symbiotic relationship between 
 
SOFIA 00000364  003 OF 003 
 
 
dirty money and political interests that still plays a role 
in Bulgarian politics.  To effectively battle it, he needs 
the full support of reform-minded politicians committed to 
weeding out cronyism and crime, more institutional 
capacity, and plenty of funding.  Follow-through on our 
plans for a three-year prosecutorial training initiative 
using SEED performance funds is essential both to help 
Velchev build a stronger team, and as a strong signal of 
U.S. support for the central figure in the fight against 
crime and corruption here.  END COMMENT. 
BEYRLE