07TELAVIV824
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0824/01 0750923
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160923Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0035
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 1823
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8575
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 1751
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2638
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 1813
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9614
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2547
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9466
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 9941
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6557
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 3953
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 8832
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3049
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 4968
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6252
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000824 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iraq 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Wednesday FM Livni discussed with 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice ways to respond to the formation 
 
SIPDIS 
of a Palestinian unity government and that Arab pace initiative. 
Ha'aretz reported that Secretary Rice expressed the "need for an 
Israeli-Arab reconciliation to accompany ... the resolution of the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict," which Ha'aretz said was a view shared 
by Livni.  The Jerusalem Post and other media quoted Rice as saying 
during her meeting with Livni: "I have not talked to people about 
modification [of the Saudi initiative].  I think it's a favorable 
thing that they are putting forward something, but ... it's not a 
negotiating position as I understand it, but rather a framework, a 
vision for how Israel and the Arabs might reconcile." 
 
Media said that Israel was quick to reject the new Palestinian 
government, which will be sworn in on Saturday, because its platform 
does not explicitly recognize Israel's right to exist.  Ha'aretz 
quoted the Prime Minister's Office as saying on Thursday that the 
platform of the new Palestinian unity government is a step backward 
from the peace process and "flies in the face" of the international 
community's demands.  The Jerusalem Post quoted senior GOI officials 
as saying on Thursday that reviving the idea of unilateral 
withdrawal is one of the options being considered inside the Prime 
Minister's Office in the wake of the formation of a PA unity 
government whose platform Israel views as intransigent.  The 
officials were quoted as saying that PM Ehud Olmert did not believe 
that Israel can afford to remain at a diplomatic standstill and that 
if there were no Palestinian government with which to negotiate a 
two-state solution, Israel once again must begin drawing borders on 
its own.  The Jerusalem Post quoted Olmert's spokeswoman Miri Eisin 
as saying: "We won't even deal with or recognize members of the 
government whom we have dealt with in the past."  Major media quoted 
David Baker, spokesman for the Prime Minister's Office, as saying: 
"Instead of recognizing Israel and renouncing terror, the emerging 
Palestinian government has decided to spring backwards."  "This is 
not what we were hoping for and flies in the face of the 
international community's demands of the Palestinians. Once again, 
they haven't provided the goods," he added.  Ha'aretz reported that 
Israel urged the Quartet to maintain the aid embargo imposed on the 
Palestinian government following the electoral victory of Hamas, 
unless it fulfilled the Quartet's three preconditions.  Ha'aretz 
said that the unity deal instead refers vaguely to respect for peace 
agreements and affirms the Palestinians' right to resist and defend 
themselves against Israeli aggression, though it also calls for 
maintaining and expanding a truce with Israel. 
 
The media reported that on Thursday the PA announcement on the 
formation of a national unity government was received with varied 
reactions from world leaders.  Ha'aretz quoted White House Press 
Secretary Tony Snow as saying: "Our position has been consistent, 
 
SIPDIS 
which is, you need a Palestinian government that is going to, in 
fact, abide by the Quartet conditions."  Yediot quoted diplomatic 
sources in the EU as saying in Brussels on Thursday that Europe will 
resume its assistance to the PA, following the formations of the new 
Palestinian government.  Ha'aretz noted that France intends to 
support the new Palestinian government and will cooperate with it, 
according to PA foreign minister-designate Ziad Abu Amar. Abu Amar 
was quoted as saying that French FM Philippe Douste-Blazy invited 
him to a meeting in Paris and informed him that he hoped "a new page 
in the relations between the Hamas government and the international 
community" could begin.  Ha'aretz and Yediot reported that, speaking 
to reporters Thursday, EU spokeswoman Emma Udwin said that the 
European Commission had not yet assessed the new government's 
program.  Ha'aretz wrote that in Moscow, Russian Foreign Ministry 
spokesman Mikhail Kamynin welcomed the development. "It is 
inarguably an important event in terms of consolidation of the 
Palestinian ranks," he was quoted as saying in a statement, noting 
that the Mecca Agreement took into account the Quartet conditions. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted PM Ismail Haniyeh of Hamas as saying that he hoped 
the new Palestinian government would launch a new era for the 
Palestinians, putting an end to bloody Palestinian infighting while 
satisfying international demands and improving the Palestinian image 
in advance of the March 28-29 Arab League summit in Saudi Arabia. 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Haniyeh announced on Thursday that 
the PA unity government enjoys the backing of the Arabs and 
Europeans. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that, in a live video speech to AIPAC on Tuesday, 
Olmert spoke out strongly against a rapid US exit from Iraq.  Olmert 
was saying that Israel is worried that a hasty US withdrawal from 
Iraq could topple the Hashemite regime in Jordan.   Ha'aretz quoted 
senior GOI officials as saying later that Olmert was expressing his 
opinion "solely on the professional aspect" of a pullout and 
insisted, as did Olmert in his speech, that Israel has no interest 
in getting involved in America's domestic political dispute over 
Iraq. Nevertheless, Ha'aretz said that the official Israeli position 
as expressed by Olmert contradicts the views of a majority of 
Americans, who favor a speedy pullout.  Ha'aretz wrote that Olmert 
spoke out publicly in part due to an assessment he has received from 
the security services, who say a US withdrawal from Iraq before that 
country has stabilized would have immediate repercussions on the 
domestic situation in Jordan. These effects could even threaten the 
stability of the Hashemite monarchy. Israel views Jordan as a 
strategic asset whose stability is a vital Israeli interest. 
However, Ha'aretz said that Israel is not concerned solely about 
Jordan's fate; it fears that stability throughout the region would 
be undermined if the United States is viewed as having lost to the 
extremists. "Those who are concerned for Israel's security, for the 
security of the Gulf states and for the stability of the entire 
Middle East should recognize the need for American success in Iraq, 
and a responsible exit," Olmert told the AIPAC conference.  Ha'aretz 
reported that one day earlier, FM Tzipi Livni told AIPAC that "in a 
region where impressions are important, countries must be careful 
not to demonstrate weakness and surrender to extremists ... It is 
[also] true for Iraq."  The daily reported that Defense Minister 
Amir Peretz, who met in Washington this week with Defense Secretary 
Robert Gates and several senior senators, expressed a similar view. 
Ha'aretz reported that Olmert, explaining his position to a visiting 
delegation from the American Jewish Committee the day after his 
AIPAC speech, said the question of why America began the war in Iraq 
is currently secondary.  What matters, he argued, is that given the 
present state of affairs in Iraq, if America were to leave now, it 
would lose its authority throughout the Middle East.   Ha'aretz 
wrote that on Thursday Olmert urged a visiting delegation of leaders 
of the Reform Movement to reconsider a motion urging the USG to set 
a firm timetable for an American withdrawal from Iraq.  The 
movement's executive, representing some 700 Reform congregations 
across the US, approved the motion by a large majority earlier this 
week.  Olmert reportedly reiterated his argument that a hasty 
withdrawal could endanger Israel's security as well as efforts to 
halt Iran's nuclear program.  But Ha'aretz reported that the Reform 
leaders turned down his request, saying they believe a rapid 
withdrawal would serve Israeli and Western interests better than a 
prolonged American stay in Iraq. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that, "in what could be an indication of 
slowly shifting Saudi attitudes toward Israel, Dr. Zoher Hareji, a 
Saudi representative appeared on Thursday "for what may have been 
the first time on a television panel discussion with an official 
Israeli spokesperson" -- Olmert's spokeswoman Miri Eisin.  The two 
discussed the Saudi peace initiative and other regional issues from 
Jeddah and Tel Aviv studios of Al Hurra-TV. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the IDF's Advocate-General, Avihai 
Mandelblit, has ordered an investigation into alleged forbidden 
actions by IDF troops in Nablus, who reportedly used the "neighbor 
procedure" against residents of the city two weeks ago.  The alleged 
violation was first reported by AP. 
 
The three major Hebrew-language dailies led with remarks made by 
Olmert in a speech to his Kadima party's governing council.  Olmert 
was quoted as saying: "I am an unpopular prime minister, the polls 
say so."  However, he added: "I intend to be working for you for a 
long time yet."  He cited what he said were the proper decisions he 
made during last summer's war in Lebanon. 
 
Yediot and Israel Radio reported that the five permanent members of 
the UN Security Council have reached agreement on new sanctions to 
be imposed on Iran.  The radio, which reported that Germany is part 
of those efforts, said that the draft resolution does not include a 
total embargo on arms to Iran.  Israel Radio said that UN member 
states are required to use restraint regarding sales of aircraft, 
tanks, and over heavy weapons to Iran.  The radio reported that it 
as resolved to freeze the assts of 13 companies and organizations, 
and of 25 individuals -- half of them officers in Iran's 
Revolutionary Guards.  Israel Radio also reported that French 
Defense Minister Michele Alliot-Marie has called to solve the Iran 
crisis through diplomatic means, as a military action might set 
ablaze the entire Muslim world. 
 
Speaking on Israel Radio this morning, Deputy Defense Minister 
Ephraim Sneh said that Israel should negotiate with PA Chairman 
[President] Mahmoud Abbas, in accordance with the guidelines of the 
Palestinian unity government's guidelines.  Sneh was quoted as 
saying that Abbas should bring the conclusions of such talks to a 
referendum, which Sneh said is the only way to remove Hamas from 
power. 
 
Leading media reported that, as the Palestinian negotiations 
concluded late on Wednesday, Hamas and Fatah forces traded fire in 
the northern Gaza Strip, killing one Fatah fighter and wounding nine 
people, including five bystanders, according to security officials. 
 This morning Israel Radio reported that militants shot a 
Palestinian officer to death in the Gaza Strip. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Yitzhak Levanon, Israeli Ambassador 
to the UN institutions in Geneva, told the newspaper on Thursday 
that the UN' Human Rights Council is looking to appoint John Dugard 
as a permanent investigator on Israel's actions in the territories, 
which he has in the past. 
 
Leading media noted that an increasing number of Labor Party MKs and 
officials tend to support former PM Ehud Barak. 
 
Ha'aretz (English Ed.) cited the outrage of foreign journalist over 
a Government Press Office requirement that they fill a form asking 
them to disclose the purpose of their visit. 
 
A Yediot headline about Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the mastermind of 
the 9/11 attacks, reads: "Satan's Confession." 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Ha'aretz reported that on Thursday Edgar 
Bronfman, President of the World Jewish Congress, unexpectedly 
announced the dismissal of Rabbi Israel Singer, a leader in the 
congress and Jewish circles.  The media wrote that officials from 
the Israeli and European branches expressed outrage at the decision 
and threatened to pull out of the organization. 
 
Maariv reported that Hollywood actor Leonardo DiCaprio, who 
concluded his visit to Israel on Thursday, met with Vice PM Shimon 
Peres for several hours on Sunday.  The newspaper reported that the 
two discussed the peace process and various environment-related 
issues. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner and diplomatic correspondent 
Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "What 
Livni did this week, and which Rice echoed to some extent in her 
remarks after their meeting, was to propose to the [Arab] leaders 
that they reverse the order [of the Saudi initiative]." 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: " Israel should not reject the Saudi initiative.  Without 
the right-of-return component, it is a serious and worthy 
proposal." 
 
Palestinian affairs correspondent Danny Rubinstein wrote from 
Ramallah in Ha'aretz: "To the Palestinians, the unity government is 
the only way to stop the street battles." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Waiting For the Cherry Trees to Blossom" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner and diplomatic correspondent 
Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (3/16): 
"The fact of the matter, says a senior Israeli official, is that it 
is necessary to welcome the idea inherent in the Saudi initiative 
and that the Arab world is prepared to accept Israel.  However, the 
refugee problem is stuck like a bone in everyone's throat.  Israel 
will not agree to absorb even a single refugee in its territory, but 
the Arab League cannot concede on this issue, which is most sacred 
to the Palestinians.  What Livni did this week, and which Rice 
echoed to some extent in her remarks after their meeting, was to 
propose to the leaders that they reverse the order.  Instead of 
waiting with the normalization for Israeli-Palestinian peace -- 
normalize now, and thus help advance the peace process, Rice said 
that there is a 'clear need for an Israeli-Arab reconciliation to 
accompany... the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.' 
Note that she said 'to accompany' -- that is, there is not 
necessarily a need to wait for it to come only afterwards." 
 
II.  "Peace or Fraud?" 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (3/16): "The [Saudi] offer naturally includes recognition of 
Israel.  But it is not sure which Israel the Arab states are 
prepared to recognize.  If it is Israel as a Jewish state -- in 
accordance with the [1947] United Nations Resolution -- the 
initiative should be praised.  But if its major demand is for the 
right of return [of Palestinian refugees], this does not constitute 
recognition of the state of Israel, but a deception.... The 
stalemate may lead to the elimination, albeit gradual, of Israel -- 
a Jewish and democratic state in favor of the dream of 'one large 
state.  The right of return on the Palestinian side and the 
settlement drive on the Israeli side also lead to the same 
nightmare.... This is why Israel should not reject the Saudi 
initiative.  Without the right-of-return component, it is a serious 
and worthy proposal." 
 
III.  "The Only Alternative Is Civil War" 
 
Palestinian affairs correspondent Danny Rubinstein wrote from 
Ramallah in Ha'aretz (3/16): "The news that a Palestinian unity 
government had finally been formed brought a sigh of relief to 
Ramallah, coming as it did after long months of negotiations, 
bloodshed and fears of civil war.  In meetings with acquaintances 
here on Thursday, I heard not a single word of criticism or 
disappointment -- only hope.  'What's important to us now is that 
there be a little quiet and we stop killing each other,' explained a 
doctor at the new Sheikh Zaid hospital.  To the Palestinians, the 
unity government is the only way to stop the street battles. 
Whether or not it is a good government, or how Israel deals with it, 
are less important: The only alternative is civil war.... One can 
certainly find indications in this government of flexibility and 
pragmatism on Hamas's part: For instance, none of the Hamas 
ministers arrested by Israel following [IDF Corporal Gilad] Shalit's 
abduction are included in it.  Why not?  A senior Palestinian 
journalist explained: 'Because they want to be practical.  They want 
the new government to function well, and not to be only a national 
symbol.'" 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iraq: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
 
Deputy Managing Editor Anshel Pfeffer wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "The Eastern Front [may] 
once again become a threat for Israel." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"The Return of the Eastern Front" 
 
Deputy Managing Editor Anshel Pfeffer wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (3/16): "Four years ago, 
when the United Sates and Great Britain brought Saddam Hussein's 
rule in Iraq to an end, there was a collective sigh of relief within 
the Israeli defense establishment.... Two facts, though, seem 
unavoidable.  Any prospective president planning to win the November 
2008 US election will have to promise a clear time frame for 
extricating American troops.  And whenever that evacuation is over, 
there will still be sizable groups of terrorists of various stripes 
and colors holding out who will celebrate the US departure as their 
victory.  At that moment, the Eastern Front will once again become a 
threat for Israel." 
 
JONES