06BUENOSAIRES34
ARGENTINA -- 2006 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT
Fri Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0034/01 0061417
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061417Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5246
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 5010
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ JAN MONTEVIDEO 5197
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 4832
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 1812
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 2698
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BUENOS AIRES 000034 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA, WHA/BSC, AND WHA/EPSC 
DEPT PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 

TAGS: EINV EFIN ETRD ELAB KTDB PGOV OPIC USTR

SUBJECT: ARGENTINA -- 2006 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 

(PART 2 OF 2) 

 

REF: 05 STATE 202943 

 

The following is the second part of Embassy Buenos Aires' 

2006 Investment Climate Statement for Argentina.  Begin text 

of Part II: 

 

--------------------------------------------- --------- 

A.9. Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 

--------------------------------------------- ---------- 

 

Law 17811 of 1968 regulates public securities offerings.  The 

Argentine Securities and Exchange Commission (Comision 

Nacional de Valores) is the federal agency that regulates 

securities markets offerings.  Securities and accounting 

standards are transparent and consistent with international 

norms. 

 

U.S. banks and securities firms are well represented in 

Argentina and are among the most dynamic players in the local 

capital markets.  The private pension fund system -- 

consolidated in 1995 -- provided an important growing base 

for capital markets until the beginning of the recent crisis. 

 In July 2003, the government began requiring foreign banks 

to disclose to the public the nature and extent to which 

their foreign parent banks guarantee their branches or 

subsidiaries in Argentina. 

 

------------------------- 

A.10.  Political Violence 

------------------------- 

 

Protests, marches, and roadblocks directed at the national, 

provincial and municipal governments are commonplace in 

Argentina, but their number, size, and the likelihood of 

accompanying violence have decreased since the crisis.  There 

have been no cases of overtly political violence since the 

April 2003 national presidential election.  During 2004, 

however, in what appear to have been mostly unrelated 

incidents, unknown persons placed thirteen bombs, which 

either exploded or were detonated by police, and four other 

incendiary devices in banks and other commercial 

establishments.  One bank guard was killed and a policeman 

seriously injured in December 2004.  In 2005, there were 

approximately 20 incidents in which local groups were 

involved in bombings, attempted bombings, or arson, mostly 

against U.S. businesses (Citibank, Bank Boston, Blockbuster, 

and McDonald's in particular).  Anti-American pamphlets or 

graffiti were found at most of the 2005 incidents, none of 

which resulted in injury or death. 

 

------------------- 

A.11.a.  Corruption 

------------------- 

 

Government corruption and private sector business fraud are 

the subject of frequent complaints from U.S. investors, and 

U.S. businesses have identified corruption in Argentina as a 

significant problem for trade and investment, particularly in 

procurement, regulatory systems, tax collection, and health 

care administration.  Surveys by Transparency International 

and other business and academic groups have contributed to 

more open debate about corruption and fraud, however.  Some 

foreign firms tend to be at a competitive disadvantage since, 

in certain industries, they are more likely to pay taxes than 

their domestic competitors.  There are strong indications 

that the government of Argentina is trying to change the 

culture of non-payment by stepping-up enforcement efforts and 

encouraging the use of credit card purchases while at the 

same time using the media to increase public awareness of tax 

obligations and to shame evaders.  While Argentina,s growing 

economy is primarily responsible for the government of 

Argentina,s solid fiscal performance, anti-evasion efforts 

were a factor in the federal government,s record tax 

collections of over 118.5 billion pesos in 2005 (compared 

with around 98.3 billion in 2004 and 72 billion in 2003), 

with revenues increasing from all taxes. 

 

The government of Argentina maintains that official 

corruption has decreased dramatically as a result of the 

privatization of most state enterprises over the past decade. 

 

BUENOS AIR 00000034  002 OF 004 

 

 

 Argentina is a party to the OAS Anti-Corruption Convention 

and ratified the OECD Anti-Corruption Convention in 2001. 

The government has regulations against bribery of government 

officials, but enforcement is uncertain.  An anti-corruption 

office under the Ministry of Justice reviews the financial 

disclosure statements that are now required of all senior 

public officials.  Press reports indicate, however, that some 

public officials have refused to provide the required 

disclosure statements on the grounds that compliance would 

expose them to kidnapping attempts.  The anti-corruption 

office also carries out investigations into cases of alleged 

corruption involving Executive branch officials. 

 

Inefficiencies in the Argentine judicial system slow efforts 

to stem corruption.  Argentine laws do not provide for 

plea-bargaining, so many corruption charges are difficult to 

prosecute.  As a result, convictions are rare. 

 

---------------------------------------- 

A.11.b. Bilateral Investment Agreements 

---------------------------------------- 

 

The governments of Argentina and the United States signed a 

BIT in 1991.  The agreement was amended, ratified by the 

Congresses of both countries, and entered into force on 

October 20, 1994.  Argentina does not have a bilateral tax 

treaty (Treaty for the Mutual Avoidance of Double Taxation) 

with the United States. 

 

Over the past decade, the government of Argentina has signed 

over 50 bilateral treaties for the protection and promotion 

of investment, including with all of its major trade and 

investment partners.  Forty-four of these agreements have 

been ratified by the Argentine Congress and are in force. 

More information regarding Argentina's bilateral tax and 

investment treaties is available at www.infoleg.gov.ar. 

 

 

--------------------------------------------- -------- 

A.11.c.  OPIC and other Investment Insurance Programs 

--------------------------------------------- -------- 

 

The government of Argentina signed a comprehensive agreement 

with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) in 

¶1989.  Argentina is also a member of the World Bank's 

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). 

 

-------------- 

A.11.d.  Labor 

-------------- 

 

Argentine workers are among the most highly educated in Latin 

America.  Argentine workers were also relatively well paid 

prior to the peso devaluation in January 2002.  High 

inflation following the devaluation eroded the value of their 

wages in 2002.  Wages in dollar terms are now more 

competitive, even taking into account Argentina's relatively 

high social security charges and other taxes.  As of the 

third quarter of 2005, the official unemployment rate was 

11.1 percent, but this number excludes recipients of 

government assistance to unemployed heads of households.  If 

those recipients were included, unemployment would be 

approximately 14.1 percent. 

 

The government of Argentina passed a modest labor reform law 

in 2000 to address rigidities in the labor market (i.e., by 

increasing collective bargaining flexibility, extending trial 

employment periods, and lowering payroll taxes for new 

permanent hires).  However, the anticipated growth in 

employment did not materialize, as the reforms coincided with 

a deepening of the economic recession produced by foreign and 

domestic factors.  Following the acceleration of the 

financial crisis beginning in December 2001, many workers 

left the formal labor force and instead began to work 

informally, as employers sought to avoid high pension, social 

security, and other taxes on formal employment.  The 

government passed a new labor law reform in 2004, which did 

not result in significant changes to the existing regime. 

 

--------------------------------------- 

 

BUENOS AIR 00000034  003 OF 004 

 

 

A.11.e. Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 

--------------------------------------- 

 

Argentina has two types of tax-exempt trading areas: Foreign 

Trade Zones (FTZs), which are found throughout the country; 

and the more comprehensive Special Customs Areas (SCAs), 

which are located only in Tierra del Fuego Province and whose 

benefits apply only to already established firms. 

 

Law 24331 of 1994 establishes the FTZ regime for Argentina. 

Argentine law defines an FTZ as a territory outside the 

""general customs area"" (GCA, i.e., the rest of Argentina) 

where neither the inflows nor outflows of exported final 

merchandise are subject to tariffs, non-tariff barriers, or 

other taxes on goods.  Goods produced within a FTZ generally 

cannot be shipped to the GCA, unless they are capital goods 

not produced in the rest of the country.  The labor, 

sanitary, ecological, safety, criminal, and financial 

regulations within FTZs are the same as those that prevail in 

the GCA.  Foreign firms get national treatment in FTZs. 

 

Under the current law, the Executive Power may create one FTZ 

per province, with certain exceptions.  More than one FTZ per 

province may be allowed in sparsely populated border regions 

(although this provision has not been fully utilized).  Thus 

far, the National Executive Power has permitted FTZs in most 

of the 24 Argentine provinces.  The most active FTZ is in La 

Plata, the capital of Buenos Aires Province. 

 

Merchandise shipped from the GCA to a FTZ may receive export 

incentive benefits, if applicable, only after the goods are 

exported from the FTZ to a third country destination. 

Merchandise shipped from the GCA to a FTZ and later exported 

to another country is not exempt from export taxes.  Any 

value added in FTZs and re-exports from FTZ is exempt from 

export taxes. 

 

Law 19640, passed in 1972, codifies the Special Customs Area 

(SCA) rules for Argentina.  Unlike FTZ manufactured goods, 

products manufactured in an SCA may enter the GCA free from 

taxes or tariffs.  In addition, the government may enact 

special regulations that exempt products shipped through an 

SCA (but not manufactured therein) from all forms of taxation 

except excise taxes.  The SCA program provides benefits for 

established companies that meet production and employment 

objectives. 

 

The SCA program applies only to Tierra del Fuego Province. 

The government reduced some SCA benefits in the early 1990s. 

Most of these benefits were later reestablished, but only for 

those firms previously established in Tierra del Fuego 

Province.  The SCA program is scheduled to expire at the end 

of 2013. 

 

 

--------------------------------------------- 

A.11.f. Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 

--------------------------------------------- 

 

The United States and Spain are the two largest sources of 

foreign investment in Argentina.  U.S. investment is 

concentrated in financial services, agribusiness, energy, 

petrochemicals, food processing, household products, and 

motor vehicle manufacturing.  Many U.S. firms have 

substantially written-down the value of their Argentine 

investments in response to the devaluation and pesification 

of previously dollar-denominated contracts.  Five U.S. power 

companies elected to abandon their Argentine investments in 

2003 and 2004, to reduce continuing losses.  Other important 

sources of investment capital include Chile, Italy, France, 

U.K., Germany, Canada, and Japan.  During a visit to 

Argentina by PRC President Hu Jintao in November 2004, public 

and private Chinese companies signed letters-of-intent for 

sizeable investments over the coming decade in Argentina,s 

transportation, hydrocarbons, mining, construction, 

telecommunications, and tourism sectors.  Chinese investment 

in Argentina to date, however, has been relatively light. 

 

Important foreign investors in Argentina include AES, ALCAN, 

American Airlines, Barrick, Bell South, BP, Brahma, British 

 

BUENOS AIR 00000034  004 OF 004 

 

 

Gas, Bristol-Myers, Bunge, Cargill, Carrefour, Cencosud, 

CDSI, Chevron-Texaco, CitiGroup, CMS, Coca-Cola, Crown Cork, 

Cyanamid, Daimler-Chrysler, Delta, Diamond Shamrock, Dow 

Chemical, Dupont, Duke Energy, Eastman Kodak, Eli Lilly, 

ExxonMobil, Federal Express, Fiat, Fleet-Boston, Ford, Four 

Seasons, France Telecom, General Electric, General Mills, 

General Motors, Gillette, HP, Hilton, Honeywell, IBM, John 

Deere, Kimberley Clark, Kraft, Lockheed-Martin, Marriott, 

McDonald's, Merck, Motorola, Nabisco, Pepsi, Petrobras, 

Peugeot, Pfizer, Philip Morris, PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 

Procter & Gamble, Renault, Repsol, Scania, Schering-Plough, 

Shell, Sheraton, Swift Armour, Squibb, TCI, Telefonica of 

Spain, Tyco Electronics, 3M, Toyota, Union Camp, United, 

United Technologies, UPS, Volkswagen, Wal-Mart, and Xerox. 

 

Argentine firms increasingly invested abroad during the 1990s 

(particularly in Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay), although the 

country has remained a large net recipient of foreign direct 

investment. 

 

The Argentine Ministry of Economy (http://www.mecon.gov.ar) 

and the Investor's Information Service for Argentina 

(http://www.infoarg.org) have additional detailed information 

on foreign direct investment in Argentina. 

GUTIERREZ 


=======================CABLE ENDS============================

"