09BERLIN1449
MEDIA REACTION: POTUS IN CHINA, BURMA, CLIMATE,
Mon Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO9169
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1449/01 3201308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161308Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5779
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1724
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0441
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0957
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2467
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1481
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0656
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BERLIN 001449 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO KGHG GM US AF BM CH IR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: POTUS IN CHINA, BURMA, CLIMATE, 
AFGHANISTAN, 
IRAN;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories 
¶2.   U.S.-Chinese Relations 
¶3.   U.S.-Burmese Relations 
¶4.   APEC--Climate Protection 
¶5.   Iranian Nuclear Conflict 
¶6.   Future of Guant namo Prisoners 
¶7.   Strategy on Afghanistan 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
ZDF-TV's early evening newscast heute and ARD-TV's early evening 
newscast Tagesschau opened with reports on Enke's memorial service. 
The majority of papers opened with reports on the SPD party congress 
in Dresden and the SPD's demand for the re-introduction of the asset 
tax.  Sueddeutsche headlined: "The World Postpones Climate 
Protection," while Tagesspiegel opened with the memorial service at 
Hannover's soccer stadium for Germany's goalkeeper Robert Enke. 
 
¶2.   U.S.-Chinese Relations 
 
In an editorial headlined "Rival, not partner," Sueddeutsche (11/16) 
remarked that "America's President is still searching for his role 
in the relationship with a stubborn China."  The paper added: "The 
strategic negligence of Asia during the Bush years is supposed to be 
over now.  Washington wants to engage more deeply again in the 
world's economically most dynamic region....  President Obama has 
set the right tone during his courtesy call.  The people in Asia 
like to hear this message; they don't want to be left alone with 
China's rising influence and power consciousness.  Washington is 
needed as military power as well as an economic counterbalance to 
Beijing....  However, the friendly tone cannot hide the fact the 
U.S. faces huge problems in Asia and has not yet found any response 
to them.  Particularly U.S.-Chinese relations must be urgently 
redefined.  Both sides have maneuvered themselves into a situation 
of mutual dependency that poses dangers, as just seen during the 
economic crisis.  The U.S. import cheap Chinese products on credit; 
China keeps its currency undervalued and buys American government 
bonds with the gains from the export surplus....  As this model is 
now collapsing, the U.S. and China are increasingly seeking refuge 
in protectionism.  It is therefore absolutely not clear how the 
relationship of both countries will go on." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/14) headlined "Not yet a Superpower - But 
America believes it can no longer live without China," and analyzed: 
"America is hoping that China will help it overcome urgent 
international problems. From the American point of view, these are: 
strengthening the world economy, climate change, the nuclear dispute 
with North Korea and Iran, and stabilizing Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
However, China won't rush to give in to the requests....  Beijing is 
insecure and lacks trust in America." 
 
In a separate editorial, Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/14) stated: "In 
Tokyo, President Obama underscored the significance of the alliance 
with Japan.  This is good and continues the right approach of the 
previous governments.  The better relations are between America and 
its Asian allies, the less we have to be concerned that China's rise 
will unhinge the power structure in Asia." 
 
Berliner Zeitung (11/16) analyzed: "Washington's diplomats had 
problems to describe the relationship with words that are 
politically correct and still sound honest enough for the President. 
 The choice was not great.  At the end, there was the desire for a 
strategic partnership.  Although this slogan sounds more credible 
out of Obama's mouth than out Bush's, the interests of both 
countries are difficult to match.  Obama aims at renewing America's 
power and leading role in the world.  China's Communist Party wants 
to push back American's influence and take over the role of a lead 
 
BERLIN 00001449  002 OF 005 
 
 
nation. 
 
Under the headline "Hu is making life difficult for Obama," 
Handelsblatt (11/16) reported: "During the APEC summit, China's 
leadership is unconstructive concerning currency policy-and thus 
annoys the United States.  President Obama must expect Beijing to be 
unyielding in the dispute over currency policies during his visit to 
China." 
 
Under the headline "President Obama explains the Internet to the 
Chinese," Spiegel Online reported on his meeting with young Chinese 
students in Shanghai: "No politician before has so charmingly told 
the Chinese that they are living in a dictatorship:  U.S. President 
Obama spoke to selected students in Shanghai and explained the 
advantages of uncensored news." 
 
FT Deutschland (11/16) commented: "The U.S. and China got closer on 
practical matters, but they lack a common idea of a better world. 
President Obama's visit to China can be helpful here....  The 
mistrust between the Americans and the Chinese is still larger than 
that between their governments.  It is therefore important that the 
politicians can name more than just practical reasons for their 
cooperation.  We will probably wait in vain for a charm offensive by 
Hu.    However, Obama has the opportunity to repeat what he achieved 
in Cairo when he meets young people in Shanghai: convince an 
American audience of his good intentions.  That's why it is 
important not just Obama the technocrat but also Obama the visionary 
travels to China." 
 
¶3.   U.S.-Burmese Relations 
 
Several papers carried factual news reports.  Frankfurter Allgemeine 
(11/16) headlined; "Obama Meets Burma's Prime Minister," with the 
sub-headline: "President Calls For Release of Nobel Nobel laureate 
Aung San Suu Kyi."  Frankfurter Rundschau(11/16)  reported that 
"after his meeting with General Thein Sein, President Obama said in 
a press release that he demanded in his talks with the leader of 
Burma's military junta the early release of Nobel peace laureate 
Aung San Suu Kyi."  The paper added: "This phrase may sound like the 
repetition of an old position but the meeting in Singapore is the 
symbol of a new U.S. policy in Southeast Asia. The difficult 
relations towards ASEAN member Burma should no longer prevent 
relations with this group of nations as in the past, Obama said.  In 
the future, Washington plans to stick to sanctions as long as the 
regime does not change its policy.  But at the same time Obama, in 
contrast to his predecessor, wants to cultivate a dialogue with the 
regime." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/16) said in an editorial: "Barack Obama 
is not afraid of people.  And this is probably very good in the case 
of Burma because the isolation of the military regime has not 
resulted in any progress in human rights.  On the other hand, direct 
talks with the U.S. president are a reward for the junta without 
having made any previous concession.  That is why it was important 
that Obama unmistakably insisted on the release of Aung San Suu Kyi. 
 Now we are excited to see if and when the junta will do justice to 
this demand.  If the regime is clever, it will release Aung San Suu 
Kyi from her house arrest, but will not allow her to influence the 
elections next year.  Then Obama would have his (modest) success, 
and the junta would save face - and would have outmaneuvered its 
greatest challenger again." 
 
¶4.   APEC--Climate Protection 
 
Many papers carried reports on the APEC meeting in Singapore and the 
decision not to agree on binding climate protection goals. 
Sueddeutsche (11/16) headlined: "The World Postpones Climate 
 
BERLIN 00001449  003 OF 005 
 
 
Protection - U.S. Calls Binding Agreement 'Unrealistic' - Nations 
Only Strive For Declaration of Intent."  Financial Times Deutschland 
(11/16) reported "Rescue of the World Cancelled - No Climate 
Protection Agreement in Copenhagen - Pacific Nations Refuse To Agree 
on Emission [Reduction] Target."  die tageszeitung (11/14) reported 
under the headline: ", China is most important for the United 
States":  "The U.S. administration considers the People's Republic 
of China as a competitor.  That is why it insists the Chinese commit 
themselves to accepting new climate [protection] rules.  Joel 
Bluestein, President of the Energy and Environmental Analysis think 
tank said that Europe is not so important for the United States in 
climate policies.  He added that for the only thing that is 
important for the Americans is that China and India stick to new 
climate protection rules since the United States considers primarily 
China as a competitor for its economy.  Bluestein added that climate 
protection does not play a role among the U.S. public.  Copenhagen 
is considered an issue for the elite and neither the average 
American nor the decision makers want to know anything about global 
warming.  And this is why there is no pressure on politicians - 
something that is noted elsewhere." 
 
Sueddeutsche (11/16) editorialized: "For the upcoming climate 
summit, [politicians] are selling the non-committal declaration of 
intent to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases as a success. 
This is frightening, even a little irresponsible.  The previously 
announced epoch-making agreement has now been shrunk to a simple 
self-commitment without any control.  If this situation remains, the 
global climate summit has failed before it has even begun. 
 
According to Financial Times Deutschland (11/16), "Over the past few 
months it has become clear that the Europeans are resting on their 
previous role as trailblazers in climate protection.  In Copenhagen 
of during the times thereafter, they must intensify their role 
again, even when it comes to financial assistance.  It is clear that 
all states must move, and this refers primarily to the United States 
without whose support all efforts for the protection of the climate 
would be in vain.  But China and India and other threshold nations 
must also make their contribution." 
 
Deutschlandfunk (11/15) commented: "How many commonplaces and 
declarations of intent can the world stand before the climate on 
earth finally changes with disastrous consequences for millions of 
people?  The APEC summit could have pointed the way to the future 
and could have resulted in a breakthrough for Copenhagen.  But the 
U.S. government does not want to impose any restrictions on its 
citizens to protect the climate, since this could slow down economic 
recovery. Nor do China, Indonesia or other developing nations among 
the APEC members want to risk their chance to catch up with the 
industrialized countries.  On the contrary, they all together prefer 
to risk the climate, i.e. the living conditions of future 
generations which will have to face the consequences.  It is no 
wonder that the state leaders from all 192 nations from all over the 
world have promised to come to Copenhagen - and this includes 
President Obama.  No one wants to attend a conference that is doomed 
to failure right from the start.  But this does not reduce the 
responsibility of the government leaders." 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/16), "many other countries - 
including the emerging countries and the United States - do not 
share the climate protection goals of the Europeans.  We can regret 
this or we can only be surprised at the unrealistically high 
expectations that have burdened the Copenhagen climate summit.  If 
the mood at the APEC summit allows a prediction, then the summiteers 
in Copenhagen will be unable to approve a binding and comprehensive 
Kyoto follow-on package.  The lesson from Singapore is that, in 
climate policies, too, it is senseless to be pigheaded.  And if the 
biggest emitters do not join forces, the Europeans can approve tough 
 
BERLIN 00001449  004 OF 005 
 
 
emission goals, but they will be unable to influence the climate. 
At best, they will ask too much of their own economies." 
 
Berliner Zeitung (11/16) opined: "The Copenhagen summit has not 
failed. it only gets a new chance.  Denmark's Premier Rasmussen's 
proposal to agree on political, basic principles first and then come 
to legally binding commitments a few months later...is reasonable 
and acceptable.  Yes, it will save the talks.  It was a hopeless 
endeavor to stick to the timetable.  Instead of running blindfolded 
to nowhere, the Danish host is adjusting proceedings to reality - 
and this reality is not that negative.  The economic crisis makes 
states hesitate to spend large amounts of money on climate 
protection.  The situation is likely to be different in six months. 
And Barack Obama needs more time to overhaul climate policy against 
the pigheaded opponents in his own country.  But the main thing is 
that the will to do something about climate change is growing 
everywhere.  It would have been nice to celebrate an agreement in 
December 2009 but a sound, good agreement is better than a windy 
one.  If it is a good one, the delay in the ratification process 
could quickly be made up.  Time can also be a good investment." 
 
¶5.   Iranian Nuclear Conflict 
 
Several papers (11/16) carried relatively short reports on 
Presidents Obama and Medvedev's press conference.  Sueddeutsche 
headlined "Time for Iran is running out," noting that "the U.S. and 
Russia called on Tehran to sign an agreement on the processing of 
uranium outside of Iran.  'Time is running out,' said President 
Obama during a press conference with his Russian counterpart 
Medvedev in Singapore.  Medvedev said he is still hoping that Iran 
will send its enriched uranium to Russia to be processed." 
Frankfurter Rundschau headlined "Obama and Medvedev increase 
pressure on Iran," adding: "In the nuclear dispute with Iran, Russia 
and the U.S. increased the pressure on the leadership in Tehran. 
Time for accepting the international compromise is slowly running 
out, President Obama said on Sunday after a meeting with his Russian 
counterpart Medvedev in Singapore.  He regretted that Iran has not 
yet agreed to the proposal mediated by the IAEA."  Tagesspiegel 
headlined: "Obama and Medvedev threaten Tehran." 
 
¶6.   Future of Guant namo Prisoners 
 
Die Welt (11/16) headlined: "Conflict in U.S. over Wirepullers of 
9/11 Attacks - Republicans Assail Obama Administration," and 
reported that an "intense controversy has begun over the meaning and 
the consequences of the trial of the decade: United States vs. 
Khaled Sheikh Mohammed and others.  Attorney General Eric Holder 
described his announcement as an 'important step in our efforts to 
close Guant namo and to call to account those people who have 
attacked out nation and out interests abroad.'  But the Republicans 
in particular vehemently criticized the plan of the Obama 
administration."  Sueddeutsche (11/14) reported under the headline: 
"Al-Qaida's Chief Planner to be Put on Trial in New York," and 
reported that civilian judges will judge over Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammed." 
 
In an editorial headlined: "Return to the Rule of Law," Die Welt 
(11/16) noted: "With its decision to put Khaled Sheikh Mohammed on 
trial, the Obama administration is taking risks.  Nevertheless, 
Attorney General Holder's decision is right.  The Bush 
administration made the mistake of institutionalizing and 
perpetuating the emergency situation following 9/11.  With this 
trial and with the planned closure of Guant namo, Obama wants to 
return to the roots of the U.S. rule of law in which even dangerous 
criminals have a right to defend themselves.  The course of his 
predecessor was at the expense of U.S. legitimacy and credibility in 
the world.  But this loss of reputation was much more dangerous that 
 
BERLIN 00001449  005 OF 005 
 
 
all thinkable consequences of the trial of the decade in 
Manhattan." 
 
"Guantnamo and No End," is the headline of an editorial in 
Sueddeutsche (11/16) which links the announcement to put Khalid 
Sheikh Mohammed on trial to the dismissal of President Obama's legal 
advisor Gregory Craig.  The daily judged: "In the end, Craig has 
become a victim of 9/11.  This rotten populism with which 
politicians of both parties are exploiting this fateful date in 
Congress has been blocking the dissolution of Guant namo.  There is 
even a U.S. law that bans the transfer of innocent prisoners to the 
U.S. mainland.    Imagine this: For more than seven years, the 
nation which describes itself as the 'land of the free' every day, 
has been keeping harmless men from China, Algeria, and Libya in 
Guant namo.  It is likely that they would be tortured at home, but 
the humanitarian gesture to offer them refuge somewhere between 
Florida and California is strictly forbidden. America will have to 
learn to live with Guant namo.  Even if the camp in Cuba is closed, 
the government will have to incarcerate 120 prisoners on the 
mainland.  Khalid Sheikh Mohammed has lost, but so has Gregory 
Craig." 
 
¶7.   Strategy on Afghanistan 
 
Suedwestrundfunk radio (11/14) commented: "Guttenberg is a smart 
tactician.  He has shown this talent with his approach to Opel.... 
He speaks of warlike circumstances.  In comparison with the 
unbearable gibberish of his predecessor, Franz-Josef Jung, 
Guttenberg appears to be a shining figure of political clarity.... 
He is deploying an additional company to Kunduz...  However, these 
120 troops are only a drop in the ocean.  Guttenberg's pressure on 
Karzai will also show no impact because Karzai knows that, despite 
the election fraud and the corrupt government, there is no 
alternative to him.  The German defense minister is simply joining 
in the international choir.  This lacks substance.... No decisions 
are being made prior to the international conference in 
Afghanistan....  Everything goes on like it is.  We are buying time 
until Obama has decided on his new strategy...  The fact is that the 
international community has taken only half-hearted action in 
Afghanistan, like Germany in the efforts to train police forces. 
Opportunities were missed, serious mistakes were made, the Taliban 
could restructure themselves.  Can a conference repair the damage? 
I'm afraid it won't be able to do this.  Policy on Afghanistan has 
reached a dead end, and this is devastating.  Guttenberg's nice 
images and words might calm things down, however, they also make 
clear that he does not know the way out." 
 
MURPHY