09CASABLANCA210
MOROCCO, THE WORLD'S NEXT HOLLYWOOD?
Thu Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0210/01 3230912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190912Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8556
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0729
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3910UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG 
COMMERCE FOR NATHANIEL MASON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV PGOV SOCI KISL MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO, THE WORLD'S NEXT HOLLYWOOD? 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Situated in central Morocco, the Souss-Massa-Draa 
region has become one of the world's most appealing film locations - 
and the backdrop for several major Hollywood films starring actors 
such as Angelina Jolie, Russell Crowe, and Leonardo DiCaprio.  The 
Moroccan government has implemented a three-pronged approach to 
boost the country's film industry, which employs more than half the 
region's residents: a fiscal incentive scheme to attract foreign 
producers, a doubling of the region's film production capacity to 30 
feature films per year, and a willingness to embrace foreign 
productions deemed too provocative by other Middle Eastern 
countries.  The regional film industry's hard-won success may be at 
risk, however, if the Government of Morocco does not address the 
dearth of local film technicians.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
Lights, Camera, Action 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) During the last decade, the Souss-Massa-Draa region has 
quietly become one of the world's most sought-after film locations. 
Today, Moroccan film production amounts to some 15 features and 50 
short films annually.  The city of Ouarzazate, the heart of the 
region's film industry, has been the location for some of 
Hollywood's major films, featuring stars such as Angelina Jolie, 
Russell Crowe, and Leonardo DiCaprio.  With its stony deserts, 
striking oases, unique Kasbahs, and snow-covered summits, Ouarzazate 
has become the Egypt of "The Mummy", the Somalia of "Black Hawk 
Down", and the Jerusalem of "The Kingdom of Heaven". 
 
---------------- 
Luring Hollywood 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) To supplement the appeal of the region's stunning 
landscape, the government has implemented a three-pronged approach 
to boost the country's film sector.  First, it has implemented a 
fiscal incentive scheme to lure international film producers.  Under 
this scheme, the government offers foreign film companies tax 
exemptions on film equipment purchased within the country, reduced 
tariff rates for the importation of cinema equipment, free filming 
on government-owned property, the use of army personnel and 
equipment for cinematic purposes, and concessional airline fares. 
When combined with Morocco's relatively inexpensive labor force, 
these incentives can equate to savings of 30 to 50 percent on 
production costs compared to Europe or the United States, according 
to Director of the Souss-Massa-Draa Regional Investment Center 
(SDRIC) Abdessadek El Alem. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The government has also committed to doubling the region's 
film production capacity from 15 to 30 feature films per year in the 
next five years. To do this, the GOM is partnering with foreign 
studios such as Italy's DeLaurentis, said Abderrazzak Zitouny of the 
Ouarzazate Film Commission (OFC), a working group tasked with 
overseeing this expansion.  According to Zitouny, the larger film 
production capacity will generate USD 259 million in annual income 
for the region and employ close to 8,000 people on a full-time 
basis. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Finally, the country's moderate orientation has readily 
embraced foreign film productions deemed too provocative by other 
Middle Eastern countries. Zitouny told Econoff, "Unlike other 
countries in the Middle East we are fine with producing what some 
may deem provocative. It is a testament to Morocco's modern and 
progressive spirit."  As the region's largest employer, Morocco's 
film sector wields economic clout, enabling it to push boundaries. 
For example, according to Zitouny, Jordan declined to host Leonardo 
DiCaprio's "Body of Lies", which dealt with the global war on 
terror.  But Morocco welcomed the film's crew with open arms.  When 
the producers of "Sex in the City" were denied permission to film in 
Dubai, Morocco was more than glad to invite the crew to film in 
Marrakesh.  Hassan II University Professor Bekouchi says it is a 
sign of the country's moral tolerance. 
 
------------- 
The Challenge 
------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Despite this broad-based effort to strengthen the country's 
film sector, some obstacles remain.  Chief among them is the dearth 
of local film technicians.  Morocco's Cinematographic Center (CCM), 
the central governing authority, remains focused on supporting the 
nascent domestic film industry.  However, serious deficits exist in 
areas such as trained local personnel to support international 
productions, said Zitouny.  Foreign companies continue to bring 
mid-level professionals to Morocco because of the limited pool of 
competent local film technicians.  "Training will be critical to 
supporting international film production, without which Morocco will 
not be able to absorb the expected increase of films," added El 
Alem. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Concerned about the lack of local film technicians, the 
GOM has created Morocco's first technical film school in Ouarzazate. 
 Inaugurated in 2007, with nearly 120 students, the school provides 
university graduates with custom design, visual graphic creation, 
post-production editing, and set design skills in order to meet the 
demands of today's international filmmakers.  The two-year program, 
which also emphasizes fluency in English and French, will graduate 
its first class in December, said the school's director, Ahmed Ait 
Ouzdi. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Ouarzazate is aggressively pursuing a sister city 
partnership with the city of Los Angeles, a testament to the strong 
partnership that exists between the American and Moroccan film 
communities.  With the country's film production capacity set to 
double, it is likely that more U.S filmmakers will find Morocco an 
appealing film destination.  In addition, the film industry has 
enormous potential for development under the US-Morocco Free Trade 
Agreement. 
 
MILLARD