09KABUL3739
GOVERNOR,S AVIPA PLUS ANNOUNCEMENT FOR ARGHANDAB
Sun Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO5117
OO RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #3739/01 3260558
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 220558Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3331
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 003739 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS USAID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM EAGR PGOV AF
SUBJECT: GOVERNOR,S AVIPA PLUS ANNOUNCEMENT FOR ARGHANDAB 
WELL RECEIVED 
 
REF: KABUL 3737 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and comment.  At a November 5 shura in 
Arghandab District, Kandahar, southern Afghanistan, Governor 
Wesa announced the USAID Afghanistan Vouchers for Increased 
Production in 
Agriculture (AVIPA) Plus program for the Arghandab valley. 
After a thorough explanation of the counterinsurgency 
stability program which focuses on agriculture support, the 
shura elders praised the provincial and district government's 
initiative on bringing the program to Arghandab district. 
Elders also voiced concerns that will need addressing to 
fully implement the AVIPA Plus program, which include 
absentee land ownership, corrupt agriculture cooperatives, 
and security.  Given high level of participation from the 
provincial and district governments coupled with the high 
attendance by local elders and farmers, this shura and 
program rollout can be seen as a success that will need to be 
maintained through quick implementation. End summary and 
comment. 
 
POSITIVE LAUNCH FOR AVIPA PLUS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU)  At a November 5 shura at the Arghandab district 
center, Kandahar Governor Tooryalai Wesa announced the 
rollout of the USAID Afghanistan Voucher for Increased 
Production in Agriculture (AVIPA) Plus program for the 
troubled Arghandab Valley. The Governor opened the meeting by 
explaining the program, which is primarily designed to serve 
as a counterinsurgency stability tool, to a well-attended 
group of elders and farmers, and noting the program's three 
major components: 
 
-- Agriculture inputs: provide: subsidized saplings, wheat 
seed and other agriculture inputs to farmers through the 
equitable voucher system 
-- Cash-for-work projects: offer temporary employment and 
income to local laborers, particularly young men, through 
short-term public works projects 
-- Grants: award small grants to agribusiness and 
community-based associations in support of the agriculture 
economy 
 
¶3. (SBU)  The shura was well-attended by local villagers in 
large part because the USAID Office of Transition Initiatives 
(USAID/OTI) in Arghandab district had participated in patrols 
with the military Stryker Brigade the previous day, 
encouraging Nagahan villagers to go to the district center to 
air their grievances while provincial officials were present. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Wesa challenged the crowd, telling them that the 
outcome and success of the program depended on the people of 
Kandahar.  He further emphasized the importance of provincial 
sustainability that can only be achieved by the people and 
not through reliance on "foreigners."  (Note: Wesa was eager 
to announce the program as his own initiative after 
expressing to PRT members on November 4 his perception that 
he could not establish good governance in the province when 
the population viewed all development benefits being derived 
from the international community. End note.)  Kandahar City 
Mayor Hamidi and other provincial and Arghandab district 
leaders echoed the Governor's comments and gave full support 
for the program, which is to be delivered via the Kandahar 
Agriculture Ministry. 
 
CONCERNS BY ELDERS 
------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) The announcement was well-received by those in 
attendance who noted that the Arghandab Valley was the "right 
place" to start the AVIPA Plus program given its long 
agriculture history.  However, a few of the elders also 
raised problems that have been plaguing the agriculture 
sector in the area for some time: 
 
-- Absentee Land Ownership: The elders noted that absentee 
land ownership impedes farmers' ability to make permanent 
improvements to the land they are tending. 
-- Corrupt Agriculture Cooperatives: Many in the crowd 
pointed to the long-standing issues surrounding the 
agriculture cooperatives in the area, which have been known 
to resell used or broken equipment and could be bribed.  The 
Governor responded by asking these farmers to create their 
own cooperative with trusted members, and the District 
Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock (DAIL) Director 
stressed to the elders that these problems needed to be 
 
KABUL 00003739  002 OF 002 
 
 
reported quickly for action to be taken. 
-- Security: A few elders pointed out that if they cannot 
work on their farms or orchards due to security concerns that 
they could not prevent theft on their lands.  The Governor 
and Kandahar City Mayor assured the crowd that they were 
working with the ANA on security.  (Note: Many areas of 
Arghandab remain kinetic, and following the shura, a US 
military convoy was hit by an improvised explosive device as 
it departed the shura. End note.) 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) This shura is a great success in that it serves as a 
strong example of connecting GIRoA to the people.  First, 
from a political perspective, officials from the provincial 
and district levels addressed a group of elders and district 
citizens as a unified body, showing solidarity and support 
for a program that will directly benefit Kandahar.  Second, 
in what hopes to be the first of many joint appearances, this 
is the first time that many of these officials had visited 
Arghandab, which went a long way with 
the people.  Third, the shura was heavily attended, and the 
mood was positive following the announcement of the AVIPA 
program, opening a vital window of opportunity in this 
district. 
 
¶7. (SBU) However, it is important to also note that the 
elders complained that similar promises for support had been 
made in the past with little to no follow-up.  Therefore, 
while keeping the security conditions in mind, expeditious 
movement on this program is key to maintaining the positive 
momentum captured at this event. 
Mussomeli