09KIGALI773
2009 RWANDAN FOOD SECURITY AND NUTRITION SURVEY
Fri Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0010
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0773 3241129
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 201129Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6434
INFO RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS KIGALI 000773 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID ECON SENV RW
SUBJECT: 2009 RWANDAN FOOD SECURITY AND NUTRITION SURVEY 
 
REF: REF KIGALI 747 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  The National Institute of Statistics of 
Rwanda released the 2009 Comprehensive Food Security and 
Vulnerability Analysis and Nutrition Survey. The survey 
analyzes nutrition trends over time by examining the extent, 
depth and causes of food and nutrition insecurity and 
vulnerability in Rwanda. Key findings in the survey are: 
rates of 52 percent and 4.6 percent among children for 
stunting and wasting respectively; and households with 
considerable dependence on agriculture, including 
agricultural laborers are especially vulnerable. The survey 
recommends increasing agricultural output, creating a 
vulnerability reduction strategy, developing vocational 
skills, and developing supplementary feeding and targeted 
nutrition programs. End Summary. 
 
Key Questions 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The survey focused on answering five key questions: 
what populations currently face food insecurity and 
malnutrition; how many are there; where do they live; why are 
they food insecure/malnourished; and how can food assistance 
and other interventions make a difference in reducing 
poverty? Surveyors collected data between February and March 
2009 from 5400 rural households. 
 
 
Findings and Recommendations 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) At the national level the survey found a 7 percent 
malnutrition rate among women of reproductive age (15-49 
years). Rates for chronic and acute malnutrition among 
children are 52 and 4.6 percent respectively. There was a 
statistically insignificant change in rate among children 
from the previous survey that was completed in 2005. However, 
according to the study, the percentage of underweight 
children decreased from 20 percent to 15.8 percent. (Note: 
The percentage of underweight children is an indicator used 
by the UN to measure Millennium Development Goal 1. The goal 
is to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. End Note.) 
According to the study the highest stunting rates (55 
percent) are among the population with considerable 
dependence on agriculture, including farm laborers. 
Geographically the most food insecure households are in the 
districts of Nyabihu, Ngororero, Nyaruguru, and Nyamagabe. 
 
¶4. (U) According to the survey factors such as female-headed 
households, the presence of a chronically-ill person, and 
cultivation of less than 0.1 hectare decrease food security. 
Contrarily, ownership of livestock and diversity of 
agricultural production are associated with greater food 
security. According to the survey, the most frequently 
reported shocks that reduce food security are drought, 
irregular rains, and dry spells. 
 
¶5. (U) Due to the diverse nature and sources of 
vulnerability, the key recommendation of the survey is for a 
broad-based, multi-sector approach that integrates food 
security, nutrition, and disaster management programs with 
the national poverty reduction program. The survey also 
recommends that the GOR increase agricultural output, develop 
vocational skills, and develop supplementary feeding and 
targeted nutrition programs for children under five years of 
age, as well as school-age children and women of reproductive 
age. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: Although the GOR has made great strides in 
increasing agricultural productivity, chronic and acute 
malnutrition continue to effect the population. Farmers, on 
average, have access to approximately one acre of land to 
grow food for their family, which when combined with high 
rainfall variability may render them food insecure. Following 
the survey period, the GOR embarked on a nationwide campaign 
with its partners to identify and treat severely malnourished 
 
children. The campaign, now concluded, distributed food 
supplements and therapeutic milk, provided nutritional 
services and education, and developed demonstration family 
gardens. The GOR response was coordinated by the Ministries 
of Health, Local Affairs, and Agriculture. Emergency response 
and nutrition education are a component of the GOR 
agriculture investment plan (reftel). Ministry of Agriculture 
nutrition support is part of a coordinated national effort 
with Health, Education and other Ministries. End Comment. 
SYMINGTON