09KYIV2021
CONCLUDING THE SAGA OF UKRAINE'S MOST TROUBLED BANK
Fri Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kyiv
VZCZCXRO3440
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHKV #2021/01 3240415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 200415Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KYIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8839
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KYIV 002021 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/UMB, EEB/OMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN EREL ELAB ECON ETRD PGOV PREL XH UP
SUBJECT: CONCLUDING THE SAGA OF UKRAINE'S MOST TROUBLED BANK 
 
REF: KYIV 1916 
 
KYIV 00002021  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Nadra Bank, the much troubled Ukrainian 
financial institution, may be close to finalizing a deal with at 
least 75% of its external creditors, who hold $570 million of 
Nadra's total debt.  Nonetheless, the Ukrainian government is giving 
signals that it could be changing tack and may not recapitalize the 
bank.  Nadra's liquidation would likely lead to a purchase and 
assumption arrangement, either with a private investor or with a 
state-owned bank akin to the mechanism employed by Rodovid with now 
defunct Ukrprombank.  The former arrangement would be unprecedented 
in scope, while the latter would add more shaky liabilities and 
distressed assets to the GOU's balance sheet.  End summary. 
 
NADRA RESTRUCTURING STALLED... 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ministry of Finance director for bank recapitalization 
Teimur Bagirov said publicly that negotiations with Nadra's foreign 
creditors had stalled.  Bagirov suggested it was not possible for 
the Cabinet of Ministers to make a final decision on whether to 
recapitalize the bank.  He noted that the Cabinet had devised a 
"Plan B" to liquidate Nadra in the event its external debt remained 
outstanding.  Nadra's liabilities and viable assets would be 
transferred to a state-owned bank, similar to the process currently 
underway with Rodovid and Ukrprombank. 
 
...OR CONTINUING APACE? 
----------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) However, NBU deputy governor Volodymyr Krotiuk told 
journalists that roughly 70% of Nadra's total foreign debt ($870 
million) had been restructured.  This figure was corroborated by a 
senior Nadra official, who indicated to us that the bank had nearly 
restructured 75% of its foreign debt.  After the 75% threshold had 
been reached, according to Krotiuk, the Cabinet of Ministers would 
decide whether to nationalize the bank. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Nadra officials confirmed to Econoff that the bank was in 
"active conversations" with its creditor committee, comprised of 
Commerzbank, Standard Bank, OTP Bank, Fortis, and Cargill Financial, 
among others.  The Nadra representatives said there were differing 
opinions among creditors about terms of a negotiated deal, with some 
looking for "special conditions" that Nadra had determined were "not 
realizable".  A letter outlining proposed terms had been sent to the 
creditor committee and likely would be answered by November 20 or 
early the following week. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) A senior London-based representative from Commerzbank told 
us that the creditor committee had nearly reached an internal 
agreement on the Nadra debt restructuring.  Fellow bankers were 
cognizant that Nadra's non-performing loans (NPLs) and a "massive" 
outflow of deposits indicated further credit deterioration, making 
its speedy resolution a necessity for economic and political 
reasons.  Ukrainian authorities were playing a "wild card" with 
Nadra over nationalization.  Commerzbank viewed the possibility that 
an investor would buy Nadra as "science fiction". 
 
POSSIBLE SUITORS FOR NADRA 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Nonetheless, Nadra temporary administrator Valentina 
Zhukovska told the media that the bank was entertaining three 
offers, without disclosing any suitors. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Stockholm-based East Capital, a private equity fund that 
holds a 6.6% share of Nadra, confirmed it had considered a further 
investment in Nadra.  According to East Capital senior advisor 
Margot Jacobs, any potential deal would be determined by the GOU's 
plans for recapitalization. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) A second foreign investor hinted that it also had designs 
on a major Nadra investment.  Platinum Bank -- owned by Horizon 
Capital, a U.S. managed private equity firm in Kyiv -- announced its 
willingness to take over Nadra's liabilities and viable assets in 
the event Nadra was liquidated.  Platinum Bank chairman Greg Krasnov 
told a public forum that Platinum's shareholders were particularly 
interested in Nadra's 700 retail branches. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Separately, a Horizon Capital representative confirmed to 
us that Platinum would attempt to expand its untarnished brand, 
thereby allowing Horizon to "deploy piles of cash" that had been 
raised prior to the crisis.  That Horizon and Platinum had 
approached Nadra was confirmed to us by a source close to Bagirov, 
who is allegedly being used as an intermediary between Prime 
 
KYIV 00002021  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Minister Tymoshenko and President Yushchenko and their respective 
allies in the Ministry of Finance and the NBU (reftel). 
 
¶10.  (SBU) A purchase and assumption arrangement with East Capital, 
Platinum Bank, or a third undisclosed party would represent the 
first private sector resolution of a failed bank in Ukraine since 
the start of the crisis. 
 
RAPID DETERIORATION AT NADRA 
---------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) In addition to debt restructuring talks, Nadra's chief 
concern was a rapid deterioration of its loan portfolio, with 
creditors still broadly refusing to make monthly payments.  Nadra 
officials would not comment on the overall level of non-performing 
loans, but said the bank did not have enough capital to continue 
operating without outside assistance. 
 
¶12.  (U) Nadra was taken under temporary administration on February 
¶11.  It is now Ukraine's eleventh largest bank, with total household 
deposits of UAH 7.9 billion ($970 million). 
 
SNAPSHOT OF CREEPING STATE CONTROL 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (U) With the nationalization and recapitalization of 
Ukrgasbank, Bank Kyiv, and Rodovid in 2009, Ukraine's banking sector 
is now 28% state owned.  The government had already infused the 
three newest state banks with UAH 9.5 billion ($1.16 billion) before 
its decision this week to add another UAH 5.69 billion ($700 
million) in statutory capital to Rodovid to ease its assumption of 
Ukrprombank's liabilities. 
 
¶14.  (U) The three newly nationalized banks have signaled a need for 
more capital "top-offs" of up to UAH 2 billion ($245 million). 
Furthermore, since the beginning of Ukraine's financial crisis, the 
GOU has added UAH 15.4 billion ($1.9 billion) in capital to the 
Soviet-era state savings bank (Oshchadbank) and the Export-Import 
Bank of Ukraine (Ukrexim). 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Ukrainian banks have universally suffered from 
deteriorating loan portfolios since the beginning of the crisis, 
with banks under temporary administration being particularly hard 
hit by a lack of public confidence. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) It was alleged that Platinum's previous bid for 
Ukrprombank had been turned down, in favor of newly nationalized 
Rodovid, to protect vested political interests.  The Ukrainian 
government may no longer have the means to offer such a generous 
liquidation package to cover Nadra's depositors, even though Nadra 
has comparatively much better assets than Ukrprombank.  With 
authorities giving mixed messages over the bank's progress on debt 
restructuring, and with time running out for a resolution to protect 
depositors before the presidential election, Nadra's saga may soon 
be coming to a dramatic conclusion. 
 
PETTIT