09PHNOMPENH874
CAMBODIA: 2009 3RD QUARTER REPORT ON TRAFFICKING IN
Wed Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO8224
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0874/01 3290908
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 250908Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1403
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PHNOM PENH 000874 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/MLS, EAP/RSP, G/TIP, DRL 
USAID FOR ASIA BUREAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN KTIP SOCI CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA: 2009 3RD QUARTER REPORT ON TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS 
 
REF: A) 08 PHNOM PENH 702 
B)08 PHNOM PENH 628 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  During the third quarter of 2009, Cambodian 
police arrested five persons on human trafficking charges and 12 
persons on procurement of prostitution charges in connection with 
cases involving minor victims.  Police reported arresting eight 
foreign pedophiles and rescuing 14 victims in connection with those 
cases.  During the same period, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court 
convicted two foreign pedophiles and two Cambodian nationals. 
Police rescued 42 victims of trafficking and reported that they were 
returned to their families or were referred to NGO victim shelters. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On September 25, The Prime Minister signed a sub decree 
combining the National Task Force with the High-Level Working Group, 
forming a single policy-making entity called the National Committee 
on Suppression of Human Trafficking, Smuggling, and Labor and Sexual 
Exploitation.  The new committee is chaired by the Deputy Prime 
Minister and Minister of Interior Sar Kheng, with deputy 
chairmanships for the Minister of Women's Affairs, Minister of 
Social Affairs, Minister of Justice, and Minister of Labor and 
Vocational Training (MOLVT).  The new 18-member committee has 
participation from all ministries.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Improving Implementation of the 2008 TIP Law 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Ministry of Justice (MOJ) conducted a series of 
training courses for district police, district governors, and 
provincial government officials on Strategies for Combating Human 
Trafficking.  The six workshops, taught by eight RGC officials and 
three consultants from the UN Inter-Agency Project on Human 
Trafficking (UNIAP), the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM), and the International Labor Organization (ILO), were held in 
Siem Reap, Preah Sihanouk, Koh Kong, Svay Rieng, Banteay Meanchey, 
and Prey Veng Provinces and focused on the 2008 TIP law and 
discussions of prosecution, protection, prevention, and policy. 
Approximately 50-60 participants attended each workshop, and the 
courses were supported financially UNIAP. 
 
Police Activity - Human Trafficking Arrests 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On August 8, Battambang provincial police arrested 
30-year-old Seng Moun, female, for the attempted trafficking of a 
three-year-old female victim to Thailand.  Police reported that the 
perpetrator lived in the victim's village, and intended to sell the 
victim in Thailand for one million Riel ($250 USD).  Police arrested 
the perpetrator in Battambang province and rescued the victim. 
Police reported that the perpetrator was sent to court and is 
currently in pre-trial detention and the victim was returned to her 
family. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) On August 20, police from the Anti-Human Trafficking and 
Juvenile Protection unit (AHTJP) arrested 35-year-old Ngeth Nath, 
male, for trafficking two adult victims to Thailand to work on a 
fishing boat.  Police arrested the perpetrator and rescued the 
victims in Koh Kong province.  Police reported that the perpetrator 
was sent to court and is currently in pre-trial detention and the 
victims returned to their families. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On August 22, police from AHTJP arrested 58-year-old 
Sitouman, male, for the attempted trafficking of two female victims 
aged 20 and 24 to China for sexual exploitation purposes.  Police 
arrested the perpetrator in Phnom Penh and reported that the 
perpetrator was charged with Article 10 "Unlawful Removal with 
Purpose" and that the perpetrator is currently in pre-trial 
detention.  Police reported that the two victims, Vietnamese 
nationals who reside in Cambodia, returned to their families in 
Phnom Penh at the request of the families. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) On August 31, police from AHTJP arrested 29-year-old Sey 
Tin, male, for trafficking 12 victims from Prey Veng province to 
Thailand to work on a fishing boat.  Police reported that there were 
four victims under age 18.  Police arrested the perpetrator and 
rescued the victims in Prey Veng province.  Police reported that the 
perpetrator was sent to court and is currently in pre-trial 
detention and the victims returned to their families. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) On September 30, Phnom Penh police arrested 53-year-old 
Mean Sok Kheang, female, for the attempted trafficking of 25 female 
victims aged between 14 and 17.  Police reported that the 
perpetrator planned to arrange weddings for the victims to Korean 
men in order to transport the victims to Korea.  Police arrested the 
perpetrator in Phnom Penh and reported that the perpetrator is 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000874  002 OF 004 
 
 
currently in pre-trial detention.  Police reported that all of the 
victims were sent to Phnom Penh Municipal Office of Social Affairs. 
It has become typical for law enforcement to first send victims to 
the municipal or provincial social affairs office, from which 
victims are referred to NGO shelters for victim assistance or 
returned to their families at the victims' request. 
 
Police Activity - Procurement of Prostitution Arrests 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) On July 14, Phnom Penh police arrested 47-year-old Yoeung 
Thy Aline, female, 49-year-old Sok Srey Nga, female, and 26-year-old 
Phak Sokly, female, for operating a brothel in Siem Reap.  Police 
rescued three underage victims, aged between 12 and 15 years old. 
Police reported that the three perpetrators are now in pre-trial 
detention; one of the victims was sent to Phnom Penh Municipal 
Office of Social Affairs for victim assistance while two others 
returned directly to their families after they were granted 
permission by police and the Phnom Penh Municipal Office of Social 
Affairs. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) On July 29, police from AHTJP arrested 40-year-old Srun 
Sopheap, male, 39-year-old Hub Kim, female, 39-year-old Sun Ngin, 
female, and 23-year-old Hor Virak, male, for operating a brothel in 
Oddar Meanchey province.  Police rescued 17 victims and reported six 
underage victims among them, aged between 15 and 17 years old. 
Police reported that the four perpetrators are now in pre-trial 
detention and all of the victims were sent to Oddar Meanchey 
Provincial Office of Social Affairs for victim assistance. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) On August 5, Siem Reap provincial police arrested 
62-year-old Teh Sam Ath, male, and 57-year-old Mao Savath, female, 
for operating a brothel.  Police rescued 14 victims and reported one 
underage victim among them.  Police reported that the two 
perpetrators are currently in pre-trial detention and all of the 
victims were sent to Siem Reap Provincial Office of Social Affairs 
for victim assistance. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) On September 4, Phnom Penh police arrested 36-year-old 
Thul Vanna, female, for operating a brothel.  Police rescued seven 
victims and reported four underage victims among them.  Police 
reported that the perpetrator is currently in pre-trial detention 
and all of the victims were sent to Phnom Penh Municipal Office of 
Social Affairs for victim assistance. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) On September 11, Phnom Penh police arrested 40-year-old 
Vietnamese national Dao Yem Chov, female, and 21-year-old Srey 
Virak, male, for operating a brothel.  Police rescued 12 victims and 
reported three underage victims among them.  Police reported that 
the perpetrators were sent to court and are currently in pre-trial 
detention.  Police reported that eight victims were sent to PPMSA 
for victim assistance while four others returned directly to their 
families after they were granted permission by police and Phnom Penh 
Municipal Office of Social Affairs. 
 
Court Activity 
-------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) On July 27, Phnom Penh Municipal Court (PPMC) convicted 
32-year-old Choun Srey Touch, female, under Article 15 of the TIP 
law ("The Act of Selling, Buying or Exchanging a Person with 
Purpose") for trafficking a 20-day-old female victim.  The court 
sentenced the perpetrator to 15 years in prison. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) On August 21, PPMC convicted 25-year-old Mey Vannak, 
male, in absentia for trafficking a 32-year-old female victim.  The 
court sentenced Mey Vannak to nine years in prison under Article 15 
of the TIP law ("The Act of Selling, Buying or Exchanging a Person 
with Purpose").  The court issued an arrest warrant and ordered Mey 
Vannak to pay USD 3,000 in victim assistance. 
 
Prosecution and Investigation of Child Sex Tourism 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) MOJ reported that on July 1, the Appeals Court upheld the 
decision of the Preah Sihanouk provincial court, convicting Russian 
national Nikita Belov for committing indecent acts against a minor 
under fifteen years old, but suspending the 3-year prison sentence 
(Ref B).  The Ministry of Justice had initiated the appeal to 
overturn the Sihanoukville decision, in order to send Belov to jail 
for three years (Ref A).  The Appeals Court, acting in the absence 
of the perpetrator, additionally ordered Belov to pay between $250 
and $3,700 USD in victim assistance.  Belov reportedly departed 
Cambodia shortly after he was released from prison in July 2008, and 
his whereabouts remain unknown. 
 
¶17.  (SBU) MOJ reported that on July 15, Preah Sihanouk provincial 
court convicted 33-year-old Japanese national Shunichi Nakagawa for 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000874  003 OF 004 
 
 
producing child pornography.  The court sentenced Nakagawa to six 
years in prison and ordered him to pay approximately $120 USD to 
each of his victims. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) MOJ reported that on July 30, the Appeals Court upheld 
the conviction and sentence of Thomas Baron von Engelhardt, a Dutch 
national.  Von Engelhardt was convicted under TIP law Article 34 
("Purchase of Child Prostitution"), and is currently serving 12 
years in prison. 
 
¶19.  (SBU) MOJ reported that on July 30, the Appeals Court also 
upheld the conviction and sentence of 63-year-old Dutch national 
Karl-Heinz Opitz Henning.  Henning is currently serving 12 years in 
prison. 
 
¶20.  (SBU) On August 26, PPMC convicted 59-year-old American 
national Michael James Dodd for the purchase of child prostitution. 
The court also convicted 40-year-old Chan Phally, the victim's 
mother.  The victim was a 14-year-old girl.  The court sentenced 
Michael James Dodd to 10 years in prison under TIP law Article 34 
("Purchase of Child Prostitution") and Chan Phally to 10 years in 
prison under Article 4 ("Criminal Responsibility") and Article 34 
("Purchase of Child Prostitution").  The court ordered Michael James 
Dodd to pay around USD 5,000 in victim assistance.  The victim was 
referred to World Hope International for immediate assistance, and 
then to a medium-term shelter sponsored by World Vision, where she 
is currently staying. 
 
¶21.  (SBU) AHTJP police reported that on August 30, 75-year-old 
American national Jack Louis Sporich, 49-year-old American national 
Ronald Gerard Boyasian, and 41-year-old American national Erik 
Leonardus Peeters were returned to the United States at U.S. 
Government request under Department of Homeland Security escort. 
The three are expected to face charges under the PROTECT Act. 
 
¶22.  (SBU) On September 9, PPMC convicted 61-year-old French 
national Jacques Bernard Rene Collinet for purchase of child 
prostitution.  The court sentenced Collinet to three years in 
prison, with two years suspended, under TIP law Article 34 
("Purchase of Child Prostitution") and ordered Collinet to pay 
around USD 500 in victim assistance.  The court ordered Collinet 
deported from Cambodia upon completion of the prison term. 
 
¶23.  (SBU) On July 23, Phnom Penh police arrested 44-year-old 
American national Scott Alan Hecker in a guesthouse room and rescued 
two underage female victims, aged 12 and 14.  Police reported that 
the perpetrator was charged under TIP law Article 43 ("Indecent Acts 
against a Minor under Fifteen Years") and that the perpetrator is 
currently in pre-trial detention.  Police reported that the victims 
were sent to World Hope International (WHI) for victim assistance. 
 
¶24.  (SBU) On July 27, Preah Sihanouk provincial police arrested 
51-year-old British national Gareth Ashley Corbett and rescued one 
12-year-old female victim.  Police reported that the perpetrator was 
charged under TIP law Article 43 ("Indecent Act against a Minor 
under Fifteen Years") and that the perpetrator is currently in 
pre-trial detention.  Police reported that the victim was sent to 
WHI for victim assistance. 
 
¶25.  (SBU) On August 9, Phnom Penh police arrested 57-year-old 
American national Harvey Alexander Johnson and rescued five underage 
female victims, aged between 11 and 14.  Police reported that the 
perpetrator was charged under TIP law Article 43 ("Indecent Acts 
against a Minor under Fifteen Years") and that the perpetrator is 
currently in pre-trial detention.  Police reported that the victims 
returned directly to their families who requested their return. 
 
¶26.  (SBU) On August 20, Phnom Penh police arrested 63-year-old 
French national Michel Jean Raymond Charlot and rescued a 
16-year-old female victim.  Police reported that the perpetrator was 
charged under TIP law Article 34 ("Purchase of Child Prostitution") 
and that the perpetrator is currently in pre-trial detention. 
Police reported that the victim returned directly to her family at 
its request. 
 
¶27.  (SBU) On August 20, Phnom Penh police arrested 60-year-old 
French national Claude Jean Pierre Demeret and rescued a 16-year-old 
female victim.  Police reported that the perpetrator was charged 
under TIP law Article 34 ("Purchase of Child Prostitution") and that 
the perpetrator is currently in pre-trial detention.  Police 
reported that the victim returned to her family at its request. 
 
¶28.  (SBU) On August 26, Siem Reap provincial police arrested 
62-year-old Swiss national Rudolf Dierekto Knuchel and rescued two 
victims, ages 14 and 18.  Police reported that the perpetrator was 
charged under TIP law Article 42 ("Sexual Intercourse with a Minor 
under Fifteen Years") and that the perpetrator is currently in 
pre-trial detention.  Police reported that the victims were sent to 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000874  004 OF 004 
 
 
Siem Reap Provincial Office of Social Affairs for victim 
assistance. 
 
¶29.  (SBU) On September 7, police from AHTJP arrested 40-year-old 
Japanese national Kato Atsushi and rescued one underage Vietnamese 
female victim.  Police reported that the perpetrator was charged 
under TIP law Article 34 ("Purchase of Child Prostitution") and that 
the perpetrator is currently in pre-trial detention.  Police 
reported that the victim was sent to WHI for victim assistance 
through Phnom Penh Municipal Office of Social Affairs. 
 
¶30.  (SBU) On September 22, Preah Sihanouk provincial police 
arrested 61-year-old French national Jean-Marie Beranger and rescued 
a 13-year-old male victim.  Police reported that the perpetrator was 
charged under TIP law Article 43 ("Indecent Acts against a Minor 
under Fifteen Years") and that the perpetrator is currently in 
pre-trial detention.  Police reported that the victim returned 
directly to his family at its request. 
 
Other Activity 
--------------- 
 
¶31.  (SBU) Action Pour Les Enfants (APLE) reported assisting police 
in various provinces with investigations that led to arrests of the 
7 foreign pedophiles mentioned above. 
 
¶32.  (SBU) MOSAVY reported that it received 140 female victims of 
sex trafficking in Cambodia and sent them to NGOs for victim 
assistance.  MOSAVY also reported that seven female Vietnamese 
national victims were sent back to Vietnam. 
 
¶33.  (SBU) International Justice Mission (IJM) reported five 
successful operations in Siem Reap and Phnom Penh, resulting in the 
rescue of 20 victims.  Police confirmed that they arrested 13 
perpetrators through these various operations. 
 
¶34.  (SBU) The Cambodian Human Rights and Development Association 
(ADHOC) received three human trafficking complaints.  ADHOC reported 
that police rescued five victims, between the ages of three and 16 
years old, and that police arrested two perpetrators in two cases 
and are searching for the perpetrator in the third case. 
 
¶35.  (SBU) Cambodian Defenders Project (CDP) received two new cases 
related to "procurement of prostitution," in which three rescued 
prostitutes were under age 18.  CDP provided legal support and 
lawyers for the victims, who had already been placed at the AGAPE 
long-term aftercare shelter. 
 
¶36.  (SBU) World Hope International (WHI) received 40 rescued 
victims of sex trafficking between the ages of 11 and 21 years old. 
Of the 40 trafficked victims, WHI reported that seven were abused by 
foreign pedophiles. 
 
¶37.  (SBU) AFESIP reported that the organization filed four 
complaints to police on behalf of victims.  AFESIP also provided 
assistance to 37 rescued victims from four raid operations carried 
out by police from AHTJP. 
 
¶38.  (SBU) Healthcare Center for Children (HCC) reported that their 
two centers in Kandal and Koh Kong provinces received nine victims 
of sexual and labor trafficking during the third quarter.  Three of 
the victims were minors.  HCC provided bsic necessities and legal 
counseling to the victims. 
 
RODLEY