09SANAA2117
SA'ADA CEASEFIRE DISCUSSIONS UNDERWAY
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #2117/01 3271515
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 231515Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3269
INFO RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 1706
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCS E C R E T SANAA 002117 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/ARP AMACDONALD AND INR JYAPHE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PREL SA YM
SUBJECT: SA'ADA CEASEFIRE DISCUSSIONS UNDERWAY 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Stephen Seche for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (S/NF) SUMMARY.  Well-informed sources, including one 
involved directly in preliminary talks, report that both the 
ROYG and the Houthis are looking for a way to stop the 
fighting in northern Yemen.  While the Houthis apparently 
have accepted the RQG's five ceasefire conditions, there is 
an impasse as to whether these conditions must be implemented 
before a ceasefire is announced or immediately after.  The 
matter is further complicated by Saudi Arabia's involvement 
in the war: Saleh cannot reach a ceasefire with the Houthis 
if the SAG is still fighting them, nor will he have much 
incentive to do so if the SAG continues to support the war 
effort militarily and financially.  It is hard to say how far 
these ceasefire talks will go, but they are the first serious 
effort that we know of to bring the Sixth War to an end 
politically rather than militarily.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SALEH MEETINGS WITH HOUTHI ENVOY 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF) Well-informed sources, including some involved 
directly in preliminary talks, report that both the ROYG and 
the Houthis are looking for a way to stop the fighting in 
northern Yemen.  Presidential advisor Abdul Karim al-Iryani 
told the Ambassador on November 22 that efforts were indeed 
underway to agree on terms for a ceasefire.  The Houthis have 
chosen Hassan Zaid, chairman of the opposition Joint Meeting 
Parties (JMP) and native of Sa'ada, to act as their 
intermediary with President Saleh.  Zaid told PolOff on 
November 21 that he met with Saleh on November 19 to discuss 
conditions for a ceasefire.  According to Zaid, Saleh 
insisted that once the Houthis accept the ROYG's five 
ceasefire conditions, he would form a commission to woQ out 
details regarding implementation of the ceasefire.  (Note: 
The ROYG's five ceasefire conditions required of the Houthis 
are: 1) withdraw from the mountains, remove mines, open 
roads, and commit to a ceasefire; 2) withdraw from districts 
and refrain from interfering with local authorities; 3) 
return seized and stolen military and civilian equipment; 4) 
release detainees; and 5) respect the law and the 
constitution.  End Note.)  Iryani confirmed that a mediation 
committee is now being formed in the event that hostilities 
cease.  According to Zaid, Saleh proposed the ceasefire 
commission consist of Northwest Regional Commander Ali 
Muhsin, Ali al-Jayfi, head of the Giants brigade, and Faisal 
Rajab, a southern military commander, while the Houthis 
proposed they be represented by Abdulkarim Amir Adim 
al-Houthi, Saleh Ahmed Habra, and Saleh al-Samaad. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF) Zaid held a subsequent meeting with the President 
on November 22 to deliver a letter from Houthi spokesman 
Mohammed Abdulsalam agreeing to the five conditions, 
clarifying their objectives (such as denying that they want 
to re-establish the imamate), and shaming Saleh for "staying 
idle while children and women are killed by missiles and 
airplanes of the Saudi regime."  Zaid told PolOff on November 
23 that he emerged from the meeting very disappointed, as 
there was no progress or tangible outcome.  He reported that, 
on one hand, Saleh appeared to indicate that he wanted to 
stop the war but could not, because he complained that 
Hussein and Hamid al-Ahmar, leaders of the Hashid tribal 
confederation, want to keep the war going.  Zaid also had the 
impression Saleh would not end the war as long as the Saudis 
continued funding and supporting it. 
 
CEASEFIRE SEQUENCING UNCLEAR 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF) One of the elements that remains unclear, 
according to Zaid, is the sequencing of the implementation of 
the ceasefire relative to the implementation of the five 
ceasefire conditions.  The Houthis have pledged to implement 
the five conditions within a day of the cessation of military 
operations.  During that time, both parties would open roads, 
begin to clear the area of mines, come down from the 
mountains, and stop interfering with local authorities. 
Iryani told the Ambassador that he believes the essential 
first step is for Abdul Malik al-Houthi to publicly announce 
the rebels, acceptance of the ROYG's five points.  He said 
this is the only way Saleh will move forward, since it has 
become the government's bottom line for a settlement.  A 
public statement by the Houthis would enable Saleh to say to 
the families of the soldiers who have died and the Yemeni 
people in general that the sacrifices they made were not in 
vain.  (Note:  While the Houthis have communicated their 
acceptance of the five conditions to the President, they have 
not yet made it public.  End Note.) 
 
SOLVING THE PROBLEM AT ITS ROOTS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S/NF) Through their intermediary, the Houthis also 
presented the President with a list of their conditions for 
"guaranteeing a final resolution" to the conflict.  (Note: 
Iryani confirmed that the Houthis were presenting conditions 
of their own for the ceasefire to hold.  End Note.) 
According to a document Zaid gave PolOff on November 21, 
these conditions are: 
 
-- The formal announcement of a ceasefire, the cessation of 
all mobilization of ground troops, and allowing IDPs to 
return to their homes; 
 
-- The release of all prisoners of war and the clarification 
of the fates of the disappeared; 
 
-- Actions to address the impact of the war through 
reconstructing destroyed infrastructure and compensating 
civilians for looted properties; 
 
-- The "normalization of life in Sa,ada" through the 
following steps:  1) The army's withdrawal from villages and 
farms in order to demilitarize public and private properties 
in Sa,ada.  (Comment:  It is not clear if the Houthis will 
allow the military to remain in their posts on mountaintops. 
End Comment.); 2) Genuine economic development and delivery 
of basic services; 3) Ending cultural and political 
discrimination against the Zaydi population; and 4) Allowing 
civil servants to return to their jobs and giving them 
back-pay for the time they were separated from their posts. 
 
SIMULTANEOUS SAUDI ARABIA TRACK 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S/NF) According to NDI Deputy Director Murad Zafir, 
reaching a ceasefire has been complicated by the SAG,s 
involvement: Saleh cannot announce a ceasefire if the Saudis 
are still fighting the Houthis, nor will he have any 
incentive to do so if the SAG continues providing cash and 
weapons for the war.  Zafir told PolOff that the Saudis had 
approached Hussein al-Ahmar to serve as a mediator with the 
Houthis.  Zaid confirmed this, saying Ahmar then called him 
to consult about possible terms the Houthis might accept. 
(Note: Hussein al-Ahmar has mobilized hundreds of Hashid 
tribesmen to fight alongside the ROYG army against the 
Houthis.  End Note.)  Zafir told PolOff on November 19 that 
Ahmar had consulted with the Houthis to see if they would 
withdraw from Jebel Dukhan in exchange for a Saudi commitment 
not to allow the ROYG to attack the Houthis from Saudi 
territory.  The Houthis reportedly agreed to these 
conditions, and Ahmar went to Riyadh to deliver the message. 
Zaid said, however, that the Saudis were not willing to give 
the Houthis anything in exchange for their commitment to 
withdraw from Jebel Dukhan and stop attacking Saudi forces. 
(Comment:  Post has not been able to confirm these reports 
with Ahmar directly.  End Comment.)  Zafir reported that the 
Houthis also chose Rabaea Amin al-Okaimi, a sheikh from Al 
Jawf, to serve as a mediator with the SAG.  Okaimi is 
reportedly in Saudi Arabia at the moment. 
 
¶7. (S/NF) Zafir told PolOff that the Houthis are asking the 
SAG to stop military action in Jebel Dukhan, to cease attacks 
against the Houthis, and to refrain from allowing the ROYG to 
launch attacks against the Houthis from Saudi territory.  If 
the SAG were to agree, he said Houthis wanted the Zaydi 
sheikhs on the Saudi side of the border to guarantee the 
terms; they are reportedly very warrior-like tribes that will 
keep the Saudi army out of their territories if they have 
given their word to do so.  Zafir reported that the SAG 
agreed to these conditions in principle, but nothing is 
official yet. 
 
¶8.  (S/NF) Iryani claimed to have no information about a 
separate line of communication between the Houthis and the 
SAG.  He did agree, however, that any ceasefire agreement 
between the ROYG and the Houthis would have to be agreed to 
in advance by the Saudis and coordinated with their forces so 
all hostilities could cease at the same time. 
 
HOPE FROM THE HAJJ 
------------------ 
 
¶9.  (S/NF) Zafir believes that the November 25 beginning of 
the Hajj could encourage the Saudis to at least stop their 
direct military involvement in the war, as they do not want 
to be accused of killing Muslims during that holy time, as 
Iran will surely do.  Zafir also argues that the Saudis will 
have difficulty achieving their goal of clearing a 10 
kilometer buffer zone on the Yemeni side of the border -- as 
the SAG appears to be attempting to do -- without killing 
civilians and inciting anti-Saudi sentiment. 
 
HOW SERIOUS IS SALEH? 
--------------------- 
 
¶10.  (S/NF) Zaid thinks Saleh may just be feigning an 
interest in a ceasefire agreement.  One reason he believes so 
is the people Saleh recommended for the ceasefire commission 
)- including Northwest Region Commander Muhsin -- are people 
he is rumored to want to get rid of in order to clear the way 
for his son Ahmed to become president.  (Comment:  Since the 
beginning of the Sixth War, many analysts have expressed the 
opinion that it is an internal proxy war aimed at weakening 
potential rivals to the president's son.  End Comment.) 
According to Zaid, Saleh will get serious about the ceasefire 
if he feels the war directly threatens his presidency or his 
son's prospects to succeed him, or if the Saudis stop 
financing his war.  Even if Saleh wanted to stop the war, 
however, Zaid is not sure he would be able to, given the 
Saudis' involvement and the desire of certain factions with 
the SAG to keep it going.  "The decision to stop the war is 
not in Saleh,s hands.  It,s in Riyadh," he said. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶11.  (S/NF) The ceasefire discussions underway are incipient 
but promising nonetheless, if only because they are the first 
such discussions since the war began in August.  Many Yemeni 
analysts believe that Saudi Arabia will make or break them, a 
view that would seem to ignore the disinterest each of the 
warring parties has shown to date in anything other than a 
military solution.  END COMMENT. 
SECHE