06MANAGUA2705
ALN DEPUTIES DISCOUNT POSSIBILITY OF QUICK, EASY
Mon Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2705/01 3521425
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 181425Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8448
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE

RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002705 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM NU
SUBJECT: ALN DEPUTIES DISCOUNT POSSIBILITY OF QUICK, EASY 
REUNIFICATION WITH PLC 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2625 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2546 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: During a recent meeting with the Ambassador, 
a group of young Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) 
deputies-elect minimized rumors of ALN rapprochement with the 
rival Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC).  They commented 
that public overtures from PLC officials aim to create the 
impression that the ALN will not continue as a separate 
entity.   The deputies admitted that the ALN made mistakes 
and must work to train party poll watchers and convince rural 
voters that the ALN represents the future of Liberalism in 
Nicaragua before municipal elections in 2008.  They agreed 
with the Ambassador that ALN officials must work hard to 
maintain the Alliance and resist Sandinista Front (FSLN) 
attempts to undermine Nicaraguan democracy.  Senior ALN 
deputy Maria Eugenia Sequeira later commented that the new 
deputies are well-intentioned, but lack experience.  She 
agreed with her cohorts, however, that the ALN should 
maintain its independence and work to undermine the PLC.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador and poloff met with ALN deputies-elect 
Ramiro Silva, Wilber Lopez, Francisco Jarquin, and Francisco 
Valdivia (alternate) on December 13 to discuss the November 
elections and ALN consolidation strategies.  The 
deputies-elect thanked Ambassador Trivelli for his support 
during the campaign and put themselves "at our disposal" for 
future legislative activities in the National Assembly. 
 
What About Liberal Unity? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) The deputies commented that many PLC supporters are 
disenchanted with the party, and the time may be ripe to 
"pick the low hanging fruit" and strengthen the ALN. 
Valdivia said that many Liberals voted for the PLC out of 
fear -- believing the PLC propaganda that only the PLC could 
defeat the FSLN -- and now feel angry and deceived.  In 
contrast, virtually no ALN voters believe they made the wrong 
choice; however, Valdivia explained, the PLC is already 
maneuvering to entice the best Liberal candidates for the 
2008 municipal elections, regardless of party affiliation. 
 
¶4. (C) Silva stated that many comments from PLC officials 
regarding unification with the ALN are directed at weakening 
the Alliance by creating the impression that the ALN has no 
future as an independent party.  He agreed that the ALN 
should try to attract PLC officials and supporters, but said 
that the ALN must work on internal unity first.  Jarquin 
warned that supporters of convicted ex-President and PLC 
leader Arnoldo Aleman may try to infiltrate the ALN during 
this process. 
 
¶5. (C) The deputies concurred with the Ambassador that the 
ALN must maintain its Alliance with its constituent parties 
and movements -- such as the Conservative Party, the 
Resistance, evangelical Christians and others --  as well as 
work with regional parties and civil society to protect 
Nicaraguan democracy.  Jarquin agreed that a separation of 
the individual groups could lead to chaos, although Lopez was 
confident that Montealegre (who he was confident would lead 
the ALN caucus in the Assembly) could hold the ALN together. 
 
Pact Stole Seats From Us 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6. (C) Jarquin responded to a query from the Ambassador on 
the outcome of the national elections by stating that the 
Supreme Electoral Council's extreme delay in posting the 
results from the final eight percent of voting centers and 
refusal to post results by voting center was very suspicious. 
 The deputies-elect believe that the FSLN and PLC conspired 
to manipulate the results in close races, which resulted in 
ALN losses in Chinandega, Masaya, and Managua.  (Note: The 
ALN leadership ultimately decided not to pursue challenges in 
these races -- see ref B.  End Note.) 
 
Deputies Admit ALN "Deficiencies" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) While they stated that partisan influence in the 
electoral authorities prejudiced the ALN, the deputies also 
admitted that the ALN made mistakes during the campaign. 
Silva acknowledged that the ALN failed to penetrate rural 
areas in the north and other areas where the PLC ultimately 
carried large majorities.  Valdivia agreed that the corps of 
ALN poll watchers was "deficient" compared to their more 
experienced FSLN and PLC counterparts.  Lopez stated that ALN 
presidential candidate Eduardo Montealegre failed to shake 
his image as a candidate of the elite class in many areas. 
 
¶8. (C) To rectify these weaknesses, the deputies agreed that 
the ALN needs a much stronger radio presence in rural areas. 
PLC partisans dominate local radio in the north and often 
refuse to run ads or commentary from competing parties, 
Valdivia explained.  He also noticed that the PLC was very 
successful in particularly remote areas of the South Atlantic 
Autonomous Region (RAAS) where he did not have the resources 
to campaign.  Silva concurred with us that local mayors are 
also important opinion-makers and should be courted. 
 
Help Us -- New Deputies Lack Experience 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C) During a December 14 meeting with poloff, senior ALN 
deputy and caucus chief Maria Eugenia Sequeira commented that 
the new, young deputies are "well-intentioned, but 
inexperienced."  She used the occasion to again request 
training and technical assistance for caucus members.  She 
also implied that we should continue to meet with more 
seasoned ALN politicians, such as herself, as our primary 
contacts with the party -- not the "newbies." 
 
¶10. (C) Sequeira agreed with the deputies-elect that the ALN 
must be very cautious regarding any sort of rapprochement 
with the PLC.  She discounted the possibility that 
non-Arnoldista deputies may join the ALN caucus, but said 
they may form a separate caucus or independent voting bloc 
within the PLC.  Sequeira specifically mentioned former 
National Assembly president Carlos Noguera (re-elected in 
Jinotega) and "ten others" who may respond to overtures from 
the ALN and/or the Embassy.  In the longer term, however, she 
stated that the ALN must "completely destroy" the PLC, which 
is too riddled with corruption for salvation. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶11. (C) With the Liberal electorate feeling betrayed by the 
PLC's false promises, the time is ripe for the ALN to make 
inroads, especially in northern rural areas that the PLC 
dominated.  To accomplish this task, Montealegre must 
strengthen the cohesion of the party and motivate his ground 
troops and newly-elected ALN officials who will soon begin to 
enjoy the cushy salaries and perks of office.  While the ALN 
rose from nothing to become a major force in the National 
Assembly, the 2008 municipal elections will likely determine 
which party represents the future of Liberalism in Nicaragua 
and which will become a footnote in history. 
TRIVELLI