06MANAGUA763
NICARAGUA SEEKS USG SUPPORT FOR MEMBERSHIP IN U.N.
Thu Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0763 0961453
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061453Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5852
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0007UNCLAS MANAGUA 000763 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL UNGA NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA SEEKS USG SUPPORT FOR MEMBERSHIP IN U.N. 
HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL 
 
 
¶1. On March 31, post received a diplomatic note from the 
Foreign Ministry dated March 31 stating that the government 
of Nicaragua (GON) will present Nicaragua as a candidate for 
membership of the United Nations Human Rights Council when 
voting for membership takes place in the U.N. General 
Assembly in May.  The note solicits USG support for 
Nicaragua's candidacy.  Informal translation of the 
diplomatic note follows.  The original Spanish-language 
version of the note will be faxed to WHA/CEN. 
 
¶2. Informal translation of the GON diplomatic note: 
 
(Official Government Seal) 
Ministry of Foreign Relations 
MRE/DGOI/00819/03/06 
 
The International Organizations Section of the Ministry of 
Foreign Relations of the Republic of Nicaragua presents its 
compliments to the Honorable Embassy of the United States of 
America and takes the opportunity to inform the Honorable 
Embassy that the Government of Nicaragua has decided to 
present its candidacy for membership in the Human Rights 
Council of the United Nations during the elections that will 
take place in the General Assembly in New York on May 9, 
¶2006. 
 
As a founding member of the United Nations loyal to the 
principles of the organization, Nicaragua has always sought 
to contribute to the great tasks that the United Nations has 
sought to carry out, particularly in the areas of 
international security, the consolidation of peace, the 
eradication of poverty and the promotion of development, 
while always taking into account the promotion and protection 
of human rights and fundamental liberties. 
 
Nicaragua is convinced that it can continue to contribute to 
the accomplishment of the objectives of the United Nations, 
taking into account that the organization currently faces the 
challenges of reforming itself and continually adapting 
itself to the challenges posed by a changing international 
environment.  In recent years Nicaragua has been recognized 
by the international community as a country committed to the 
fight against corruption, the promotion of good governance, 
and the promotion of disarmament, efforts that have had 
positive effects on the region.  Nicaragua could share these 
concrete experiences with other states from its position as a 
member of the Human Rights Council. 
 
Nicaragua was a member of the former Human Rights Commission 
on four occasions, most recently from 1995 to 1997, and 
always distinguished itself by playing a positive, objective 
role in the work carried out by that important body, 
particularly in the promotion of dialogue and cooperation 
between member states, observers, inter-governmental 
institutions, and civil society. 
 
Nicaragua places particular importance on its candidacy for 
the Human Rights Council and is aware that, far from being a 
privilege, membership in this council constitutes a serious 
commitment and a great responsibility.  Taking into account 
that this membership will be chosen based on geographic 
distribution, it hopes that small countries will have the 
opportunity to participate. 
 
Taking into account the close ties of friendship between the 
Illustrious Government of the United States and the 
Government of Nicaragua, we ask for your valuable support for 
the Nicaraguan candidacy. 
 
The International Organizations Section of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Nicaragua takes the 
opportunity to assure the Honorable Embassy of the United 
States of America of its highest consideration. 
 
Managua, 31 March 2006 
(Signature and official Ministry seal 
 
END TEXT OF DIPLOMATIC NOTE 
TRIVELLI