07MANAGUA2021
NICARAGUA: DOLE PITCHES NEMAGON SETTLEMENT TO
Tue Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2021/01 2471632
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 041632Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1153
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002021 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB/IFD, AND L 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/04/2017 
TAGS: EINV SENV SOCI ELAB NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: DOLE PITCHES NEMAGON SETTLEMENT TO 
ORTEGA 
 
REF: 06 MANAGUA 0440 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
Summary 
------- 

¶1. (C)  Dole Food Company President and CEO David DeLorenzo 
met with President Ortega on August 28 to deliver a new 
proposal for the settlement of health claims related to the 
pesticide Nemagon.  DeLorenzo reports that Ortega was 
receptive to the proposal, which would include payments to 
affected individuals as well as investment in a health 
clinic.  However, Ortega said he could not push for the 
removal of Law 364, which Dole believes must be part of any 
final resolution.  Division between groups representing those 
affected by Nemagon further complicates Dole's efforts to 
negotiate a settlement.  End Summary. 
 
Dole Offers Direct Compensation and Health Clinic 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 

¶2. (C) Dole Food Company President and CEO David DeLorenzo 
and Dole General Counsel Michael Carter met with President 
Ortega on August 28 to deliver a new proposal for the 
settlement of health claims related to the use of Nemagon in 
Nicaraguan banana farms prior to 1980.  Under the proposal, 
the National Assembly would repeal Law 364, which required 
Nicaraguan courts to provide special treatment to Nemagon 
cases, including a lower burden of proof and expedited 
resolution.  According to DeLorenzo, $32.5 billion in claims 
have been filed in Nicaragua under Law 364.  The proposal 
also requires the National Assembly to pass a law that would 
allow the Nicaraguan Government to negotiate a settlement on 
behalf of the claimants, as the Honduran Government has done. 
 
 
¶3. (C) In exchange, DeLorenzo said Dole would provide a 
settlement package worth $15 million.  He claimed that Dole 
employed only 3,500 in Nicaragua, and only 500 had exposure 
to Nemagon.  However, all 12,000 Nicaraguans claiming 
exposure and related health issues would be invited to 
participate in a screening program.  Those proven sterile, a 
demonstrated effect of Nemagon exposure, would receive about 
$6,000 from Dole in compensation, while those with low sperm 
counts would receive $2,000.  The company would also build a 
modern medical clinic in Chinandega, where Dole's farms were 
located, and fund its operation for five years.  The clinic 
would handle claims, which DeLorenzo said are unfounded, that 
Nemagon exposure has caused other health problems such as 
renal malfunction.  DeLorenzo said that Shell is prepared to 
provide a settlement package worth a similar amount, while 
Dow is still deciding whether to join in. 
 
Ortega Wants to Settle--Without Repealing Law 364 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 

¶4. (C) DeLorenzo told the Ambassador that Ortega, who was 
accompanied by Attorney General Hernan Estrada in the August 
28 meeting, was generally receptive to the proposal. 
DeLorenzo reported that they had an "interesting, good, 
friendly, and focused" discussion.  However, Ortega labeled 
two key elements of the proposal "politically difficult," 
repeal of Law 364 and passage of a new law allowing the 
government to settle all claims.  DeLorenzo said he explained 
to Ortega that these elements were essential to any 
settlement--otherwise, Dole would remain the target of a 
never-ending barrage of Nemagon litigation.  Ortega 
recommended that Dole talk to his &top guy8 Carlos 
Arguello, Nicaraguan Ambassador to the Hague, and continue 
the dialogue with Estrada.  Dole's General Counsel will 
follow up with Arguello, while Fernando Medina, Dole's local 
attorney, plans to meet with Estrada later this week. 
 
Banana Workers Split 
-------------------- 

¶5. (C) Over the past several months, Dole has garnered 
support from several groups of former banana workers for a 
negotiated settlement.  Carter and representatives of three 
groups--ASTROEXDAN, AOBON, and Alianza Nacional--wrote Ortega 
on June 28 requesting his support in negotiating a "permanent 
resolution to the Nemagon problem and all related litigation, 
claims, and judgments."  Other groups, however, wish to 
pursue compensation through the courts.  In addition to 
litigation in Nicaragua under Law 364, the trial for the 
first of five cases filed in Los Angeles County Court, 
involving more than 5,000 workers from throughout Central 
America, began on July 19, 2007. 
 
¶6. (C) Since May 30, 2007, several hundred former banana 
workers have camped in a park near the National Assembly to 
draw attention to their claims regarding Nemagon.  On August 
29, a crowd of 2,000 former banana workers and their 
supporters, including some of those camped near the National 
Assembly, marched peacefully to the Embassy and delivered a 
letter to the Ambassador.  The letter, signed by 
representatives of several banana employee groups and their 
lawyers, thanks the Embassy for issuing visas to Nicaraguans 
affected by Nemagon so that they could testify in U.S. 
trials.  The marchers carried a large banner to this effect. 
The letter also requests Embassy assistance in executing 
Nicaraguan judgments against Dole and others in the United 
States and seeks assistance in improving medical care in 
Chinandega.  The signatories purport to represent 23,800 
persons affected by Nemagon.  Highlighting the division 
between groups, the letter explicitly states that the 
signatories have no connection with Victorino Espinales, one 
of the representatives of banana workers who signed Dole's 
letter to Ortega. 
 
Comment 
------- 

¶7. (C) Dole executives are optimistic they can negotiate a 
settlement with those who claim health issues as a result of 
Nemagon exposure; they point out that they have settlements 
in place already in Costa Rica and Honduras.  Ortega's 
unwillingness to push for the repeal of Law 364 in the 
National Assembly, however, may prove a stumbling block.  It 
is unclear what real incentive Ortega has to resolve this 
issue quickly--he would likely gain politically by drawing 
out a process that vilifies Dole and other U.S. companies 
that for him undoubtedly represent the "savage capitalism" he 
so frequently criticizes.  He is, however, being pressed by 
former banana workers to honor his campaign promise to 
resolve their plight.  We also note that the division between 
worker groups does complicate Dole's efforts to limit legal 
claims by negotiating settlement.  End comment. 
TRIVELLI