07MANAGUA577
ALN MUST EMBRACE LOCAL LEADERS TO WIN BATTLE FOR
Fri Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0577/01 0612322
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 022322Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9324
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/28/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: ALN MUST EMBRACE LOCAL LEADERS TO WIN BATTLE FOR 
LIBERAL LEADERSHIP 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0543 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0487 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 0331 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) deputy 
Ramiro Silva believes that the ALN must work with local 
Liberal elected officials in order to win the battle for 
Liberal leadership with the Liberal Constitutional Party 
(PLC) and consolidate opposition forces.  Silva holds ALN 
leader Eduardo Montealegre largely responsible for the 
party's failure to capitalize on post-election discontent 
with the PLC and attend to essential internal affairs.  In 
reference to intimidation tactics used by the Sandinista 
Front (FSLN) against ALN members, Silva described a plan for 
organized shake downs against property owners in the 
department of Rivas, which could harm American investors as 
well.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Poloff met with ALN deputy Ramiro Silva on February 28 
to discuss ALN liaison with Liberal mayors prior to the 2008 
municipal elections and the state of ALN party cohesion. 
Silva, formerly a PLC youth leader in Managua, defected to 
the ALN in 2005 to support Eduardo Montealegre's presidential 
campaign.  Victorious in the ALN's pre-election primaries to 
select National Assembly candidates, he was one of the few 
ALN leaders to effectively organize grassroots support for 
the party.  A young, dark-skinned colloquial Spanish-speaker 
with a rheumy eye, the intelligent and energetic Ramirez 
belies the ALN's reputation as a party for the white elites. 
 
¶3. (C) On the question of Liberal unity and the PLC's 
continued subservience to Aleman, Silva acknowledged that, 
since the elections, many PLC deputies and local leaders have 
become much more agitated with the Aleman-Ortega pact and 
Ortega's totalitarian push.  He commented that the Liberal 
bases desire unity of the opposition, but without the 
influence of Aleman or his cronies.  Silva agreed that the 
ALN must reach out to non-Arnoldista PLC deputies as well as 
members of the Convergencia (refs B and C) uncomfortable with 
Ortega's anti-democratic thrust. 
 
¶4. (C) Silva energetically agreed that the ALN must cultivate 
mayors and town councilors tired of PLC leader Arnoldo 
Aleman's collaboration with President Ortega, especially 
where the PLC dominated the Liberal voting bloc.  He 
commented that he already has a friendly relationship with 
group leader Bronley Alvarez and would attend the meeting 
with other ALN and PLC deputies scheduled for later in the 
day (Ref A).  Silva also concurred that the ALN's efforts to 
cultivate elected Liberal officials at the local level has 
been largely ineffective due to ALN deputy and mayoral 
liaison Jamileth Bonilla's distraction with other issues and 
her reputation as a political opportunist.  He pledged to 
work closely with the mayors in an effort to block Aleman's 
pretensions to eliminate and subvert other leaders in the 
Liberal camp. 
 
¶5. (C) While discussing Bonilla's complicated role, Silva 
blamed Montealegre for not solving the ALN's leadership 
problems (primarily between Bonilla and fellow ALN 
deputy/caucus chief Maria Eugenia Sequeira) and taking up the 
mantle of opposition leader.  Despite Montealegre's 
assertions to the contrary, he repeated accusations that 
Montealegre has been muzzled by FSLN threats to prosecute him 
under charges related to the Cenis (bank bonds) scandal, 
noting that Montealegre recently opposed a proposal by ALN 
deputy Alejandro Bolanos to organize a protest march of 
newly-fired public employees.  Poloff responded that the ALN 
deputies are not children and Montealegre is not their 
father/caudillo -- they must take the initiative to resolve 
personal differences for the good of the party and the 
country and not depend on one person. 
 
¶6. (C) Poloff mentioned that Alejandro Bolanos (head of the 
National Assembly's Labor Commission) has been very assertive 
on labor rights and even convinced Managua Archbishop 
Leopoldo Brenes to publicly speak out on behalf of unjustly 
fired government employees.  Silva concurred and noted that 
the FSLN has threatened to persecute Bolanos by using the 
partisan and corrupt court system to contrive charges related 
to the financing of his resort in Pueblo Viejo.  Silva also 
mentioned Bolanos' vulnerability through property owned in 
the municipality of Tola (Rivas Department).  He explained 
that the Sandinista mayor of Tola has a "business deal" with 
FSLN security chief Lenin Cerna, who controls the courts and 
police, and her husband, who controls a gang of about 50 
professional "land invaders," whereby the three identify 
"soft target" property owners, invade their land under a 
specious pretext, and then demand a payoff.  The property 
owners have no choice but to pay since the local government, 
police, and judges are all involved in the scam. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: The ALN has so far failed to capitalize on 
the mayors' and councilors' discontent with Aleman and their 
ability to influence Liberal tendencies at the grass roots 
level.  The ultimate affiliation of the group led by Alvarez 
will greatly influence the leadership struggle in the Liberal 
camp and the outcome of the 2008 municipal elections.  We 
will continue to cultivate young leaders like Ramirez, who 
are ambitious and relatively untainted by past power 
struggles. 
TRIVELLI