07MANAGUA295
CONSERVATIVES WILL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT THE ALN...
Wed Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO3914
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0295/01 0311723
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 311723Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8907
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 000295 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ELAB KDEM NU
SUBJECT: CONSERVATIVES WILL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT THE ALN... 
FOR NOW 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0241 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 0175 
     ¶C. 06 MANAGUA 2625 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Conservative National Assembly deputy 
Alejandro Bolanos, one of the leading Conservative Party 
voices in Nicaragua, recently confided to poloff that the 
Conservatives will continue to support the Nicaraguan Liberal 
Alliance (ALN) for the foreseeable future.  Nevertheless, 
Bolanos has serious doubts about ALN chief Eduardo 
Montealegre's leadership skills.  As president of the Labor 
Commission in the National Assembly, Bolanos plans to track 
illegal firings of civil servants in the Executive and 
partisan dismissals of contractors at the National Assembly. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Poloff met with National Assembly deputy Alejandro 
Bolanos on January 29 to discuss the Conservative Party's 
future within the ALN and Bolanos' role as the new president 
of the Assembly's Labor Commission.  Bolanos, a nephew of 
former President Enrique Bolanos, is regarded as a prominent 
Conservative with a strong voice within the Conservative 
Party (PC).  In the past, he has argued for the Conservatives 
to form a separate caucus in the Assembly to give the party 
its own voice independent from the ALN. 
 
Bolanos on the Conservatives Role in the ALN, Negotiations 
with the PLC 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) At the start of the meeting, Bolanos launched into a 
brief history of the PC, explaining its role as a great party 
with 200 years of history, although the Conservatives have 
witnessed a gradual decline in the last 70 years due to 
"Liberal and Sandinista dictatorships."  Bolanos mentioned 
that a pre-election poll revealed that 14-18 percent of 
Nicaraguans still identify themselves as Conservatives. 
(Comment: PC President Azalia Aviles earlier quoted similar 
figures to us.  This claim is not unrealistic, although many 
Nicaraguans hold memberships in several parties and will 
strategically vote for the party/candidate they believe has 
the best chance of success.  With the exception of a handful 
of mayoral races, this is rarely the Conservative candidate 
or party.  End Comment.) 
 
¶4. (C) Although Bolanos complained that "we are hidden within 
the ALN," he agreed that "the moment is not right" for the 
Conservatives to form an independent caucus.  The PC has five 
deputies and nine alternates in the National Assembly, as 
well as two deputies in the Central American Parliament. 
(Note: A party must have a minimum of four deputies to form 
an independent caucus.  End Note.)  Poloff remarked that the 
PC did much better in the Alliance than it would have running 
alone.  Bolanos nodded, but stated that the possibility of 
breaking away gives the PC more bargaining power within the 
ALN.  "We are the most organized and coherent element of the 
ALN," he stated.  Bolanos explained that the PC has already 
begun to identify "strong candidates" to compete in the ALN 
primaries prior to the 2008 municipal elections. 
 
¶5. (C) Regarding the negotiations with the Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) to unify the opposition caucuses 
(ref B), Bolanos acknowledged that he is part of the ALN 
negotiating committee and confirmed that talks with the PLC 
"will continue."  He concurred that convicted PLC leader and 
ex-President Arnoldo Aleman is the primary obstacle to 
unification.  "Aleman is a more devoted Sandinista than 
Ortega," Bolanos said.  He agreed that the opposition parties 
must formulate an agenda in advance rather than merely 
reacting to Sandinista initiatives.  Bolanos commented that 
one complicating element is that the PLC Liberals "don't like 
or trust Conservatives," although "fortunately the ALN 
Liberals are learning to like us." 
 
Eduardo is a "Feeble Leader" but a "Good Manager" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6. (C) When asked about Eduardo Montealegre's capacity to 
lead the ALN, Bolanos rolled his eyes and described 
Montealegre as "feeble."  According to Bolanos, Montealegre 
lacks the "passion and fire" of a traditional leader (like 
Aleman, for example), although he is a "good manager and a 
good friend."  Bolanos believes that Montealegre is an 
introvert who must force himself to "work the crowds." 
 
Labor Commission will Investigate Unjustified Firings 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) As head of the National Assembly's Labor Commission, 
Bolanos plans to investigate the alleged illegal firings of 
civil servants by their new Sandinista bosses.  He explained 
that the Civil Service Law protects about 6,000 workers in 
the Executive from unjustified dismissal.  Edgar Fonseca, the 
former Director General of the Civil Service who has been 
replaced by Sandinista militant Denis Silva, will serve as an 
advisor to the Labor Commission, Bolanos said.  The 
Commission will also investigate the cases of several 
National Assembly advisors who reportedly had their contracts 
terminated for partisan reasons.  (Comment: We are 
encouraging ALN lawmakers to utilize Assembly committees to 
check Sandinista excesses and abuses -- including the 
unjustified firings and forced resignations of civil servants 
who are not FSLN militants.  End Comment.) 
 
Comment: The PC's Symbiotic Relationship with the ALN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (C) Bolanos is not the only Conservative who pines for the 
glory days of the past.  Fortunately, most influential 
Conservatives reluctantly recognize that the PC's strength as 
a national party is indeed part of history as most of the 
ideological space has been occupied by the Liberals and the 
Sandinistas for many decades.  Nevertheless, the PC continues 
to command significant support in departments such as 
Granada, Rivas, Chinandega, and Boaco (and part of the ALN's 
success in the first three departments was due to the PC 
presence).  In addition, the party enjoys considerable 
financial and human resources that have proven key to the 
ALN's survival.  Participation in the Alliance dramatically 
increased the PC's representation in the Assembly (from one 
to five deputies) and could provide similar benefits for the 
municipal elections.  Simply put, the ALN and the PC need 
each other.  Hopefully the Liberals and Conservatives will 
not forget that fact and allow age-old suspicions to poison 
their mutually beneficial relationship. 
TRIVELLI