07MANAGUA2169
CHECKBOOK DIPLOMACY?  TAIWANESE PRESIDENT VISITS
Fri Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO4723
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #2169/01 2641942
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 211942Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1322
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0071
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0084
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0093
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI//FPA/J2/J3/J5//
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 MANAGUA 002169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC AND IO/UNP 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/TC--HART, BREMNER AND TOYROLYA 
TREASURY FOR SARA GRAY 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/MSIEGELMAN 
3134/ITA/USFCS/OIO/WH/MKESHISHIAN/BARTHUR 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
PACOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/20/2017 
TAGS: PREL EAID ECON PGOV ETRD EINV ENRG TW NU
SUBJECT: CHECKBOOK DIPLOMACY?  TAIWANESE PRESIDENT VISITS 
NICARAGUA 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 1449 (NOTAL) 
 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 1783 (NOTAL) 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 1865 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 b&d. 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: On Aug 26-28, President Chen Shui-ban of 
Taiwan visited Nicaragua as part of an effort to retain 
Nicaragua's diplomatic recognition of his country.  For the 
Nicaraguans, the visit was an opportunity to secure more 
assistance and foreign investment.  Throughout the visit, 
Chen repeatedly praised Ortega, calling him "brother" on more 
than one occasion.  While amounts as large as USD 400 million 
were bandied about during the visit, in reality Taipei has 
agreed to provide Nicaragua with support worth only about USD 
830,000 for electricity generation, donations to a local 
hospital, and support for the Hambre Cero anti-hunger program 
-- all in exchange for continued diplomatic recognition of 
Taiwan.  In fact, the Taiwanese DCM has told us privately 
that most assistance will be in the form of investment as 
opposed to direct aid, and nowhere near the USD 400 million 
that was reported in the press.  Ortega used the discussion 
of trade to criticize CAFTA, advocating again "fair trade vs. 
free trade," and calling on the Taiwanese to engage in "fair 
trade" with Nicaragua by providing technological and 
financial assistance to improve the prices for Nicaraguan 
goods overseas.  Taipei views its relationship with Nicaragua 
as the linchpin to retaining diplomatic recognition in 
Central America and the Caribbean, as evidenced by Chen's 
four official visits to Nicaragua since taking office. 
However, the Ortega-Chen relationship is not an easy one for 
Taipei, due primarily to Ortega's far left political 
inclinations.  Nonetheless, Chen tolerated the Sandinista 
spin on the visit and assistance promises in order to secure 
the precious fruit of continued diplomatic recognition.  End 
Summary. 
 
Chen and Ortega- Best Buddies 
----------------------------- 

¶2. (U) On Aug 26-28, President Chen Shui-ban of Taiwan 
visited Nicaragua with an 88-member public-private 
delegation.  This is Chen's second visit in 2007 (he came for 
Ortega's inauguration) and his fourth visit since his own 
inauguration in 2000.  For Ortega the visit affirmed current 
Taiwanese assistance and commercial ties and presented new 
ways to expand the relationship.  For Chen the visit 
reinforced Taipei's keen desire to retain diplomatic status 
with Nicaragua and offered an opportunity to lobby for 
support for Taiwan's petition to join the UN.  The two 
presidents signed a joint communique which reaffirmed their 
friendship and cooperation; reiterated the importance of 
continued investment by Taiwan in Nicaragua; promoted the 
signing of a "fair trade" agreement; and recognized the high 
value of democracy and the necessity of people to play an 
active role in strengthening and deepening democracy. 
 
¶3. (U) Throughout his visit, President Chen repeatedly 
praised Ortega's achievements in improving education and 
health and working to end poverty and illiteracy, and stated 
he had "much to learn" from Ortega.  He added that only 
Ortega could "bring peace, work, and hope so that the people 
may see progress and never suffer from hunger."  Calling 
Ortega his "brother," Chen pointed out that both men began 
their careers studying law, then entered their countries' 
respective revolutionary or democratic movements, and served 
prison terms as political prisoners. 
 
Taiwan's Diplomatic Priorities: Nicaragua, a linchpin 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 

¶4. (SBU) Chen's effusive praise of Ortega was part of 
Taipei's concerted effort to keep secure Nicaragua's 
long-standing diplomatic recognition of Taiwan, a status 
widely considered in jeopardy following Costa Rica's recent 
official recognition of the People's Republic of China (PRC). 
 (Note: Taiwan closed its embassy in Nicaragua for ten years 
during the 1980s. End note.)  Both of Chen's 2007 visits have 
tried to counter Ortega's campaign promises to return to full 
diplomatic relations with the PRC.  Throughout this visit, 
Chen publicly repeated Ortega's affirmation of Nicaragua's 
commitment to Taiwan.  Ortega kept his options open, saying 
that he hopes to establish formal diplomatic relations with 
both the PRC and Taiwan, as Nicaragua should be able to 
establish diplomatic relations with any country without 
conditions.  Chen supported the idea, saying that it would be 
a great contribution to the diplomatic world -- indeed worth 
y of a "Nobel Peace Prize" -- if Ortega could achieve dual 
recognition. 
 
¶5. (C) According to Taiwanese DCM, Ismael Wang, Taipei sees 
Nicaragua as a linchpin in the region now that Costa Rica has 
"switched sides."  Wang told us that the Taiwanese fear that 
if Nicaragua were to switch recognition to the PRC, it would 
set off a domino effect among the other Central American and 
Caribbean countries that currently recognize Taiwan.  As 
such, Wang said, "this is a matter of basic survival for the 
Taiwanese," a fact that he said the U.S. does not appreciate 
enough.  In fact, during his visit, in the local press Chen 
accused the PRC of trying to bribe Costa Rica with USD 400 
million in assistance and investments to break off ties with 
Taiwan. 
 
¶6. (U) Chen was less successful in his visit's second 
objective, to gain public Nicaraguan support for Taiwan's 
petition to be granted UN membership.  Chen stated publicly 
that he believed Nicaragua will support the bid.  However, 
Ortega's only public statement was that he supported Taiwan's 
proposed March 2008 referendum on its membership application. 
 He added that Nicaragua would make a decision based on the 
result of the referendum.  Chen insisted that privately, 
Ortega had promised his support for Taiwan's UN bid. 
 
What Nicaragua Gets in Return 
----------------------------- 

¶7. (U) Throughout the visit, GON officials and media press 
reports bandied about several amounts of promised Taiwanese 
assistance.  One report touted USD 1.1 million in financial 
aid to fight poverty.  Another claimed the two countries had 
inked an assistance deal worth USD 400 million to cover 
infrastructure, energy, environment, and education.  Minister 
of Health Maritza Quan requested USD 38 million in assistance 
to improve the conditions in all of Nicaragua's health care 
system, which the press claimed Chen promised to study 
seriously. 
 
¶8. (U) In contrast, actual deliverables for the visit were 
quite slim.  As soon as Chen arrived on August 26, he 
traveled straight to Matagalapa for a rally at a Hambre Cero 
site ("Hambre Cero," or Zero Hunger, is Ortega's signature 
poverty reduction initiative; see Ref B (NOTAL)).  There Chen 
handed out 600 radios and ear-temperature thermometers to 
program recipients, which during his remarks Ortega valued at 
USD 1.1 million.  In a separate ceremony on August 27, Chen 
gave USD 30,000 for the purchase of new equipment to the 
directors of the Roberto Calderon Hospital, the busiest in 
the country.  
 
¶9. (U) The Taiwan also promised to help Nicaragua acquire 
power generators.  Again, the GON and Taipei versions of this 
assistance varied.  The Nicaraguans claimed Taipei would 
provide USD 30 million, but Chen said the two countries need 
to decide on the make and model of generator before they 
could discuss monetary terms.  Taipei also pledged to look at 
the feasibility of helping Nicaragua develop alternative 
energy sources such as biomass. 
 
¶10. (C) After the visit, Taiwanese DCM Wang told us that "not 
a single cent" had actually been committed.  Wang said the 
value of Taipei donations, including the medical equipment, 
electrical generation capacity and a grain seed donation to 
Hambre Cero that was not reported publicly, was actually 
closer to USD 830,000.  With a wry smile, he said he had no 
idea where the public figure of USD 400 million had come 
from, and asserted that it would be impossible for Taipei to 
actually come up with USD 400 million in direct assistance 
just for Nicaragua.  Noting that Taipei's general preference 
was for assistance through direct investment, he said that 
Taiwanese were still in talks with GON officials as to the 
details.  He confirmed that Nicaraguan FM Santos was expected 
to visit Taiwan for October 10 National Day celebrations and 
the aid package details would be worked out at that time. 
 
¶11. (U) In response to criticism from home, Taipei 
representatives stated that Chen did not engage in checkbook 
diplomacy, as all of the assistance programs discussed during 
the visit were part of established assistance programs.  In 
fact, Taipei has an a record of generous assistance to 
Nicaragua.  For example, it was one of the first countries to 
deliver assistance after Hurricane Mitch, and it built 
Nicaragua's Foreign Ministry, former Presidential Offices, 
and National Assembly building in Managua. 
 
The Private Sector May Derive More Benefits 
------------------------------------------- 

¶12. (C) Taiwanese DCM Wang stated that most Taiwan assistance 
will be in the form of investment as opposed to direct aid. 
With investment, Taipei hopes to obtain a win-win situation 
by creating employment for Nicaraguans as well as the 
possibility of Taiwanese businesses actually getting some 
return on their investment.  Taipei is also hoping to get 
Taiwanese state-affiliated enterprises such as Taiwan 
Electric directly involved as well. 
 
¶13. (U) Trade and investment are already the most fruitful 
areas for Nicaragua-Taiwan cooperation.  Two-way Nicaragua 
and Taiwan trade was USD 21.6 million in 2006.  Principal 
imports from Taiwan included textiles, zippers (for the 
maquila assembly factories), electronics, kitchenware, 
plastic products, and knitwear.  Nicaragua's top exports to 
Taiwan were frozen beef, coffee, scrap metal, timber and 
cotton fabrics.  There are 21 Taiwanese firms generating 
30,000 jobs in Nicaragua.  Taiwan and Nicaragua have 
negotiated a Free-Trade Agreement, which the Nicaraguan 
National Assembly has already approved.  However, the GON has 
not published the FTA in the "Gaceta," the local equivalent 
of the Federal Register, because it claims to lack the USD 
5,000 to do so.  Thus, the FTA has not been actually enacted. 
 
 
¶14. (U) During the visit, Ortega called on Nicaragua and 
Taiwan to implement the concept of "fair trade," so that 
small countries can benefit as much as large ones.  He 
proposed the establishment of mixed enterprises, with 
Taiwanese technological, financial, and investment support, 
so that Nicaraguan products can fetch better prices.  He 
asked Taiwan to diversify investment out of maquilas and 
focus on long-term investments in agriculture and animal 
husbandry. 
 
¶15. (U) Ortega also used any opportunity or conversation 
regarding trade to rail against CAFTA.  Focusing on his new 
theme of fair trade vs. free trade, Ortega said "fair trade 
does not leave you hanging when they want to; that is free 
trade, it leaves you hanging when you least expect it." 
Harping on a recent U.S. congressional proposal to impose a 
tax on cigars to fund health insurance for children (Ref C), 
Ortega added that "CAFTA is an unfair trade exchange, as when 
the U.S. wants it bans entry of products to its territory and 
slaps taxes on them, as in the most recent case with 
Nicaraguan cigars.  Nicaragua lacks the force to respond to 
the U.S."  Ortega recognized that in "other areas Nicaragua 
is placing products in the U.S., which benefits the country." 
 But in the next breath he said "but one has to keep placing 
them, to continue fighting.  Each time I speak with the 
representatives of the USG I tell then that they have to 
change this concept of free trade for fair trade." 
 
Dealing with the Sandinistas 
----------------------------- 

¶16. (C) According to Taiwanese DCM Wang, the Ortega-Chen 
relationship is not an easy one for the Taipei, as they see 
Nicaragua's "leftist government" as more naturally aligned 
with the PRC than with Taiwan.  He suggested that Taipei must 
adapt to the "new Nicaraguan way of doing things," pointing 
out that President Chen purposely did not wear a suit jacket 
to appeal more to Sandinista sensibilities.  The atmospherics 
for the trip surely made Chen uncomfortable at times.  Ortega 
and his wife, Rosario Murillo, used several events to fly the 
leftist flag.  During the August 26 rally in Matagalpa, 
Ortega, Murillo, and Chen took to the stage together 
accompanied by several socialist militant songs including 
"The Internationale," "The People United," and "Nicaragua 
will Triumph." 
 
¶17. (C) Wang advised that the development of deep personal 
relationships with key officials is of utmost importance when 
dealing with the Sandinistas, especially individuals such as 
first lady Rosario Murillo.  He pointed out that, unlike many 
other foreign missions, the Taiwan mission has managed to 
maintain direct, easy, and high level access to all GON 
ministries as a result of the personal relationships it has 
cultivated across all levels of FSLN leadership. When asked 
about Taiwan's previous loss of recognition during the first 
Ortega Administration, Wang said that the Sandinistas had 
actually cut off relations with Taiwan in retaliation for 
Taipei's support for the Contras ) support that the U.S. had 
"forced" Taipei to give. 
 
Comment 
------- 

¶18. (C) The Taiwanese are obviously uncomfortable with and 
wary of dealing with the Sandinistas.  However, they see the 
maintenance of their relationship with the FSLN as a matter 
of national security as well as diplomatic survival and are 
thus willing to "endure the unendurable" to secure the 
precious fruit of continued diplomatic recognition.  Given 
the proven mercurial tendencies of the Sandinistas and of 
Ortega himself, their natural leftist leanings, and the fact 
that China is now able to offer much richer awards than 
Taiwan, our assessment is that the Taiwanese may be 
overconfident in their ability to influence the Sandinistas. 
 
BIO NOTES: 
 
¶19. (C/NF) Ismael Wang:  Taiwan Embassy DCM, married with two 
children (both currently attending Purdue University).  Wang 
has served in Managua for six years, and was in Costa Rica 
for six years before his current assignment.  He has also 
previously served a six-year tour in Spain.  Wang plans to 
return to Taipei in six months and is considering retirement 
from the Taiwan foreign service.  Wang speaks fluent Spanish, 
Mandarin Chinese, Taiwanese, and most likely speaks English 
at a professional level. 
TRIVELLI