09NICOSIA315
CYPRUS: COURT DECISION IMPACT ON ECONOMY AND
Wed May 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Nicosia
VZCZCXRO3089
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHNC #0315/01 1331009
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 131009Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY NICOSIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9851
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5465
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 NICOSIA 000315 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OFFICE OF EAST EUROPE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/13/2019 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PREL CY
SUBJECT: CYPRUS: COURT DECISION IMPACT ON ECONOMY AND 
PUBLIC OPINION 
 
REF: A. NICOSIA 305 
     ¶B. NICOSIA 301 
 
Classified By: AMB F URBANCIC FOR REASONS 1.5 B AND D 
 
¶1.  (C) The decision by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) 
requiring other EU member-states to enforce rulings made by 
Republic of Cyprus (RoC)  courts in regard to property in the 
part of Cyprus under Turkish Cypriot (TC)  administration is 
having a profound impact on economic confidence in north 
Cyprus, and on public attitudes towards reunification on both 
sides. More people in both communities feel their points of 
view (either, "our property rights can't be negotiated away" 
or "the EU is under the control of the anti-Turkish grouping 
, so TCs can never expect fairness from Greek Cypriots (GCs) 
or the EU") are vindicated by the decision. Any future 
compromises by Christofias on property will be taken by many 
GCs as  betrayal of the principles suggested by the ECJ 
decision. For Talat,  the Orams ruling has reduced his 
negotiating leverage and increased the already high level of 
suspicion of the EU among TCs . To reestablish positive 
momentum, the leaders agreed at their last meeting to speed 
up the pace of the negotiations, but the degree of difficulty 
in achieving success has increased substantially with the 
Orams verdict. End Summary. 
 
Turkish Cypriots See ECJ Decision as Greek Cypriot  Plot 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶2. (C) "How can we make any new investments here until we 
understand how the Orams ruling will play out?" a leading TC 
businessman asked us on May 7.  He then sought our opinion 
about a complicated scheme for hiding his UK and TC assets. 
While some in the TC business community play down the 
long-term economic  fallout from this case, they are all 
uniformly angry that the ruling was made at this time. None 
believes it is simply a court decision based on principle but 
insist that it is part of a long-planned political maneuver 
by the RoC to gain advantage in the reunification talks. They 
point to the alleged ability of the court to have delayed a 
decision on "public policy" grounds and the fact that the 
president of the court was a Greek judge as evidence that, on 
Cyprus and Turkey policy, the EU is controlled by an 
anti-Turk grouping led by Cyprus and Greece. 
 
Who has the Land? 
---------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Under a point system established in 1975 which gave 
credit for factors such as whether individuals were refugees 
from the RoC-controlled area, fought with the TC military, or 
had family members killed by GCs, GC-owned land in the north 
was redistributed to TCs based on how many points people 
could claim-the more points, the more property. In return, TC 
 individuals with property in the south ceded any right to 
these properties to the "TRNC." With about 85 percent of land 
in north Cyprus originally owned by GCs, and a building boom 
which followed the failure of the 2004 Annan Plan, 
considerable economic activity has taken place on disputed 
property. As chief TC negotiator Nami told us on May 5, "How 
can he (Christofias) expect us to use less than 20 percent of 
the land? We need to have an economy here too." 
 
Bank Risk and the Worsening TC Economy 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Banks in north Cyprus typically lend very 
conservatively to developers working on GC-titled land. Loans 
are usually for no more than 50 percent of the value of the 
collateral and with maturities of less than 5 years. As a 
result, banks in the north have loan to deposit ratios of 
only 5 to 45 percent. The "Governor" of the "Central Bank" 
told us that, for this reason, banks he supervises will not 
face financial harm because of Orams. Nevertheless, he did 
not know how much collateral is outstanding on GC land and 
said he is undertaking a study of the issue. Others are not 
so sanguine. One commercial banker said that "some banks have 
been more aggressive" and that it is possible that some 
mortgage-holders will simply stop making payments on the 
theory that they may lose the property in any case to the 
original GC owner. This is made worse because so much new 
development was aimed at the foreign (typically UK) 
holiday/retirement home market and these buyers are no longer 
likely to take new risks buying property in north Cyprus. The 
UK High Commission web site points out to would be 
property-buyers in the north that such purchases are a 
criminal offense under GC law with a maximum sentence of 
seven years imprisonment.
 
 
 
¶5. (C) Real estate brokers in north Cyprus say there has not 
been panic selling, but at least in part because there are so 
few buyers. TC -titled property before Orams typically 
carried a 10-20 percent premium over GC-owned properties. 
That spread is expected to go up significantly, but no data 
is yet available. Brokers say some Russian, Israeli and 
Turkish Cypriot investment groups are being formed to buy 
from desperate sellers at rock-bottom prices (presumably 
because they have no assets in the EU and therefore are 
beyond the reach of the ECJ decision), but the market has not 
yet adjusted. In any case, the important TC construction 
sector, which was already moribund in the wake of 
overbuilding, now has even less likelihood of improving 
without an overall settlement of the island's division. Orams 
exacerbates an 18 month economic slide that has seen auto 
sales decline 70 percent this year compared to last, imports 
reduced by 60 percent, and tax receipts well below 
projections, requiring the recently-elected "TRNC government" 
to seek yet another loan from Turkey to close a USD55 million 
budget gap for  the month of May. 
 
The Public Opinion Problem 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Public opinion among TCs, whose skepticism about 
reunification was reflected in the election of two-state 
advocate Dervis Eroglu as "Prime Minister" in April, took a 
further hit with the Orams ruling. Pro settlement columnist 
Ipek Ozerim writes "my anger started to boil over at the 
biased EU, the ineptness of the TCs, and at the under-handed 
GCs. The property problems on the island are rooted in a 
political conflict and only a comprehensive solution can 
solve them. The talks between Christofias and Talat offered 
the best chance for this. Instead, the south went for 
one-upmanship. In doing so, Cyprus was mortally wounded. I'm 
not sure how the talks can continue. The days of trust and 
good will are over. It's now every side for itself." At the 
May 8 Europe Day event sponsored by the Turkish Cypriot 
Chamber of Commerce, only one politician and barely a dozen 
businesspeople  showed up as TCs did not want to demonstrate 
any support for the EU in Orams' wake. For many TCs, the 
Orams decision establishes GC court writ over the TC north, 
calling into question the meaning of "bi-zonality" that is a 
basis for the negotiations. Septel will examine the history 
of this concept in Cyprus and how it is perceived by the two 
sides. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Among GCs, the general attitude regarding the case 
is one of vindication and satisfaction that "those who tried 
to buy our stolen land" will be punished. There is also 
growing opportunism. GC lawyers are now reportedly working 
with their UK colleagues, searching through UK property 
records, looking for a list of Britons who are known to own 
properties in north Cyprus, or for Turkish-sounding names and 
then checking records here to see if they own land in north 
Cyprus. Several GC lawyers have told us that they plan to 
offer GC property owners contingency deals in return for 
20-30 percent of the value recovered. One lawyer explained 
that the issue they will be arguing is "illegal trespass" and 
seeking back rent. GCs originally from the north who had 
never before considered legal action are now musing the 
possibility. This includes one of the richest men on the 
island, who told the Ambassador last week that he sees no 
reason not to receive compensation for the land he owns in 
the north. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Christofias' flexibility in trading property for TC 
political power is more constrained than it was before Orams. 
As one hard-line journalist wrote; "All we have to do is to 
make clear to our government that it has no mandate to bring 
before the people a solution compromising the rights won by 
Orams plaintiff Meletis Apostolides at the European Court." A 
former GC judge of the European Court of Human Rights said 
"when (UN Special Representative) Downer says that 'both 
sides believe they are right and that we should compromise 
because we cannot have everything,' he is in effect saying 
that Turkey may be right in wanting to institutionalize the 
relevant violations of the principles which the UN envoy is 
expected to support, that we should compromise our human 
rights and accept the Turkish crimes against humanity." 
 
¶9.  (C) Comment: The Orams decision has complicated the 
dynamics of the reunification process. TCs believe it was a 
plot to gain an unfair advantage in the talks and served to 
kick them while they were already down economically - "proof" 
that GCs cannot be trusted to negotiate in good faith. A 
sense of continuous betrayal by the EU- starting with the 
failure to open direct trade in return for voting in favor of 
the Annan Plan and proceeding to the many restrictions the EU 
has allowed the GCs to place on spending the Euro 259 million 
assistance program for the north - has caused even 
pro-solution types to reject the EU as a biased entity. 
 
¶10. (C) Comment continued:  Many GCs have long believed that 
once they agreed to a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation (in 
1977), they were done compromising. While Orams will not get 
GCs their property back,  it might make the pain of waiting 
more acceptable by extracting rent from those who "illegally 
occupy our land." To reverse the negative momentum of the 
decision, the leaders in their last meeting agreed to 
"intensify" the pace of the talks. However, polls tell us 
that the core of GC "yes" voters for the Annan Plan were 
refugees from the northern Cyprus. This core may be less 
willing to vote "yes" again if they can monetize their assets 
in the north via Orams . Property for governance and security 
was and is the basic deal that has to be struck between the 
two communities. One leg of this deal has now been whittled 
down, at least in the eyes of many Cypriots on both sides. 
 
 
 
Urbancic