04ANKARA6769
TURKEY URGES ALL IRAQIS TO PARTICIPATE IN JAN. 30
Sat Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

040553Z Dec 04UNCLAS ANKARA 006769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ASEC IZ TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY URGES ALL IRAQIS TO PARTICIPATE IN JAN. 30 
ELECTIONS 
 
REF: STATE 254809 
 
¶1. When on Dec. 3 PolMilOff called on the MFA Iraq Desk to 
discuss Iraqi elections (reftel), we were provided an MFA 
press statement that was to be released the same day. 
COMMENT: We see the statement as offering Turkey's full 
support for Jan. 30 elections taking place with all Iraqis' 
full participation.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶2. Begin text of informal embassy translation of statement: 
 
The contacts that were held with Iraqi Interim Government 
Vice President Ibrahim Jafari on Dec. 1-2 in Ankara were 
useful.  The visit of the Iraqi Vice President was even more 
important as it coincides with a period during which 
preparations for January 30, 2005 general elections are 
heightened. 
 
Our Prime Minister and Foreign Minister once again stressed 
to their Iraqi guests Turkey's principled and clear policy 
regarding the transformation process in Iraq.  The Iraqi Vice 
President expressed that Turkey's approach without ill 
intentions regarding Iraq helps to assure Iraq's own success. 
 
As it has been so far, Turkey in the coming period will 
preserve its close contact with the Iraqi Interim Government 
as well as with all political and social sectors composing 
Iraq and will continue its friendly recommendations. 
 
Turkey does not have a special agenda concerning Iraq, and it 
approaches all sectors in Iraq with the same goodwill.  The 
sensitivities that Turkey has been voicing and will continue 
to voice are solely directed to support the goal of Iraq's 
preparing its own future in unity and by achieving harmony 
among all groups.  One particular group's feeling itself 
being under pressure or being isolated by another will make 
this harmony difficult.  Similarly, one particular group's 
demands and aspirations that would go beyond the common 
agenda of Iraq will also harm the common goal. 
 
A two-month period is left for trying to hold the first real 
free elections in Iraqi history.  The end of the period for 
the registration of candidates and coalitions for the 
election to a 275-member Assembly and Governorate Councils is 
approaching.  The Iraqis must act by thinking about their 
future.  The pain and distress that are being lived through 
today and the feeling of isolation should not be allowed to 
take the future away from the people. 
 
The rules of the game in Iraq have changed and the way to 
make one's voice heard and safeguard one's interests is 
through the democratic process.  Those who attach hopes to 
other methods will see that they will not yield results and 
they will lose valuable time in the election process.  Iraq 
does not have any alternative other than a new constitutional 
order which will be established with the full participation 
of all sectors, and which will guarantee its national 
integrity.  All Iraqis should be included in this path. 
Turkey is on the side of those who take this path. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
¶3. Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN