04ANKARA6686
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, NOVEMBER 10-30,
Thu Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 12 ANKARA 006686 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE, INL/CTR 
DEPARTMENT FOR VALERIE KWOK USAID E&E/ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, NOVEMBER 10-30, 
2004 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
international media sources published the following news 
articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles originally 
published in Turkish is provided through unofficial local 
FSN translation. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Published November 30, 2004 by the International 
Office on Migration (IOM) at http://www.iom.int/: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: 
 
     The 88th session of the IOM governing body will open on 
     Tuesday, 30 November 2004, in Conference Room XVII at 
     the Palais des Nations. 
 
     This year's Council session "International Dialogue on 
     Migration" will focus on Valuing Migration: the costs, 
     benefits, opportunities and challenges of migration. 
 
     In his opening presentation Gervais Appave, IOM's 
     Director of Migration Policy and Research, will outline 
     the opportunities and challenges posed by migration 
     today and in the future. He will emphasize that "It 
     would, of course, be a mistake to measure the value of 
     migration solely in economic terms. Migration is linked 
     not only to national and global economic growth and 
     prosperity but also to such complex issues as 
     international security and human rights, public health 
     and national identity. It has political, social, 
     cultural and other effects, including the very 
     important "human dimension", in addition to its 
     economic effects." 
 
     On Tuesday afternoon, the following guest speakers will 
     take part in the discussions: 
 
       - Carolina Barco, Minister of Foreign Affairs of 
       Colombia; 
       - Des Browne, Minister of State for Citizenship, 
       Immigration and Nationality of the United Kingdom; 
       - Viktor Ivanov, Assistant to the President of the 
       Russian Federation; 
       - Riaz H. Khokhar, Foreign Secretary of Pakistan; 
       and 
       - Qiao Zonghuai, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs of 
       China. 
       - N. K. Singh, Member of the Global Commission on 
       International Migration, chairman of the Management 
       Development Institute of India will serve as 
       commentator. 
 
     On the second day of the Council, as part of the 
     Dialogue, a Year in Review session will highlight major 
     developments in international migration and a workshop 
     on the Image of Migrants in Society will be held in the 
     afternoon. 
 
     Professor Dr. Rita Sussmuth, Member of the Global 
     Commission on International Migration, Chair of the 
     Independent Council of Experts on Immigration and 
     Integration, appointed by the German Government, will 
     present an overview of the issue. 
 
     During this year's Council session, the Commonwealth of 
     the Bahamas and the Republic of Estonia  will be admitted as IOM's newest 
     Member States. This will bring the number of IOM Member 
     States to 107. The Islamic Educational, Scientific and 
     Cultural Organization (ISESCO), has applied for 
     observer status. 
 
     The Director General, Brunson McKinley will hold a 
     breakfast with journalists on Thursday 25 November from 
     09h00 to 10h30 at the Restaurant des Dlgus at the 
     Palais des Nations. 
 
     All Council documents are available on the IOM Website. 
     Members of the press are welcome to attend the Council 
     session and discussions. 
 
     For more information, contact 
     Media and Public Information 
     IOM Geneva 
     Tel: 41.22.717.9111 
11 
     E-mail: mpi@iom.int. 
¶3. (U) Published November 30, 2004 by the International 
     The IOM Mission in Albania is holding a three-day 
     workshop for experts working to combat the trafficking 
     in human beings. 
 
     Law enforcement officials, judges, prosecutors, NGO 
     staff, and others involved in the fight against 
     trafficking of human beings from Belgium, France, 
     Greece, Italy, Hungary, Albania, Belarus, Moldova, 
     Romania, Bulgaria, the Russian Federation, Turkey, and 
     Ukraine, are attending the event, which began on Monday 
     in Tirana. 
 
     The participants will discuss the elaboration of a Code 
     of Conduct containing guidelines based on the Italian 
     experience to efficiently combat the trafficking in 
     human beings on a joint transnational level. 
 
     The workshop is part of the IOM/EU project 
     "Establishment of the Network of and Joint Training for 
     Operational Law Enforcement Officers, NGOs and IOs in 
     Fighting Human Trafficking into the EU Member States 
     from EU Accession Countries and Countries Bordering the 
     EU after Enlargement," implemented under the European 
     Commission Directorate General Justice and Home 
     Affairs' AGIS Programme 2003, with co-funding granted 
     by selected EU Member States. 
 
     According to IOM's Chief of Mission in Albania, 
     Maurizio Bussati, Tirana was chosen to host this event 
     in recognition of substantial progress made by Albania 
     towards meeting European standards to fight trafficking 
     an provide assistance to victims. 
     For more information contact: 
 
     Bjorn Clarberg 
     IOM Brussels 
     Tel: 32.2.285.00.25 
     E-mail: Bclarberg@iom.int 
 
     Tamara Keating 
     Tel: 32.2.282.45.79 
 
     Albi Greva 
     IOM Tirana 
     Tel 355 68 2052542 
     E-mail: agreva@iomtirana.org.al 
 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Published November 23, 2004 by AKI Press Kyrgyzstan: 
 
     TITLE: Uzbek Prostitutes Look to New Markets 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: The economic crisis at home has forced 
     prostitutes to expand their horizons. 
 
     When Israel deported Gulnora for prostitution last 
     month she came home to Samarkand by plane. Her journey 
     to get there one year earlier was rather more 
     complicated. 
 
     First Gulnora - not her real name - was taken by a pimp 
     from Tashkent to Moscow, and then flown to Egypt. She 
     and five others were handed over to a Bedouin, who took 
     them on a long and dangerous ride to Israel by camel. 
 
     "Our journey lasted nine days, and we were lucky we 
     didn't encounter Israeli border troops," she said, 
     adding that some women making the same journey have 
     been killed by guards while others have been raped by 
     their Bedouin guides. 
 
     The United Arab Emirates, where Uzbeks make up the 
     largest group of foreign prostitutes, used to be the 
     destination of choice for women like Gulnora. Some 
     travel agencies in Tashkent even offer a visa service 
     to speed up the process. 
     But competition there is fierce, and Gulnora is among a 
     growing number of prostitutes employed by pimps looking 
     to expand into new markets like Israel, Thailand, 
     Malaysia, Indonesia, Turkey, Bahrain and Iran. 
     South Korea - which has strong trade links with 
     Uzbekistan - is another popular destination, though 
     customers there are mainly Uzbek men working away from 
     home so the women say the earnings are not as good. 
 
     But the authorities in some of these countries are now 
     cracking down. 
     According to a Thai women's group, 228 Uzbek women were 
     arrested and deported from Thailand last year. In 
     Israel, which is almost impossible to enter legally, 
     more than 250 have been sent home in the past year 
     alone. 
 
     Gulnora - who saw up to 15 clients a day and earned 
     enough in six months to pay back the 5,000 US dollars 
     she owed her pimp - arrived back in Uzbekistan with 
     just 10 dollars in her pocket. That money was taken by 
     customs officers at Tashkent airport. 
 
     Nodyra Karimova, head of a non-government group in 
     Uzbekistan which works to end the trafficking of women 
     and which helped bring Gulnora home, said more people 
     are turning to prostitution as the economic crisis in 
     the country worsens. 
 
     To escape poverty, there are even some mothers who 
     offer their daughters to pimps and ask for them to be 
     sent abroad to work as prostitutes. An Uzbek women's 
     centre told of two cases where madams took their own 
     underage children to work in brothels. 
 
     Other women, however, are tricked into going abroad by 
     promises of jobs as cleaners or cooks. Their passports 
     are confiscated by the pimps and if they refuse to work 
     they may be beaten up. When the debt for their journey 
     overseas is settled, the women are often sold on to 
     another pimp. 
 
     After years of ignoring the problem, Uzbekistan last 
     year signed an international convention on sexual 
     exploitation and trafficking of women. 
 
     Five madams have been charged, but later released under 
     President Islam Karimov's annual amnesty. Because of 
     the amnesty, the pimp of an underage orphan who was 
     raped, beaten and had her face burned with cigarettes 
     was allowed out of jail. The girl's aunt, who sold her 
     for 50 dollars, also went free. 
 
     "This happens every year," said Maya Kurbanova, a legal 
     expert from an Uzbek women's centre. "Ninety per cent 
     of the pimps are women, and their husbands and brothers 
     help them from abroad or home. Because it is not 
     punished, the traffic of women in Uzbekistan continues 
     to flourish." 
 
     Despite the tragic stories, some state officials are 
     unsympathetic to the plight of Uzbek prostitutes. 
 
     The head of the women's affairs committee at the 
     Samarkand governor's office, Farogat Shakirova, blames 
     the women themselves for their problems, and denies the 
     growth of prostitution among Uzbek women is linked to 
     the country's economic woes. 
 
     "They simply don't want to work, so they look for easy 
     ways to earn a lot of money" said Shakirova. "They are 
     simply immoral women. When they are abroad, why don't 
     they work as cleaners in factories like other Uzbek 
     people do? Even in the difficult [Second World] War 
     years women starved, but kept their honour and 
     dignity." 
 
     Samarkand human rights activist Salima Kadyrova said 
     the authorities won't acknowledge the problem because 
     they themselves are to blame for Uzbekistan's current 
     crisis. 
     "The state must not create conditions that allow 
     prostitution to develop on a massive scale," she said. 
     "What sort of monstrous society are we creating?" END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶5. (U) Published November 22, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: A 16-year old girl asked for help from 
     Jandarma teams claiming that she was forced by her 
     family to live with somebody. 
 
     According to the Provincial Jandarma Command, S.S. (16) 
     applied to the Nurdagi Jandarma Command in the Esenyurt 
     district of the Nurdagi sub-province of Gaziantep.  She 
     claimed that her mother Zeynep B. and stepfather 
     Ibrahim B. forced her to live with Fatih G.  Jandarma 
     detained the mother and the stepfather. 
 
     An investigation is ongoing. END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published November 22, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
     TITLE: 94 people, including 93 foreigners, were 
     captured in the last two days along the border in 
     Edirne. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: The Jandarma, police and border patrol 
     captured the illegal immigrants who wanted to go to 
     Greece. 
 
     They included 56 Iraqis, 20 Pakistanis, six 
     Mauritanians, four Bengalis, two Indians, two Somalis, 
     one Moroccans, on Syrian, one Iranian and one Turk. 
     Foreigners were sent to the Edirne Police for 
     deportation. 
 
     A judicial investigation is ongoing on the captured 
     Turk.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published November 20, 2004 by the Pakistan daily 
Times: 
 
     TITLE: 2 men trying to get visa on fake reference 
     letter held; By Khawaja Naseer 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: LAHORE: The Federal Investigation Agency 
     (FIA) on Friday arrested two members of a six-member 
     human trafficking gang who tried to get Iranian visas 
     on fake reference letters issued on the letterhead of 
     Punjab Tourism Minister Mian Aslam Iqbal, sources told 
     Daily Times on Friday. 
 
     Mahtab Khan, gang leader, and George Masih got fake 
     accreditation letters of the minister and applied for 
     the visa, sources said, adding, that the FIA had 
     already received several complaints against Mahtab Khan 
     and Geroge Masih, who had planned to enter Europe 
     through Iran, Turkey and Italy. 
 
     Sources told Daily Times that when the Iranian Embassy 
     contacted the provincial minister for verification, it 
     was revealed that the accreditation letters were not 
     genuine. The embassy then contacted the FIA, which 
     arrested the culprits from Township. Talking to Daily 
     Times, Chaudhry Tanveer Ahmad, the FIA regional 
     director, said investigations were underway and the 
     agency would arrest the remaining members of the gang 
     soon. 
 
     Talking to Daily Times, the provincial tourism minister 
     said his private secretary had lodged a case against 
     the swindlers who procured his fake reference letter. 
 
     Sources told Daily Times that it was not the first 
     attempt by human traffickers to obtain visas on 
     accreditation letters of ministers or assembly members. 
     They said that a month ago the FIA arrested another 
     gang who tried to obtain visas for European countries 
     on fake letterheads of six Punjab Assembly members. END 
     TEXT. 
¶8. (U) Published November 17, 2004 by Turkish language Zaman 
News: 
 
     Title: Women Coming for Prostitution Attempted to be 
     Hidden at the Shelter; Sedat Gunec - Ankara 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Human traffickers attempted to take 
     advantage of the opportunities granted for the victims 
     of prostitution in order to get residence permits for 
     the foreign women they brought to Turkey.  Interior 
     Ministry got activated upon the efforts of traffickers 
     in placing the women they have brought from eastern 
     block countries in the shelters established for victims 
     pulled into prostitution.  Deputy Undersecretary Sebati 
     Buyuran instructed that such initiatives should be 
     obstructed. 
 
     The Interior Ministry put into implementation the 
     project prepared by the Human Resources Development 
     Foundation with the purpose of collapsing the 
     prostitution networks.  The foreign women who fall in 
     the hands of prostitution networks are not immediately 
     deported if they cooperate with security units.  They 
     are placed at the shelter established in Istanbul.  The 
     victimized women are provided protection services as 
     well as psychological support.  Those who need 
     treatment are sent to health institutions and treated. 
     Thus those who are subject to human trafficking are 
     encouraged to cooperate with the security units so that 
     security would reach to criminals. 
 
     Sub-title: Coordination Among Countries is Aimed 
 
     These women are put under strict protection to prevent 
     them falling in the hands of prostitution barons again 
     and their safe departure from Turkey is provided. 
     Contacts are established with the security units of the 
     victims' countries so that they will not fall in the 
     hands of human traffickers again.  Information 
     regarding the names of the people and countries thru 
     which these women are sent to Turkey are conveyed to 
     the related country. 
 
     However, it is found out that human traffickers tried 
     to use the shelter to get residence permits for the 
     foreign women they bring to Turkey from eastern block 
     countries with the purpose of prostitution by 
     presenting them as victims.  Interior Ministry Deputy 
     Undersecretary Sebati Buyuran drew attention to the 
     fact that these people claim that they are victims in 
     order to conduct prostitution and similar acts on a 
     comfortable and legal platform.  The circular he issued 
     urged (security members) to show utmost sensitivity to 
     enable only real victim foreign women to use the 
     shelters.  According to this, only Istanbul liaison 
     point officials will conduct the placement procedures 
     for the women who are determined to be victims and 
     those who are granted settlement document for them to 
     stay in Turkey for a while.  Irrelevant people and 
     officials will not be able to participate in this 
     transfer process.  Information about where and how this 
     shelter operates will be kept secret.  END TEXT. 
 
¶9. (U) Published on BlackTable.com November 17, 2004 by 
author Andy Baker: 
 
     You are a teenage girl growing up in Estonia. You're 
     dirt poor. Your prospects are dim. One day, you see a 
     want ad in your local newspaper: "Agency seeking young 
     women to work as au pairs. High paying opportunities 
     throughout the European Union and United States." 
 
     Encouraged, you meet a local employment agency 
     recruiter for a few interviews and what luck! The 
     agency finds you a job. Not only that, they supply you 
     with a travel visa and plane tickets. Next thing you 
     know, you're on your way to Athens to work as a live-in 
     for a diplomat's family. Life is good. 
     Only you don't make it to Greece. Rather, you wind up 
     in some Serbian backwater where you are starved, beaten 
     and forced into prostitution. Over the next year you 
     service 10 to 15 men a day, earning your Estonian 
     syndicate bosses about $50,000. In exchange for your 
     labors you receive more beatings, enough food to keep 
     you alive and crappy cigarettes. This is your life. 
 
     This is just one out of dozens of true story lines 
     described in the recently released The Natashas: Inside 
     the New Global Sex Trade by award-winning, 
     investigative journalist Victor Malarek. Malarek, who 
     writes for Toronto's The Globe & Mail and whose 
     television news show The Fifth Estate is Canada's 
     answer to 60 Minutes, spent two years researching and 
     dissecting the $12 billion business of sexual slavery. 
     He calls human trafficking the human rights issue of 
     the new millennium. The Black Table spoke with Malarek 
     recently about child prostitutes and Serbian gangsters. 
 
     BT: Have you ever observed a sex slave auction? 
 
     VM: Not an auction per se. The worst I've seen is the 
     what goes down in the brothels in Kosovo, where it's 
     totally animalistic. The men, 10 and 20 at a time, 
     literally maul these women. 
 
     BT: Your average Russian mobster -- how does he smell? 
 
     VM: It's funny, you know, how often the clichs are 
     borne out by the reality. Eastern European thugs 
     especially. But with them it's the dress code. They may 
     live in Greece, Kosovo, Bosnia, Tel Aviv, Rome 
     Frankfurt, London, you name it, but they all seem to 
     sport leather jacket and buzz cut. It's an intimidating 
     look. If you want to be a pimp you have to intimidate 
     the Johns, too, not just the women. Most smell like 
     cheap cologne, I guess. 
 
     BT: What kind of front do these so-called employment 
     agencies put up in order to lure "employees"? 
 
     VM: Well first, the ads appear to be officially 
     sanctioned. They're decorated with the American stars 
     and stripes or the Canadian Maple Leaf or the tri- 
     colored flags of Germany, Belgium, Italy, the 
     Netherlands and so on. In countries like Ukraine, 
     Romania, Russia and the Czech Republic, bogus 
     recruiters will set up offices adjacent to legitimate 
     employment agencies. Some go so far as to hold "career 
     days" at local universities. Of course, not all women 
     fall victim to the spin of phony employment agencies. 
     The first link in the chain is just as often a relative 
     or a boyfriend or some acquaintance in a trusted 
     position. 
 
     BT: Kind Uncle Zootroy lined up a job for you in 
     Istanbul? 
 
     VM: That's right. 
 
     BT: Don't some of these women have an idea of what 
     they're getting into? 
 
     VM: There are a number of women who know they're going 
     to go and strip. And there are a certain number who 
     even know they're going to be prostitutes. They're 
     given a story though. And it's almost akin to the movie 
     Pretty Woman: Hey, you're gonna do one or two, maximum 
     three men a night. No need to work seven days a week, 
     five is fine. You're going to be making $5,000 a week 
     that goes directly into your pocket. You can take the 
     week off when you're on your period. And you can say no 
     to any man. What actually happens is a nightmare. 
 
     BT: Such as? 
     VM: Your average trafficked woman does -- is forced to 
     do -- between five and 30 men a day, usually without a 
     condom. (Bareback is especially popular Tel Aviv, where 
     the orthodox clientele are forbidden by their religion 
     to "waste" their semen.) She is kept under lock and key 
     usually in an overstuffed apartment. She is accompanied 
     at all times by a "bodyguard" whose job it is to ensure 
     two things: That she satisfies clients and that she 
     doesn't escape. She works 24/7, 30 days a month, period 
     or no period. She can never say no to a man and cannot 
     say no to an act. 
 
     BT: What about madams? Somewhere along the line you 
     must have interviewed women who managed to flip or 
     subvert the power dynamic and, you know, run their own 
     business. 
 
     VM: Not one. 
 
     BT: Hmm. The New York Times recently did a story on a 
     Korean girl in Jersey City who runs her own very 
     profitable escort service. About all that's bugging her 
     are stomach ulcers. 
 
     VM: OK, no Asian woman runs an escort service without a 
     Triad (mafioso) behind her. You see, this is the 
     naivet sometimes of people. They can front whatever 
     they want to front. And what I have found is that a lot 
     of formerly-trafficked women have suddenly become 
     madams, but they do not control the operation. They are 
     the front. I will defy anyone -- you follow the money 
     that this madam makes and you will see that a large 
     portion of it is going somewhere else. Madams and pimps 
     are field workers. 
 
     BT: You mention the "breaking" process in your book. 
 
 
     VM: Yeah, it's a pimp term for the systematic 
     intimidation and disorientation that the women (I say 
     women, but we're talking about mostly 15- through 19- 
     year-olds) are subjected to before they start working 
     in brothels. First they're put in huge debt bondage, 
     told that they must work off travel expenses before 
     they can even think of being let go. They're stripped 
     of their identification and held in a foreign country 
     where they don't know the language. They're told that 
     their families back home are being watched. If they try 
     to run, their mother or father or brother will be 
     beaten or killed. They're then starved and roughed up. 
     You have these apartments in Tel Aviv or in Hamburg and 
     you have a dozen in an apartment or 50, 150 girls in an 
     entire building. And the girls are brought in to the 
     men individually and sometimes in pairs. The men come 
     in, five, six, seven at a time and gang bang them. They 
     call it the "test drive." They show them how to move 
     and what to do. Any girl who tries to fight it, they'll 
     take her and make an absolute example out of her. 
     Often, they'll videotape them in these forced gang 
     bangs and make a porn tape out of it and threaten to 
     send that back home to their village if they get out of 
     line. Most of them just give up. 
 
     BT: And the ones who manage to break free and get 
     repatriated? 
 
     VM: Well, the sad reality of repatriation is there's 
     nothing waiting for them. Take Moldova, which I call 
     the Haiti of Eastern Europe. They go back to Moldova 
     and there are no treatment programs for them, no 
     rehabilitation programs; there are no therapies, 
     there's nothing for them. Often they have all kinds of 
     STDs. Some of them have HIV. And so they go back to 
     their villages where they're known as: "The whore [who] 
     has come back." After a while, some of them commit 
     suicide. 
 
     There are some programs setting up in Kiev and 
     Bucharest and Moscow for when they do return. But 
     they're very few and far between because the 
     governments claim there is little money out there for 
     rehabilitation. My counterargument to that is the 
     governments of places like Moldova should confront 
     countries like Germany, Greece, the Netherlands, Israel 
     and Turkey and say, "When our young women are 
     repatriated from your country and when we know what has 
     happened to them, your government should give us money 
     so we can rehabilitate them." 
 
     BT: Sounds doubtful. 
     VM: Yeah, but you know what? Look at the "comfort 
     women" from South Korea that are now fighting for some 
     kind of retribution or reparation for what the Japanese 
     did to them during the Second World War. Their case is 
     getting heard, so it's not that outlandish. 
 
     BT: In The Natashas, you say there have been four waves 
     of human sex slave trafficking, the first three 
     originating respectively in Southeast Asia, Africa and 
     Latin America. Aside from geography, how does the 
     current wave differ from the preceding three? 
 
     VM: It's far more brutal and far more organized. When 
     you look at the organized crime syndicates that are 
     involved, in particular the Russian, Estonian and 
     Ukrainian mafias, they've realized what the potential 
     is out there and there seems to be this incredible, 
     insatiable desire for these kinds of women. It's the 
     speed of this thing as well. In 1991 the Iron Curtain 
     crumbles, the wall comes down, democracy sort of rushes 
     into the former Soviet states and this huge market 
     suddenly opens up and it's vast. 
 
     BT: If I brought this subject up in company, many 
     people would find it tawdry, maybe even a little bit 
     banal. Period. Why should anyone care? 
 
     VM: I've always been one that gets really upset with 
     respect to abuse. My whole life has been one that looks 
     at child abuse issues. That largely is driven by my own 
     childhood. I grew up in the child welfare system and 
     protection system in Quebec. I was put in foster homes 
     and boys homes and I was a first-hand victim and first- 
     hand observer of major abuse of kids. When I got into 
     journalism, that's one of the areas I keyed in on. That 
     sort of stays with me all the time when I look at any 
     issue. 
 
     I think we should care because these are girls and 
     young women who are being raped. We're not talking 
     about voluntary choices. These are girls who are being 
     forced into absolutely hellish existences, all for the 
     pleasure of men. We look at these young women who are 
     on the streets and we make these snap judgments. We 
     think: Whore. But we don't look beyond the stilettos 
     and miniskirt to ask what lead this person to this 
     point in their life? 
 
     Now, when I look at U.S. State Department statistics, 
     U.N. statistics, Europol and International Organization 
     for Migration statistics and the consensus is that 
     there are 800,000 to 1 million of these young women 
     trafficked every year, well there's no way in hell that 
     a million of these young women are lining up for this. 
     That's all it takes for me to care. I've been a 
     journalist for 35 years, been in wars and famines and 
     all kinds of deep shit and I'm not hardened. I take it 
     personally. I can't sit back because one day, who 
     knows, it could happen to my daughter or your sister. 
     You have to protect those in society who can't defend 
     themselves and that's children and senior citizens. 
 
     BT: So you've interviewed hundreds of these trafficked 
     women. Is there anything weird about being a guy and 
     covering this subject? 
 
     VM: It's a stupid thing but you feel guilty for 
     mankind, you know? And yeah, in interviewing young 
     female victims and discovering the world of shit 
     they've been living in I've sometimes felt guilty as a 
     man because it's men who are responsible for their 
     suffering. But it wasn't me. 
 
     BT: OK, but you're dealing with young, pretty girls 
     who're incredibly vulnerable. How do you keep from 
     feeling in some way like you're crossing a line, being 
     just one more intruder? 
 
     VM: I'm surprised and not surprised when people open up 
     to me. My wife and several of my friends have said to 
     me that children and people who have gone through hell 
     seem to have a sympathetic ear for me. I remember being 
     in Costa Rica, in a place where young girls had been 
     rescued off the streets and I was talking to the woman 
     who was running it, Mara, and she told me a horrific 
     story about this 9-year-old girl who was made to 
     service hundreds of men orally and was beaten if she 
     didn't swallow. As a result of the trauma she could no 
     longer consume cheeses, milk, eggs, ice cream or any 
     dairy because it was too much of a reminder. She flat 
     out refused to speak to anyone. She was very afraid, 
     but especially terrified of men. She'd gone mute, 
     essentially. 
 
     Later on in the day we were in the main yard which, by 
     the way, is guarded by a man with an AK-47 because 
     several times the pimps have tried to charge the safe 
     house to get these young girls back. [O]ne little girl 
     came up to me and we started to talk and she had a 
     beautiful smile. She was a beautiful young lady and she 
     was speaking to me in Spanish and saying she would like 
     to learn English and just chatting. Eventually I 
     noticed Mara was staring at me and I asked her, "Is 
     anything wrong?" She said, "That's the girl I was 
     telling you about. She doesn't talk to anybody." 
 
     For some reason, people come up and talk to me. They 
     open up to me. 
 
     BT: You're described often as a "crusader" journalist. 
     Is "crusader" a modifier you embrace? 
 
     VM: Eh, I'm one of these guys who charges into places 
     with a sword. And again it goes back to nobody swung a 
     sword for me as a kid. And I decided that rather than 
     be another self-fulfilling prophecy, you know, destined 
     to be a bad kid, I'd try and change things for myself 
     and maybe others. 
 
     BT: There's a movie on you. Is it any good? 
 
     VM: Yeah, I guess. After it came out I got this rep for 
     being an angry young man, you know? People today ask me 
     if that's still the case and I say, "No. I'm an angry 
     middle aged man." 
 
 
¶10. (U) Published November 12, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Border patrol and Jandarma captured 126 
     foreigners as attemptd to illegally cross the border in 
     Edirne. 
 
     Along the border in the Ipsala and Meric sub-provinces, 
     authorities captured 56 Pakistanis, 53 Iraqis, nine 
     Somalis, six Afghanis and two Mauritanians. 
 
     The foreigners were turned over to the Foreigners 
     Department of the Edirne Police for deportation. END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶11. (U) Published November 12, 2004 by Radio Free Europe: 
 
TITLE: World: Child Sex Trade Becoming Lucrative, Pan- 
Asian Epidemic; By Antoine Blua 
 
BEGIN TEXT: The United Nations estimates that more than 
1 million children around the world enter the global 
sex trade every year. The children are tricked or lured 
away from their families and are often taken abroad. In 
some cases, they are forced to service more than 10 
customers per night, and are also used to feed the 
exploding popularity of child pornography over the 
Internet. 
Prague, 12 November 2004 (RFE/RL) -- Police in the 
southern Kazakh city of Shymkent said this week that 
they have broken a human trafficking ring in which 
young girls would have been sold into prostitution. 
 
     They say they prevented the sale of eight girls -- the 
     oldest was 17 -- to the Persian Gulf after receiving a 
     tip-off last month. 
 
     Police spokesman Erkin Inkarov tells RFE/RL that 
     recruiters had promised the girls well-paid jobs 
     abroad. 
 
     "[They] kept eight girls for sexual exploitation, 
     [saying to them]: 'Well, if you want to get jobs 
     abroad, we have an opportunity to employ you there.' 
     And they started arranging passports [and travel 
     documents] for them," Inkarov said. 
 
     The Central Asian republics are a source, transit 
     point, and destination country for people trafficked 
     from other countries in the region. Most of the victims 
     are trafficked to Russia, the Persian Gulf, Turkey, 
     East Asia, and Europe. 
 
     The issue is of particular concern in Tajikistan, which 
     is still struggling to recover from its five-year civil 
     war, which left many people desperate to find better 
     economic prospects abroad. 
 
     Gulchehra Mirzoeva is head of Modar (Mother), a Tajik 
     nongovernmental organization focusing on women's 
     rights. She notes that the sex slavery trade also 
     affects young boys. 
 
     "We've spoken to six pimps, [and] one of them said that 
     Arabs recently asked to send young boys. According to 
     [the pimp], Arabs prefer young boys between 12 and 14 
     with blue eyes. Their skin can be either light or dark. 
     The price of the boys depends on that," Mirzoeva said. 
 
     Meeting this week in the capital, Bangkok, officials 
     from the United Nations and 20 East Asia-Pacific 
     countries admitted that child trafficking is getting 
     worse despite changes in laws and government policies. 
 
     Gopalan Balagopal, a senior adviser to UNICEF, the 
     United Nations Children's Fund, spoke to Reuters about 
     the problem. 
 
     "We see that children are continuing to be sexually 
     exploited. And children are continuing to be 
     trafficked. There's a whole lot of material on the 
     Internet which is directly connected to the sexual 
     exploitation of children," Balagopal said. 
 
     Thailand has long had a reputation for its sex trade. 
 
     Young girls from Southeast Asia are lured to Thailand 
     with promises of lucrative jobs, only to end up in 
     massage parlors and karaoke bars where prostitution is 
     rampant. 
 
     Recently, six teenage girls were found cowered inside 
     dark, grimy rooms after they were rescued in a brothel 
     in northern Thailand. The girls, most of whom had been 
     smuggled across the border from impoverished Myanmar, 
     were covered in bruises and cigarette burns inflicted 
     by drunken customers. One girl even had duct tape 
     across her mouth to stop her from screaming. 
 
     Ben Svasti, from the anti-trafficking group Trafcord, 
     says the case is one of the most horrific memories he 
     has of his time on the frontlines in the fight against 
     child trafficking. 
 
     "A young child is not yet ready to have sex physically 
     or mentally. And you're being faced by a customer who 
     wants to take your virginity. He's probably paid a lot 
     of money for it. And he's often drunk. And he's brutal. 
     And that is just the most horrific ordeal for any child 
     [and] any woman to have to go through," Svasti said. 
     Thailand's child-trafficking business is believed to 
     amount to some $2.5 billion a year. 
 
     New technologies, including the Internet, digital 
     cameras, and mobile phones, have increased the spread 
     of child pornography, the demand for it, and the risks 
     for children of sexual exploitation. 
     National laws have not kept pace with these trends. 
     Most countries in the region do not have laws that 
     refer specifically to child pornography, and few 
     criminalize its mere possession. 
 
     (Sojida Djakhfarova from RFE/RL's Tajik Service; Merhat 
     Sharipzhanov, director of RFE/RL's Kazakh Service; and 
     Reuters contributed to this report.) END TEXT. 
 
¶12. (U) Published November 11, 2004 by Turkish language 
Anaolian News Agency: 
 
     TITLE: DEATH TOLL RISES TO 11 IN BOAT ACCIDENT IN 
     AEGEAN 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: IZMIR (A.A) - "We recovered body of one 
     more illegal migrant off Doganbey district in Aegean 
     Sea," said Seferihisar Sub-Governor Mehmet Godekmerdan 
     on Friday. 
 
     Nine illegal migrants drowned and three others survived 
     when a boat carrying 20 people capsized and sank off 
     Doganbey hamlet of Seferihisar town in western city of 
     Izmir on Wednesday. 
 
     Coast Guard teams found one body in open sea yesterday. 
     There are still 5 missing people. 
 
     There were a total of 1 Turkish citizen, 6 Somalians 
     and 13 Mauritanians aboard the boat. END TEXT. 
 
¶13. (U) Published November 11, 2004 by the Southeast 
European Times: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: According to an annual report conducted by 
     Greek police forces and sent to Europol, authorities 
     investigated 157 cases of organised crime during 2003. 
     Fourteen types of crime were recorded, ranging from 
     relatively minor ones -- such as insider betting and 
     illegal trading of cultural products -- to extremely 
     serious ones, including drug smuggling, blackmail, 
     forgery, child pornography and human trafficking. 
 
     Organised crime groups are generally structured 
     according to nationality, with members of a particular 
     nationality usually engaging in the same type of crime, 
     the report found. Of the groups reported in Greece, 
     none are sufficiently organised to engage in 
     international operations. 
 
     According to the police, Albanian crime groups are the 
     best-organised and most violent, as well as the most 
     likely to collaborate with Greeks. They are mainly 
     involved in cross-border drug smuggling, human 
     trafficking, thefts, robberies and illegal immigration. 
     Despite the notoriety of Albanian organised crime, 
     however, the report found that the number of Albanian 
     citizens in Greece who are involved in criminal 
     activity is relatively small. Only 1 out of every 3,000 
     have been convicted in a criminal case. 
 
     Bulgarian crime groups in Greece engage in 
     counterfeiting, forgery, human trafficking and drug 
     dealing, the report said. Crime groups from Macedonia, 
     Turkey, Pakistan, Iran and China are mostly involved in 
     cases of illegal immigration. Russian and Ukrainian 
     groups deal mainly in cigarette smuggling and the sex 
     trade. 
 
     Most of the groups' members use modern technology to 
     expand and broaden their operations and to elude 
     police. To differing degrees, all groups use physical 
     brutality to ensure internal cohesion and to intimidate 
     victims. END TEXT.