04ANKARA5730
NINETEENTH SESSION OF U.S.-TURKEY SECURITY
Wed Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005730 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MASS TU
SUBJECT: NINETEENTH SESSION OF U.S.-TURKEY SECURITY 
COOPERATION WORKING GROUP 
 
 
¶1. DSCA Director for Europe, Russia, the Americas, and 
Sub-Saharan Africa Jeanne Farmer led a U.S. delegation to 
Ankara Sept. 24 for the nineteenth session of the U.S.-Turkey 
Security Cooperation Working Group (SCWG).  Ms. Farmer and 
her Turkish counterpart, Brigadier General Ali Akdogan, 
discussed a wide range of security cooperation issues, 
including Defense Industrial Cooperation, comparative 
procurement procedures, Turkish use of IMET and other USG SC 
funding, specific Turkish plans to purchase U.S. equipment 
and programs, and Turkish concerns regarding disposal of 
excess U.S.-origin materiel and USG third-party transfer 
requirements.  Both sides tentatively agreed to resume 
Defense Industrial Cooperation (DIC) talks as well as the 
twentieth SCWG meeting in early 2005.  List of agreed action 
items in para. three. 
 
¶2. Highlights of the meeting included: 
 
--Turkey's interest in U.S. procurement procedures.  The U.S. 
side advised that Turkey may wish to avail some of its 
IMET funding (or its own) to take courses at the Defense 
Acquisition University at Fort Belvoir, VA. 
 
--Turkey's desire to market the capabilities of its 
U.S.-origin aircraft depot level maintenance facilities. 
U.S. side responded that USG cannot help Turkey market 
itself, but advised Turkey to raise this issue at DIC talks 
and also to consider visiting U.S. contractors who provide a 
similar service to inquire as to their marketing practices. 
 
--Turkey's ongoing problems dealing with excess U.S.-origin 
equipment it obtained in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. 
Unfortunately, the Turks cannot provide documentation 
regarding under what program these items were obtained, thus 
making it difficult for them to dispose of the materiel.  The 
U.S. side recommended that the Turks make a one-time request 
to dispose of this equipment in accordance with DoD 
4160.21-M-1 (see action items para. three). This is also a 
global issue with most countries that have purchased 
U.S.-origin equipment under the former Military Assistance 
Program (MAP). 
 
--Turkey's desire to transfer some of this equipment to third 
countries.  U.S. side recommended the GOT request the 
State Department to review third-party transfer statutes and 
policy to deal with equipment whose transfer dates and 
terms are indeterminable. 
 
--Turkey views that the interest rates on "state-firm" 
credits are above market rate.  DSCA's Farmer responded 
that DoD has no control over the setting of these previous 
loan rates. 
 
--DSCA's Farmer reported that a USG interagency working group 
is studying the Customs and Defense Security Service 
issue.  She noted that Turkey was among many countries which 
has run into problems with U.S. customs regulations in this 
area. 
 
¶3. Following is the agreed text of action items resulting 
from the nineteenth U.S.-Turkey SCWG (note internal 
paragraph numbering): 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
 
Action Items of the 19th Security Cooperation Working Group 
(SCWG) 
21-24 September 2004 
 
The U.S.-Turkey Security Cooperation Working Group (SCWG) met 
in Ankara, Turkey, September 21-24, 2004 and reaffirmed 
the bilateral commitment to maintain a strong and strategic 
bilateral defense partnership, to maintain regional 
security and consultations on security issues affecting both 
Turkey and the United States (US). 
 
The following are agreed action items: 
 
¶1. The GoT and USG agreed to transfer Industrial Cooperation 
discussions and activities to include Depot 
Level Maintenance on F-16, C-130, and KC-135 aircraft to the 
Defense Industrial Cooperation (DIC) Committee.  DIC 
meetings tentatively scheduled January 2005. 
 
¶2. USG to provide a list of Defense Acquisition Courses to 
GoT, including courses that are eligible for 
IMET funding. 
 
¶3. GoT to provide a request to USG (DSCA) for approval to 
dispose of inoperative US origin equipment received under 
various programs whose transfers dates and terms are 
indeterminable.  This equipment will be demilitarized in 
accordance with DoD 4160.21-M-1 and disposed of using the 
terms and conditions of the Southern Region Amendment and 
will be a one time request to relieve the burden of 
maintaining and accounting for this equipment. 
 
¶4. GoT to provide a letter of request from MGA to the 
Department of State requesting a review of Third Country 
Transfers and disposal procedures for items received under 
various programs whose transfers dates and terms are 
indeterminable. 
 
¶5. USG to investigate the status of release of SLAM-ER 
(AGM-84H) with Automatic Target Acquisition capability, 
Joint Stand-Off Weapon (AGM-154C) and JASSM (Joint Air to 
Surface Stand-off Missile, AGM-158). 
¶6. Pursuant to the agenda, the US Embassy will provide an 
update on outstanding Third Party Transfers cases to the 
GoT by October 31, 2004. 
 
END TEXT 
 
¶4. Ms. Farmer cleared this cable. 
EDELMAN