04ANKARA5758
SPECIAL TURKISH MEDIA REACTION: EU COMMISSION
Thu Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 005758 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: SPECIAL TURKISH MEDIA REACTION: EU COMMISSION 
REPORT, 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 7, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
EU door is open for Turkey - Turkiye 
EU says `Yes,' but no guarantees for membership - Aksam 
Thanks to Verheugen - Sabah 
EU Turkey representation: EU decision a historic moment - 
Aksam 
EU advises Ankara to consider Kurds a `minority' - Aksam 
EU Turkey report `sensitive' on minorities - Hurriyet 
Erdogan, Gul bargain with EU over `minorities' - Milliyet 
US: Turkey has the will to succeed - Hurriyet 
European Parliament split over `Yes' for Turkey - Aksam 
Prodi: Turkey must get ready by 2013 - Sabah 
Verheugen: The Turks deserve it - Turkiye 
Verheugen: Turkey was quick, determined - Milliyet 
Prodi: Turkey has reached European standards - Milliyet 
PM Erdogan: Turkey determined to enter the EU - Turkiye 
France cautious, Germany, Britain happy over EU decision - 
Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
EU gives `historic' green light for Turkey - Zaman 
`Conditional' recommendation form EU Commission - Cumhuriyet 
EU to present Turkey new `homework' list - Cumhuriyet 
Verheugen: Turkey has left us with no option but `Yes' - 
Radikal 
Turkish government very pleased - Radikal 
FM Gul: EU took historic step forward - Radikal 
US, careful not to `anger' EU, lobbies for Turkey - 
Cumhuriyet 
US Welcomes EU report on Turkey  - Radikal 
Blair: Negotiations with Turkey must begin without delay - 
Yeni Safak 
Verheugen: We can trust Turkey - Yeni Safak 
EU to make final Turkey decision on December 17 - Zaman 
Turkey gets visa for final test - Yeni Safak 
Turkey to receive EU financial aid after 2006 - Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
EU Commission report on Turkey:  The EU Commission on 
Wednesday recommended that the EU open accession talks with 
Turkey.  Turkey has achieved significant legislative 
progress in many areas, the report said, adding that 
`important progress has been made in the implementation of 
political reforms, but these need to be further consolidated 
and broadened.'  The Turkish media highlighted the following 
conclusions and recommendations contained in the Commission 
report: 
 
-- Political reforms have been introduced through a series 
of constitutional and legislative changes adopted over a 
period of three years (2001-2004). 
-- Economic stability reliability have been substantially 
improved since the 2001 economic crisis. 
 
-- The government has increasingly asserted its control over 
the military.  Nevertheless, the armed forces in Turkey 
continue to exercise influence through a series of informal 
mechanisms. 
 
-- The independence and efficiency of the judiciary have 
been strengthened. 
 
-- Turkey has acceded to most relevant international and 
European conventions on human rights. 
-- The situation of women remains unsatisfactory. 
Discrimination and violence against women, including `honor 
killings,' remain a major problem.  Children's rights have 
been strengthened, but child labor remains an issue of 
serious concern. 
 
-- The authorities have adopted a `zero tolerance' policy 
toward torture and a number of perpetrators have been 
punished.  Torture is no longer systematic, but numerous 
cases of mistreatment, including torture, still occur and 
further efforts will be required to eradicate such 
practices. 
 
-- Although freedom of religious belief is guaranteed by the 
Constitution, non-Muslim religious communities continue to 
experience difficulties. 
 
The press reports that the accession talks will be `open- 
ended' with no guarantee of a positive result.  The 
Commission did not propose a starting date for negotiations, 
leaving the final decision to EU leaders at the December 17 
summit.  The Commission recommended a suspension of 
negotiations in the case of a serious and persistent breach 
of the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms.  The Commission also made 
clear that Turkey would not join before 2015 at the 
earliest, and suggested that the bloc consider permanent 
measures that may restrict the free movement of workers. 
 
Ankara hailed the European Commission's recommendation on 
Wednesday, but some Turks expressed concern that conditions 
attached by Brussels could block their road to membership. 
`We find the EU Commission's assessment generally balanced,' 
PM Erdogan told a news conference in Strasbourg.  `Our 
desire is for talks to begin officially in the first few 
months of 2005.'  FM Abdullah Gul, speaking in Ankara, said: 
`This is an historic decision, both for Turkey and for 
Europe.'  Initial reaction from the business world, which 
hopes the decision will attract more foreign investment, was 
positive.  While most commentaries focused on the positive 
aspects of the report, Murat Yetkin of "Radikal" highlighted 
what he believes are `double standards' with regard to the 
free movement of labor and agricultural issues.  "Hurriyet" 
Ankara bureau chief Sedat Ergin cautioned that Ankara would 
not be pleased by the Commission report's language 
concerning ethnic and religious minorities.  Ergin also 
commented that some in the military would be uncomfortable 
with the implication that the military's role should be 
further proscribed. 
 
Many commentators expressed concern that the accession 
negotiations will be an open-ended process, and that talks 
could be halted in the event of a serious violation of 
freedoms and human rights.  Papers note that the EU 
Commission, through a new Accession Partnership Document to 
be presented to Turkey in 2005, will outline new 
`expectations' from Ankara before full admission.  The media 
expect the EU to step up pressure on Ankara to recognize the 
Republic of Cyprus.  Papers also highlight that the 
Commission report described both Kurds and Alevis in Turkey 
as `minorities.'  EU Commission representative in Ankara, 
Hans Jorg Kretschmer, said on Wednesday that the EU expects 
more to be done with regard to education and broadcast in 
mother tongues.  PM Erdogan told the press in Strasbourg 
that Turkey would continue to curb torture, and pledged to 
expand religious freedoms.  Meanwhile, Dutch FM Bernard Bot, 
the EU term president, said he expects EU negotiations with 
Turkey to start in the second half of 2005.  Bot stressed 
that Turkey can join the EU if it meets all required 
political, economic, and social conditions, but noted that 
`there is no certainty about EU entry.'  A news commentary 
in "Cumhuriyet" applauds Washington's `sophisticated' 
lobbying activities for supporting Ankara's EU bid. 
Diplomatic sources told "Cumhuriyet" that President Bush, 
Secretary Powell, and National Security Adviser Dr. Rice 
 
SIPDIS 
have contacted high-level EU officials in support of 
Turkey's case. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  EU-Turkey 
 
"Congratulations!" 
Hadi Uluengin wrote from Brussels in the mass appeal 
"Hurriyet" (10/7): "The next 70 days are significantly 
important for Turkey's EU vision.  Barring some kind of 
`train wreck,' December 17 will be the day that Ankara will 
learn it can start accession negotiations in early 2005. 
There is no need quibble about the negative aspects of the 
EU commission report.  The fact is that Turkey managed to 
overcome the first hurdle, and we all have to look on the 
bright side.  Turkey should focus on successfully overcoming 
the next hurdle on December 17." 
 
"Conditions in the Report" 
Sami Kohen noted in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (10/7): 
"There is a discriminatory approach in the report, 
especially on the issue of the free circulation of labor. 
Preventive measures on this issue are expressed in such a 
way that they could be permanent, a practice never applied 
to any other EU candidate.  Such a condition might be a 
relief to the European public, but will certainly create 
uneasiness for Turks. . The report also says that `the 
outcome of negotiations cannot be guaranteed.'  This is 
another statement that will cause concerns in Turkey. . 
There is still a chance to eliminate those conditions or 
make them ineffective.  It remains to be seen if EU leaders 
will take steps in this regard, or whether they will make 
the conditions even heavier.  All of this calls for some 
very hard work by Turkish diplomacy." 
 
"A Revolutionary Process" 
Ergun Babahan commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (10/7): 
"This is a very important step, which has paved the way for 
the start of negotiations.  Once the negotiations process is 
started with the EU, we are all going to witness a Turkey 
that is rapidly changing for the better.  The result will be 
a democratic country with greater prosperity and 
contemporary values.  We are going to see a revolutionary 
process of democratic change." 
 
"The EU Report and Sarkozy" 
Fikret Ertan wrote in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" 
(10/7): "The Commission report is not a surprise.  Turkey 
completed the necessary reforms and has become eligible for 
the start of negotiations.  This is an important decision, 
but one that should not be exaggerated.  In fact, Turkey 
should focus on the next step, which will be more 
determinative and faces larger obstacles.  One of the 
biggest hurdles is the ongoing referendum debate led by 
France.  The Turkish public should get to know the important 
French political figure who initiated the whole referendum 
controversy -- French Finance Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, who 
aspires to be President of France." 
 
"It is still a long and thorny path" 
Fehmi Koru wrote in the Islamist-opinion maker "Yeni Safak" 
(10/7): "The report contains some skillful diplomatic 
language.  The EU Commission managed to address all of the 
various strains of thought in the Union.   The upcoming 
process and the December 17 summit are the most important 
benchmarks for success.  Turkey should shape its vision to 
be able to make the best gains out of the summit.  The 
required steps for the success should be taken as soon as 
possible. . Turkey is aware of the fact that EU membership 
process is a long and thorny path.  There have been some 
significant gains since the day Turkey officially applied to 
be a member, but even today the road is still long and 
rocky." 
 
"EU Report and Illusions" 
Orhan Karatas argued in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (10/7): 
"EU officials are revealing their real intentions only on 
non-official occasions, during which they reflect the anti- 
Turkish sentiment within the Union.  In other words, EU 
officials are warning Turkey to be prepared for the 
possibility that it will never be admitted as a full member. 
Some members are even arguing about whether or not Turkey 
should be given a negotiation date.  France is one of many 
examples, and we can add Holland, Belgium, Greece and the 
Greek Cypriots to the list.  Who can really believe that we 
will convince them all and be admitted to the EU?  To 
believe this is to live under an illusion. . Let's be 
honest: this is just a report issued by the EU Commission, 
and does not represent a binding decision.  After making 
such important sacrifices, what Turkey has gotten is a 
report that is full of conditions.  This is an indication of 
how Turkey will be treated in the decision process on 
December 17." 
 
EDELMAN