04BRASILIA2711
BRAZIL AND THE IMF: IS THE DANCE OVER?
Thu Oct 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 002711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - DAS LEE AND FPARODI 
NSC FOR DEMPSEY 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OMA - MOSS 
STATE PASS FED BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR ROBITAILLE 
USDOC FOR 3134/USFCS/OIO/EOLSON/DDEVITO 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/DMCDOUGALL/ADRISCOLL 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/JANDERSON/WBASTIAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/26/2014 
TAGS: EFIN ECON EINV PGOV PREL BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL AND THE IMF: IS THE DANCE OVER? 
 
REF: A. BRASILIA 2447 
 
     ¶B. BRASILIA 2051 
 
Classified By: Economic Counselor Bruce Williamson, Reasons 1.4 (b) and 
 (d). 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The GOB economic braintrust is currently 
debating whether to follow up Brazil's current precautionary 
IMF Standby Agreement (SBA) when it expires in March 2005 
with another IMF program.  Based on the country's 
fundamentals, there appears to be little need for a follow-on 
program, as all expectations are that Brazil will not require 
balance-of-payments (BOP) support in 2005.  Many private 
analysts believe that the financial markets would look even 
more favorably upon Brazil if it were to graduate from IMF 
tutelage and maintain its responsible macroeconomic policies. 
 But, with the memory of contagion from the Asian and Russian 
financial crises still fresh, not to mention the 2002 crisis 
of confidence sparked by Lula's election, the GoB would like 
some form of insurance against unexpected shocks.  It has 
been pushing for IMF creation of a new contingency line of 
credit.  Brazil, however, has not convinced a majority of the 
IMF Board to support the idea.  Absent such a line of credit 
and given the positive economic outlook, the GoB seems 
disinclined to seek a follow-on SBA or other formal IMF 
monitoring for 2005.  While the GoB would face a political 
conundrum should economic winds shift and force it to seek a 
Fund program in the election year of 2006, Lula's proven 
economic pragmatism suggests he would bite the bullet in that 
eventuality.  End Summary. 
 
Little Economic Rationale 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Visiting Regional Treasury Representative and Emboff 
discussed the GoB's dance with the IMF over a follow-on to 
Brazil's current, precautionary, exceptional-access SBA 
during a series of conversations October 8-15 with government 
officials, private sector representatives, and IMF Resident 
Representative Max Alier (please protect).  Central Bank 
director for Economic Policy Afonso Bevilaqua pointed out 
that, judged solely on the economic merits, there is little 
case for a follow-on agreement.  Even using the Central 
Bank's conservative estimates, Brazil in 2005 should enjoy 
another BoP surplus, of about $10 billion.  (Note: private 
sector estimates are as high as $15 billion.)  This strong 
expected performance undermines the traditional BOP-support 
rationale for an IMF program.  Bevilaqua further argued that 
Brazil would build more market confidence by "graduating" 
from its IMF agreement while continuing to pursue responsible 
economic policies. 
 
Potential Benefits of Graduation 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The private sector, according to Nilson Teixeira of 
CSFB, has already adjusted to the reality of the Lula 
government's responsible policy agenda.  Given the lack of 
need for BOP support, he judged an IMF program "irrelevant." 
Banco Pactual's Guilherme Bacha, by contrast, felt that 
graduating from the IMF program and continuing the same 
policies would significantly reduce Brazil's country risk. 
Bacha nevertheless did not expect that the market would react 
negatively to negotiation of a new program.  Former Central 
Bank President Arminio Fraga, now with Gavea Investments, 
likewise argued that Brazil would gain more in the market's 
eyes from pursuing responsible policies without IMF tutelage. 
 
GoB Wants Insurance 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) While the GoB,s official line is that there is no 
need to decide about a follow-on program before March 2005, 
when the current program expires, the GoB appears to be 
weighing two alternatives: either no program (so-called 
graduation) or a new type of contingent facility.   For the 
GOB, ideally, a new contingent line for "good performers" 
would combine large, automatic access to IMF resources in a 
crisis with minimal conditionality.  Finance Ministry 
International Secretary Luiz Pereira observed that a new line 
of credit for countries with good policy records would 
mitigate risks of contagion and other external shocks, 
although such a facility would need a decent level of 
automatically-available resources to be credible with the 
market.  He believed the negotiation of an SBA would be too 
slow in a crisis, and that this made the case for a facility 
that granted quick access, followed up by renewed IMF 
monitoring once it was activated.  Pereira acknowledged it 
might be tricky to get the level of eligibility criteria 
right:  too little risked moral hazard, while too much risked 
a repetition of the experience of the now-defunct Contingency 
Credit Line (CCL), which was never used.  Pereira claimed 
"sympathy" from France and Russia for Brazil's position that 
this sort of facility should be part of the international 
financial architecture.  He further stated there would be 
"little demand" for a policy-monitoring program that did not 
carry access to fund resources, implying the GoB would opt 
for no program at all absent the creation of a new contingent 
line.  Treasury Secretary Levy added that the latest proposal 
from IMF staff outlining how such a new line of credit would 
work was not what the GoB had envisioned and unlikely to 
prove effective. 
 
¶5. (U) Underlying Pereira's comments is Brazil's experience 
with international financial markets since 1998, when 
contagion from the Asian financial crisis forced it to seek 
an IMF SBA.  Brazil has been on SBAs since then, and these 
facilities have helped it deal with financial turmoil after 
the Russian financial crisis and the 2002 crisis of 
confidence sparked by uncertainty over the policy course that 
then-probable presidential election winner Lula da Silva 
would implement.  The $30 billion 2002 SBA was the IMF's 
single largest program, and granted Brazil exceptional access 
to IMF financing.  (Note: Exceptional access carries an 
expectation of more intensive post-program monitoring.) 
 
ResRep: GoB Bluffing 
-------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) IMF ResRep Alier called the GoB's 
new-facility-or-nothing position a "bluff."  The GoB's real 
problem, he argued, is how to deal with the possibility that 
economic circumstances would require it to seek IMF financing 
during the election year of 2006.  It would be politically 
problematic for the Lula administration to "kiss the Fund 
good-bye" in 2005 and then be forced to seek an IMF program 
in 2006.  The GoB, he said, is still weighing that potential 
political loss against the (less theoretical) gains of 
graduating from the current SBA in 2005.  Alier argued that 
in the absence of an IMF program, the GoB should take the 
step of releasing the IMF staff reports generated during 
routine monitoring visits next year as a way to reassure the 
markets.  The GoB has always elected to keep IMF staff 
reports confidential. 
 
¶7. (C) Addressing the specifics of Brazil's arguments for a 
new contingent line with high levels of automatic access, 
Alier stated that the Lula Administration financial team, 
while tough negotiators, always fulfilled their commitments. 
This made their case for a new line of credit with large, 
automatic access to IMF resources more credible.  From the 
institutional point of view, however, it made little sense 
for the Fund to create a new facility tailored to the current 
reality of one IMF client.  Moreover, he added, there was no 
guarantee that future GoBs would be as reliable as the 
current one. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) The politics of a follow-on program are doubtless more 
complex than the economics.  It seems a bit hasty, however, 
to dismiss the GoB's current all-or-nothing position on a 
follow-on IMF program as a bluff.  Given the low probability 
that the IMF Board will create a new contingent facility per 
the GoB,s wishes, the GoB's real choices are between 
graduation, a follow-on, precautionary SBA or a 
staff-monitored program.  This last option is unpalatable as 
it combines all of the political drawbacks of formal IMF 
policy monitoring with a complete lack of access to IMF 
financing.  With regard to an SBA, the GoB has little to gain 
with the markets at this juncture for signing on to a program 
unwarranted by the economic realities.  It would further face 
the downside of potentially being lumped in with 
poor-performing countries that require prolonged access to 
Fund resources.  That leaves graduation as the GoB's most 
likely choice, and with it the opportunity for the GoB to 
better establish its policy credentials with the market. 
Many in the market are also of the view that Brazil has an 
implicit contingency line from the IMF, as long as it pursues 
its current policy mix.  Alier has a point that the GoB would 
pay a political price for graduating in 2005 if a reversal of 
economic fortunes forced it to seek another IMF program in 
2006, when Lula would be running for reelection.  But, Lula's 
pragmatism and consistent willingness to make tough economic 
decisions and justify them with the electorate mitigates this 
concern. 
 
DANILOVICH