04HELSINKI1288
CHINA ARMS EMBARGO: PRESIDENTIAL CHIEF OF STAFF
Fri Oct 01 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 001288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR DAS CONLEY FROM THE AMBASSADOR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/01/2014 
TAGS: PARM PREL ETTC PHUM CH FI EUN
SUBJECT: CHINA ARMS EMBARGO: PRESIDENTIAL CHIEF OF STAFF 
AGREES THAT CALL TO HALONEN WOULD BE WELL RECEIVED 
 
REF: A. HELSINKI 1281 
 
     ¶B. STATE 208511 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Earle I. Mack for Reasons 1.4(B) and (D) 
 
¶1. (C) I spoke today with Jaakko Kalela, President Halonen's 
chief of staff.  I noted news reports over the past few days 
that a cache of weapons, mostly handguns, had been seized in 
Finland.  Just today Finnish customs officials have reported 
that these weapons were transiting Finland, from China to 
Estonia.  I told Kalela that if the EU's China Arms Embargo 
were lifted, with a consequent increase in the arms trade 
with China, we might very well see more such incidents.  I 
also stressed the negative effect lifting the embargo would 
have on regional stability in East Asia, especially if 
tensions increase in the run-up to Taiwan's elections. 
Lifting the embargo now would be seen as a validation of 
China's human rights policy, or at least a sign that the EU 
believes the policy is headed in the right direction. 
 
¶2. (C) Kalela told me he agreed conceptually with the points 
I had made.  He said, however, that the Finns believe the 
embargo has become outmoded, and something updated should 
take its place.  I replied that we do not believe the 1998 
Code of Conduct is enforceable, and do not believe it could 
be made effective.  I underlined that lifting the embargo 
would evoke a very negative reaction in the U.S., including 
on the Hill.  Kalela assured me he does not want to see a 
strain of that sort in the trans-Atlantic relationship.  In 
any case, he said, he did not think any substantive action 
would take place at the upcoming GAERC meeting.  He assumes 
the Ministers will defer this for later action. 
 
¶3. (C) I mentioned my conversation with Under Secretary 
Laajava (Ref A); Kalela said he was aware of it.  I used that 
opportunity to mention that Laajava had suggested a call from 
the Secretary to President Halonen may help make the case for 
retaining the embargo.  I asked Kalela for his advice 
regarding such a call.  I said we would not want to embarrass 
President Halonen by putting her in a position where she 
would be uncomfortable with the call.  Kalela in response was 
a bit more positive than Laajava, who had been a touch 
guarded about the merits of such a call.  Kalela said he 
thought a call from the Secretary would be well received, 
although -- like Laajava -- he did not want to guarantee that 
it would change Finnish views. 
 
¶4. (C) We still have the sense that the Finns would prefer to 
see the embargo lifted, but would not take the lead for doing 
so.  There have been times in the past, however (such as the 
ICC debate in 2002), when they have been strong advocates 
within the EU for working with the U.S. to find an outcome 
acceptable to all.  It might be worthwhile for the Secretary 
to telephone Tarja Halonen and ask for her assistance in this 
case. 
MACK