04PRETORIA4530
SOUTH AFRICA LAUNCHES NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE
Fri Oct 08 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 004530 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR OES/PCI/ESHAW, OES/EGC/YOFFE 
FOR HARLAN WATSON, SENIOR CLIMATE CHANGE NEGOTIATOR 
FOR AF/S/JDIFFILY, AF/EPS 
DOE FOR LDOBRIANSKY, DPUMPHREY, RDIXON 
NOAA FOR SWARE-HARRIS, RSCHNELL 
USAID FOR G/ENV/FMOORE, KBARRETT, EGAT 
EPA FOR OIA, OAR JBEALE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENRG EAID TSPL PREL SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA LAUNCHES NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE 
RESPONSE STRATEGY 
 
 
¶1. Summary and introduction. Following Cabinet's approval on 
October 6, the Department of Environmental Affairs and 
Tourism (DEAT) on October 7 formally launched South Africa's 
climate change response strategy.  At the launch event, 
officials noted the urgency with which Cabinet views 
responding to climate change.  The cross-cutting strategy 
involves many government departments and provides a 
"framework for action."  Departments are developing, or must 
soon develop, detailed plans for action and implementation 
of the climate change response strategy, although the 
strategy sets no deadlines.  The strategy balances climate 
change response with practical considerations such as 
ensuring sustainable economic growth and using locally 
available resources like coal.  End summary and 
introduction. 
 
¶2. DEAT Director-General Dr. Crispian Olver opened the 
presentations with an explanation of the impact of climate 
change and areas of vulnerability for South Africa.  He 
noted the negative environmental and other implications --on 
water supply, agriculture/forestry, biodiversity and human 
health-- from climate change.  He also stressed economic 
challenges the country faces in addressing climate change, 
in light of its heavy reliance on cheap electric power from 
low-grade coal-fired plants.  Dr. Olver noted that although 
South Africa contributes only 1.7 percent of global 
greenhouse gas emissions (number 15 in the world), it has a 
higher level on a per capita basis, and its rate of growth 
of GHG emissions is 5 percent per annum, so that in 15 years 
or so the level of emissions will double.  Olver also noted 
mitigation efforts underway or planned for a number of 
sectors, such as transport, coal mining, agriculture, along 
with the Department of Minerals and Energy (DME)'s efforts 
to implement a White Paper on Renewable Energy and an Energy 
Efficiency Strategy. 
 
¶3. Dr. Olver described the implementing actions that 
different departments of government will undertake in 
support of the climate change response strategy.  DEAT 
intends to optimize waste management to minimize GHG 
emissions, to finalize air quality legislation, to put into 
place a national ambient monitoring network and information 
handling system that incorporates GHG data, and to develop 
protection plans for plant, animal and marine biodiversity. 
 
¶4. The Departments of Water Affairs & Forestry, Agriculture, 
Health, Transportation, Trade & Industry, Science & 
Technology and the Treasury all will be actively involved in 
implementing the strategy.  The other key partner in the 
strategy is the Department of Minerals and Energy, which was 
represented at the launch by Dr. Rod Crompton, Deputy 
Director General for Energy. 
 
¶5. Dr. Crompton noted a number of DME activities and policy 
initiatives underway, including: improving energy supply 
diversity by developing natural gas; establishing targets 
for renewable energy; tapping Global Environment Facility 
and World Bank funding to facilitate and subsidize renewable 
energy; reducing sulfur content in diesel fuel and requiring 
gasoline to be unleaded by 2006; and offering a low-smoke 
home cooking fuel program at the community level. At the 
international level, Crompton noted South Africa's 
participation in the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum 
and the International Partnership for the Hydrogen Economy 
initiatives. 
 
¶6. Representatives of industry and civil society also made 
brief statements at the launch.  Dr. John Kilani, Vice 
President for Sustainable Development of African Rainbow 
Minerals Limited and Chair of South Africa's Executive Board 
on the CDM (Clean Development Mechanism).  Dr. Kilani noted 
that business appreciated the government's efforts on 
climate change.  He encouraged South Africa to move quickly 
on CDM activities because other countries such as Brazil, 
India and China are far ahead. 
 
¶7. Erin Lorimer, representing the Climate Change Action 
Network, a group of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
welcomed the strategy and the government's multi-agency 
approach.  She also said the NGO community hoped to see more 
details of implementation plans soon, as the strategy was 
very vague and gave no timeframes for implementation.  Ms. 
Lorimer also noted that government renewable energy targets 
were too low.  She encouraged the government to focus on the 
social and economic benefits that climate change response 
can generate, by stimulating new economic sectors and 
industries. 
 
¶8. In closing comments, Deputy Minister of Environmental 
Affairs and Tourism Rejoice Mabudafhasi emphasized the 
importance of raising public awareness on climate change and 
building capacity to support the strategy.  Speaking on "the 
way forward," DEAT Deputy Director General Joanne Yawitch 
noted that the National Committee on Climate Change, 
comprised of government and stakeholders, will help advance 
the strategy.  Anticipating Russia's ratification and the 
entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol, South Africa needs 
to be prepared for intensified action on climate change and 
possible new targets for developing countries. 
 
¶9. A question-and-answer period was dominated by queries and 
concerns about DME's implementation of the Clean Development 
Mechanism.  Dr. Crompton noted that DME intends to work with 
the Development Bank of South Africa to offer a "hand- 
holding" mechanism to assist interested parties to develop 
CDM projects. 
 
¶10. Post will forward a copy of the Climate Change Response 
Strategy to OES/EGC.  Note: A long-term technical adviser 
funded under the USAID-DEAT bilateral drafted the initial 
version of the strategy in 2002. 
 
FRAZER