04SANAA2767
HUMANITARIAN DEMINING ASSISTANCE TO YEMEN HELPS
Sun Oct 31 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 002767 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PM A/S LBLOOMFIELD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER KHDP YM
SUBJECT: HUMANITARIAN DEMINING ASSISTANCE TO YEMEN HELPS 
USG POLICY 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  See paragraph 2. 
 
¶2.  Summary and Action Request.  Funds for the USG Yemeni 
Humanitarian Demining Program (HDP) may be cut entirely in FY 
¶05. Approaching its seventh year, Yemen's HDP (YHDP) is an 
example of how USG humanitarian assistance can successfully 
help meet USG policy goals in the region.  Ending assistance 
to the YHDP at this time would have a negative impact on 
Yemen's ability to attain self-sufficiency in demining in the 
near future, and on USG CT and PD goals in the region.  Post, 
therefore, urges continued funding for FY 05.  End Summary 
and Action Request. 
----------------- 
Program successes 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  Since the USG began contributing to the Yemen's National 
Mine Action Center's (NMAC) demining efforts, over 80,900 
Unexploded Ordinances (UXOs) and 1,000 assorted mines from 
more than 86 minefields have been cleared.  All areas in 
Yemen that were considered to be high impact (where the 
presence of mines significantly changes the daily activities 
of a community), and 40 percent of all medium impact areas 
are now considered mine-safe.  The program was also the first 
in the world to have a civilian and a military component and 
to complete a Level One Survey which takes into account the 
social impact of mine locations.  With USG help, the Yemen 
NMAC has developed a strategic plan with an achievable end 
state of self-sufficiency. 
 
--------------------------- 
HDP promotes U.S. interests 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  HDP has also served as an effective method to extend U.S. 
public diplomacy to remote areas of the country at a time 
when hostility to U.S. policy in the region is high.  The 
NMAC readily acknowledges and teaches local populations that 
the USG is the longest sustaining and single donor to the 
program.  Locally affected populations regularly thank 
Emboffs who visit mine-affected areas for USG support.  It is 
noteworthy that during the 2000 attack on the USS Cole, 
U.S.-trained Yemeni demining troops were the first on the 
scene, and worked tirelessly to aid U.S. sailors. 
 
--------------------------- 
Humanitarian considerations 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  In the past year YHDP has worked diligently on the 
approximately 700 square kilometers of mid and low level 
areas where populations are negatively impacted economically 
by mine ridden and therefore fallow land.  The last year has 
also seen NMAC clear 517 mines and 6,691 UXOs from 
significantly tougher terrain than in previous years. 
 
------------ 
Almost there 
------------ 
 
¶5.  While the Yemen HDP is close to becoming self-sustaining, 
there is no doubt that it still requires US aid to remain 
vital through to self-sufficiency.  USG funding currently 
comprises 12 percent of its yearly funds and, over the course 
of its support, has provided 50 percent of all its equipment. 
 The NMAC staff has a solid end state in mind and a 
restructuring underway to met it.  Cutting USG funding at 
this time will have a negative impact on reaching demining 
self-sufficiency in Yemen. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  Yemen HDP funding is a diplomatic and operational success 
in a core country in the GWOT.  While humanitarian concerns 
have decreased significantly due to the program's previous 
successes, the need for continued CT cooperation, public 
diplomacy efforts, and the long-term success of the Yemeni 
demining program make continued USG HDP support vital. 
Furthermore, mines and UXOs still significantly affect the 
country's economy.  Post urges continued funding from this 
program for FY 05.  End Comment. 
KRAJESKI