04TAIPEI3104
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 003104 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
A) "The United States Should Fully Understand [Taiwan 
Senior Presidential Advisor] K.M. Koo's Outspoken 
Statements and Adhere to Its Commitments to the Taiwan 
People - Deeply Democratized Taiwan Has Developed New 
Public Opinion and National Identity; the United States 
Must Not Use a Double Standard to Stop Taiwan from 
Becoming a Normal Country" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" editorialized 
(10/6): 
 
". What is noteworthy is that in Koo's article, he 
pointed out that while the United States is asking 
Taiwan to spend a huge amount of money on weapons' 
purchases, it is also telling the Taiwanese that they 
cannot have their own country, their own constitution, 
their own national anthem, or even a flag of their own 
choosing.  This is a strongly self-contradictory 
approach.  Indeed, if the Taiwanese people cannot 
identify with a normal country, for whom are they 
buying so such weaponry and against whom are they 
fighting?  Also, the same article pointed out that the 
United States' adherence to the One-China policy will 
only reinforce the Communist dictators' conviction that 
their view of Taiwan is the correct one and that they 
have the inalienable right to decide Taiwan's future. 
[What the United States is doing] is to tempt China to 
damage the peace across the Taiwan Strait. 
 
"We hope [our] American friends can understand with 
their hearts the outspoken statements made by an old 
warrior who has dedicated decades of his life to Taiwan 
and urge the U.S. government to adhere to its 
commitments to democratic and free Taiwan." 
 
B) "[Taiwan Senior Presidential Advisor] K.M. Koo's 
Advertisement Displeases the United States" 
 
Washington correspondent Norman Fu said in the 
"Washington Outlook" column of the centrist, pro-status 
quo "China Times" (10/6): 
 
". The Bush administration's cross-Strait policy is 
that neither side (meaning Taipei and Beijing) should 
alter the status quo unilaterally.  What is not spoken 
but has been fully understood by everyone is that 
neither can both sides of the Taiwan Strait ask the 
United States to change the status quo - namely, to 
alter or renounce Washington's longstanding One-China 
policy. 
 
"[Beijing's Foreign Minister] Lee Zhaoxing told 
[Secretary of State Colin] Powell to his face recently 
that Washington should not let its domestic law 
override an international commitment.  The domestic law 
that Lee referred to is the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA). 
It is surprising to see that Koo echoed Lee by pointing 
out that TRA is a domestic law, under which Taiwan has 
neither rights nor any obligations.  Has Koo forgotten 
that Taiwan, under the TRA, enjoys the right of being 
provided with defensive weapons from the United States? 
It is a fact that the TRA is a domestic law of the 
United States.  But Koo is probably the first Taiwanese 
person to directly point out that the TRA is a domestic 
law made in the interests of the United States.  Koo's 
tone was so severe that it almost sounded equal to his 
displeasure with the United States' One-China policy. 
This is really weird logic - given Koo's life-long 
efforts dedicated to the push for Taiwan independence, 
he is not supposed to betray his belief and echo the 
`communists' across the Taiwan Strait!" 
 
C) "Taiwan Must Not Overlook the United States' 
Unpleasant but Honest Advice" 
 
Washington correspondent Nadia Tsao said in the pro- 
independence "Liberty Times" (10/6): 
 
"Even though Deputy Undersecretary of Defense Richard 
Lawless' remarks [at a U.S.-Taiwan defense industry 
meeting in Arizona on Taiwan's arms procurements] 
sounded a little bit unpleasant, they are vital to 
Taiwan's problems. . 
 
"The United States is the only country in the world 
that is willing to sell advanced weapons to Taiwan. 
Naturally, the price tag offered by Washington for the 
weapons it wants to sell displeases Taiwan and makes it 
feel that it is being controlled by others, and it is 
understandable that the Legislative Yuan wants to 
haggle over the price. .  Lawless' speech actually did 
not sound fresh to Taiwan.  What's new is that it is 
the Americans who are reminding us of that the matter 
concerns Taiwan's [very] existence." 
 
D) "Chen Has an Historic Opportunity" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
noted in an editorial (10/6): 
 
"On Sunday President Chen Shui-bian announced that he 
would deliver an important speech on cross-Strait 
relations on Double Ten Day. . 
 
"Chen should use this opportunity to clarify some of 
the most urgent issues facing this nation. 
 
"First, he must clearly and definitely declare Taiwan 
an independent sovereign state. . 
Second, Chen needs to reiterate his determination to 
carry out constitutional reform.  Though most people in 
this country want a new constitution, some people - 
including U.S. officials - still have concerns. . 
Third, Chen should make it clear that cross-strait 
peace must be built upon a military balance of power. 
Since Taiwan doesn't want to annex Chinese territory 
but Beijing has repeatedly stressed its aim of annexing 
Taiwan, the people here cannot but ask the government 
to strength national defense and make necessary 
preparations. . 
 
"Finally, Chen should make clear to Beijing and the 
international community that according to official 
Chinese statistics, as of the end of last year 
Taiwanese businesspeople had invested US$72.3 billion 
in China, making it that country's largest foreign 
investor. . 
 
"This being the case, there is no reason why China 
should wish for Taiwan to downgrade itself into a 
provincial government.  Conducting commerce under the 
`one China' principle would be political suicide.  It 
is necessary for Beijing to deal rationally with the 
issue of cross-strait commerce. ." 
 
PAAL