08PRETORIA2404
South Africa: Minerals and Energy Newsletter "THE ASSAY" -
Mon Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO2393
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2404/01 3081224
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031224Z NOV 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6262
INFO RUCPDC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0875
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 0751
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1627
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0886
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1463
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0717
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 PRETORIA 002404 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID 
STATE PLEASE PASS USGS 
DEPT FOR AF/S, EEB/ESC AND CBA 
DOE FOR SPERL AND PERSON 
 
E.O.   12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ENRG EMIN EINV EIND ETRD ELAB KHIV SF
SUBJECT: South Africa: Minerals and Energy Newsletter "THE ASSAY" - 
Issue 11, September 16-30, 2008 
 
PRETORIA 00002404  001.2 OF 006 
 
 
This cable is not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Introduction:  The purpose of this newsletter, initiated in 
January 2004, is to highlight minerals and energy developments in 
South Africa.  This includes trade and investment as well as supply. 
 South Africa hosts world-class deposits of gold, diamonds, platinum 
group metals, chromium, zinc, titanium, vanadium, iron, manganese, 
antimony, vermiculite, zircon, alumino-silicates, fluorspar and 
phosphate rock, and is a major exporter of steam coal.  South Africa 
is also a leading producer and exporter of ferroalloys of chromium, 
vanadium, and manganese.  The information contained in the 
newsletters is based on public sources and does not reflect the 
views of the United States Government.  End introduction. 
-------- 
HOT NEWS 
-------- 
 
-------------------------------- 
ASME Nuclear Codes and Standards 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Some 400 delegates from South Africa's potential nuclear 
supplier and service industries attended the ASME (American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers) Nuclear Codes and Standards workshop held 
in Johannesburg from October 7-9.  The program included a technical 
tour to Columbus Stainless, Africa's only stainless steel plant (see 
below).  ASME is a U.S.-based, independent organization that sets 
globally-recognized performance, testing, safety and numerous other 
standards and codes for engineering structures and components, 
including nuclear.  The purpose of the workshop was to explain and 
promote ASME standards as a means for potential South African 
nuclear industry suppliers to join the global supply chain, thereby 
indirectly supporting Westinghouse's bid for new nuclear build in 
South Africa.  The workshop covered most aspects of the requirements 
for certification of South Africa's developing Pebble Bed Modular 
Reactor power plant, and for components used in nuclear plants that 
may also be exported.  The workshop was the joint initiative of ASME 
and the U.S. Commercial Service based in Johannesburg. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
End of Commodity Super Cycle - Or Is It? 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) South Africa is a major producer of both precious and 
industrial-use metals and minerals, which 
in raw and processed form account for some 17-18% of GDP and more 
than 50% of exports.  The current global credit market turmoil and 
the collapse of demand and prices for commodities have had a major 
impact on producers, particularly those in emerging countries.  The 
global commodity price index for 19 raw materials has fallen by 43% 
(equivalent to a loss of value of $281 billion at current production 
levels) since it peaked in July 2008. This is more than the total 
worth of the raw materials two years ago, according to the 
Reuters/Jefferies CRB commodity price index.  South Africa's major 
commodity prices have fallen since July 2008 by: PGMs 67%, gold 26%, 
ferro-alloys 12%, copper 52%, nickel 80%, lead 67%, stainless steel 
36%, uranium 78%, vanadium 28%, iron ore 10%, and aluminum 36%. 
Q36%, uranium 78%, vanadium 28%, iron ore 10%, and aluminum 36%. 
Coal, diamonds, zircon, manganese ore, and titanium have generally 
retained or increased their value.  To add to South Africa's woes, 
the rand/dollar exchange rate and the Johannesburg Security Exchange 
(JSE) have both weakened by 40% since July/August, which raises the 
specter of further inflation and interest rate increases, above the 
respective current 13.0% and 15.5%.  The good news is that crude oil 
has fallen in price by nearly 60% and the refined products by some 
13% at the pumps. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
PetroSA's 400,000 Barrels/Day Refinery 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) South Africa's National oil company PetroSA announced on 
October 2 that it had received a manufacturing license for its 
planned $5 billion, 400,000-bbl/d crude oil refinery.  The Mthombo 
refinery will be constructed in the Coega industrial development 
zone (IDZ), located east of Port Elizabeth in the Eastern Cape 
Province, and will probably include a new fuel products pipeline to 
 
PRETORIA 00002404  002 OF 006 
 
 
Johannesburg.  PetroSA CEO and President Sipho Mkhize said the 
refinery would ease the country's current and projected fuel 
shortage and was of strategic importance to economic development. 
PetroSA previously announced its intention to dedicate the new 
refinery for Venezuelan heavy oil (hoping for equity participation 
from Venezuelan state oil company, PDVSA).  Construction is expected 
to start in 2010 and the refinery is scheduled to come on stream in 
¶2014.  The refinery would be the biggest in Africa and would create 
about 25,000 direct and indirect jobs.  Comment: This refinery would 
take the place of the Alcan-Rio Tinto aluminum refinery which would 
have been the anchor project for the IDZ and was placed on hold as a 
result of the January power crisis.  The PetroSA refinery also 
provides additional energy resources to the energy-starved country, 
rather than consuming it.  End Comment. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Neither the SAG nor the SA Petroleum Industry Association 
(SAPIA) envisaged the need for more refining capacity prior to the 
start of South Africa's economic growth spurt in 2003.  Economic 
growth has since outpaced fuel demand, refined fuel products have 
now to be imported, and pipeline and road infrastructure is under 
strain to move ever-greater volumes of refined products. 
State-owned Transnet Pipelines is building a new pipeline from 
Durban to Johannesburg and the private sector is planning one from 
Maputo in Mozambique to Secunda in Mpumalanga to relieve the 
transport problem.  All of South Africa's refineries are old, are 
surrounded by residential suburbs, and increasingly have to 
implement costly retrofits to comply with new fuel quality and 
environmental standards.  Some have become uncompetitive, and the 
private sector appears reluctant to build a new, state-of-the-art 
refinery.  (Comment.  Critics opine that output from this new 
refinery would far exceed South Africa's projected requirements and 
could make existing refineries obsolete.  The SAG's response is that 
excess fuel will be exported to neighboring states.  Other critics 
note that state control of refined product prices has led to the 
private sector's unwillingness to invest in additional refinery 
capacity and the current domestic refined product shortage in the 
same way that state control of electricity prices has led to the 
private sector's unwillingness to participate in public private 
partnerships to produce electric power and the current power 
shortage.  End Comment.) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
State-owned Mining Company Contradiction 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Minerals and Energy Ministry spokesperson Sputnik Ratau 
said at South Africa's Mining Summit on September 29 that there was 
no plan "at the moment" to create a state-owned mining company. 
Such a state mining company was proposed by the National Union of 
Mineworkers (NUM).  Ratau emphasized it was not government policy to 
establish and control mines.  Nevertheless, Department of Minerals 
and Energy DDG Jacinto Rocha said at the Gordon Institute of 
QBusiness Science (GIBS) mining panel discussion on October 8 that 
the state intended to become involved in mining.  He said a decision 
had been taken to re-activate a pre-existing state-owned mining 
company, but stressed there would be no wholesale nationalization of 
mines.  Rocha said the alternatives for the state were direct 
involvement as a miner or indirect involvement as a shareholder, 
particularly in platinum sector opportunities.  Besides platinum, 
the state would also consider opportunities in gold, uranium and 
other strategic minerals. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Rocha pointed out that the state had long been involved in 
mineral ventures, including Alexkor diamonds and Foskor phosphate 
mining, and it had established the national oil company PetroSA out 
of other state-owned companies Soekor (petroleum and gas 
exploration) and Mossgas (gas-to-liquid conversion).  The state had 
also established enterprises such as Iscor Steel (now MittalAcelor), 
Columbus Stainless, and Sasol (coal-to-liquids), all of which had 
since been privatized.  He said the issue was not whether mining 
companies were state-owned or privately owned, but whether they had 
quality mining expertise and management.  Rocha also referred to 
neighboring Botswana and Namibia, where 50/50 joint ventures had 
been established between the respective governments and De Beers in 
the form of Debswana and Namdeb. 
 
 
PRETORIA 00002404  003 OF 006 
 
 
------ 
ENERGY 
------ 
 
----------------------------------- 
Proposed Energy Conservation Scheme 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Eskom spokesperson Corrie Visagie announced that the 
state-owned power utility hoped to implement its energy conservation 
scheme (ECS) during the first quarter of 2009.  The plan would set 
out how much power users could consume over a 12-month period and 
would levy considerably higher tariffs for consumption above this 
amount.  Although not fully finalized, Eskom has indicated that the 
conservation rates would apply to customers using more than 100 MWh 
per year or a maximum demand greater than 25 MW.  Each customer 
would be given an energy allocation based on the consumption during 
the period October 2006 to September 2007, or before load-shedding 
came into effect.  The required savings for each customer class, 
envisaged to reduce overall demand by 3,000 MW, is 8% for 
agriculture; 10% for industry; 20% for the commercial sector; 20% 
for the residential sector; and 25% for government and State-owned 
enterprises. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Visagie said Eskom would set rules to provide for changes 
that may have taken place after the base period.  Major mining 
companies, which were already subject to a 5-10% cut, would be 
exempt from further cuts.  Visagie said the benefit of the 
allocation was that the end-user would have the flexibility to use 
energy as he/she sees fit.  He said normal tariffs would apply for 
the allotted energy used, but increased and punitive tariffs would 
apply in cases where the end-user exceeded the allotted amount. 
Visagie also warned that Eskom would be forced to revert to 
load-shedding if the energy conservation scheme is not implemented. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
China's CTL Project with SASOL Progressing 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) China's Shenua Ningxia Coal Industry Group and South 
African partner Sasol announced they had signed a contract on 
October 22 with Foster Wheeler International Corporation and Wuhuan 
Engineering Company to carry out a feasibility study for an 80,000 
barrel per day coal to liquids (CTL) plant.  The plant is to be 
located at the Ningdong Chemicals Base in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous 
Region of China.  The Ningdong industrial region already has an 
extensive infrastructural and industrial base, including power and 
water supply, roads, rail, housing, and maintenance facilities.  The 
plant site is adjacent to huge coal reserves.  The decision to 
proceed with the feasibility study followed an announcement by the 
National Reform and Development Commission of China that the 
Ningxia/Sasol CTL project would continue, despite recent cut-backs 
on other proposed CTL plans.  China is seeking ways to meet its 
increasing demand for environmentally friendly fuels and the CTL 
route is seen as a promising option. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Government Change Clouds Eskom Projects 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Recent changes at the Department of Public Enterprise 
(DPE), which runs state-owned power utility Eskom, may delay 
Q(DPE), which runs state-owned power utility Eskom, may delay 
projects to expand electricity generation and mitigate the country's 
power shortage.  New South African President Kgalema Motlanthe named 
former Department of Justice Minister Brigitte Mabandla as the new 
DPE Minister at the end of September.  Analysts said Mabandla will 
have to get to grips with plans to build a number of new power 
stations and help Eskom raise cash internationally in the midst of a 
global credit squeeze.  Her term will last six-eight months before 
the scheduled general elections, which leaves little time for 
meaningful changes and the possibility that she will be displaced 
after the April/May 2009 elections.  One of Mabandla's key tasks 
will be to approve the expansions mooted for power generation, 
including the new nuclear power plants being contested by 
Westinghouse and Areva of France.  The nuclear decision has been 
postponed on two occasions this year, but Eskom officials say that 
 
PRETORIA 00002404  004 OF 006 
 
 
the decision will still be made before year-end.  Analysts do not 
expect Mabandla to radically change the current policy. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Meanwhile, the electricity reserve margin remains 
alarmingly low as Eskom starts its summer maintenance program and 
Eskom's spokesman has affirmed that electricity supplies remain at 
risk.  Energy savings were instituted following the January power 
crisis and there have been no significant power disruptions during 
and since the (southern hemisphere) winter months.  Consumers have 
assumed a false sense of security because of this and the Department 
of Minerals and Energy has warned that South Africa is "not out of 
the woods yet," as far as electricity supply is concerned.  Eskom 
has started its summer maintenance season and has shut down some 
units, so far without incident. 
 
---- 
GOLD 
---- 
 
------------------------------------- 
Mars Bacteria Found in Deep Gold Mine 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) A team of scientists has discovered a strange breed of 
bacteria living in a deep gold mine in South Africa.    The 
rod-shaped microbe, dubbed Desulforudis audaxviator (see picture in 
e-mail version), can survive in complete darkness, without oxygen, 
in temperatures around 600C, as long as it has a trickle of water 
flowing through radioactive rocks.  The bacteria derives energy from 
the radioactive decay of uranium in surrounding rocks and gets 
carbon and nitrogen, two of the building blocks of life, either from 
dissolved gases or by cannibalizing other bacteria.  The bacteria 
was found living under such conditions in a 2.8 kilometer-deep gold 
mine in South Africa.  These mines contain gold, uranium, fossilized 
carbon material, and moisture.  "I would guess that an organism like 
this would be ideally suited for the Martian subsurface," said 
Princeton University microbiologist Doctor Onstott, one of the 
microbe's discoverers.  D. audaxviator takes its species name from 
the Jules Verne classic "Journey to the Center of the Earth".  The 
research is significant as it shows the resilience of life on 
earth's most extreme frontiers, but also because of the implications 
for finding life elsewhere in the universe, said NASA's Astrobiology 
Institute Director Carl Pilcher. 
 
--------------- 
STAINLESS STEEL 
--------------- 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Stainless Steel and Nuclear Power in SA 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Stainless steel has unique properties that make it an 
important material in the construction of nuclear plants and 
structures in corrosive environments.  Columbus Stainless Ltd is 
South Africa's and Africa's only stainless steel producer and is a 
fully integrated, high-tech facility.  The facility is 76% owned by 
the Spanish stainless steel giant Acerinox S.A., which produces some 
11% of the world's stainless steel output.  Columbus hopes to 
provide its steel for a fleet of conventional pressurized water 
reactors (PWR) and up to 25 locally-developed Pebble Bed Modular 
Reactors (PBMR) mooted for South Africa over the next 25 years. 
QReactors (PBMR) mooted for South Africa over the next 25 years. 
Columbus also plans to export nuclear plant components, but will 
need ASME accreditation if selling to the U.S. market.  Columbus has 
the capacity to produce 1 million tons per year of stainless steel, 
including 600,000 tons of value-added cold-rolled steel.  At the 
time of the ASME-group visit, it was operating at 30-40% of capacity 
due to the drop-off in export orders, particularly from China and 
Asia, resulting from the current global financial turmoil.  Columbus 
exports nearly 80% of its production and is looking to increase 
sales in the local and African markets. 
 
------ 
MINING 
------ 
 
 
PRETORIA 00002404  005 OF 006 
 
 
---------------------------- 
Mining Industry Needs Skills 
---------------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) South Africa is not alone in facing the skills shortage 
afflicting the global mining industry, which has been in growth mode 
since about 2002.  The current global financial turmoil may slow or 
postpone some projects, but industry fundamentals still look good 
for the medium-term as China, India and Asia may be able to sustain 
their industrial growth.  Growth requires mines and metals, but the 
lack of qualified, experienced engineers and miners is likely to be 
a major constraint to supply.  The shortage of skills in the mining 
industry is so acute, according to a report by Ernst & Young (E&Y), 
that it is likely to persist even if 5%-10% of new projects are 
halted. 
 
 
¶16. (SBU) The skills shortage is serious in all countries, according 
to the E&Y report, with Canada and Australia each estimated to need 
an additional 70,000 to 80,000 workers over the next decade.  E&Y 
says the largest contributing factor to the labor shortage in South 
Africa is the HIV/AIDS epidemic, followed by the emigration of 
skills to developed countries.  Estimates are that a third of South 
African engineering graduates have emigrated over the past 40 years. 
 Shortages have pushed up salaries and forced mining CEOs to adopt 
innovative methods of recruiting, training, and retaining skills. 
Recruiters have to overcome the perception of mining as a 
"stone-age" career with issues of health and safety, working in 
remote areas, and mining as a sunset industry, instead of as a 
modern, technologically innovative sunrise industry.  World leader 
in coal-to-liquid (CTL) technology Sasol recently announced that 
they would provide an annual contribution of $3 million to South 
African academia to develop world-class science and engineering 
graduates, retain and attract talented academics to teach at 
universities, and grow the engineering profession.  This investment 
is part of a $30 million ten-year commitment. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
The Fittest to Survive in the Mining Sector 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) The global financial turmoil could see the end for a 
number of junior miners, but also presents the majors with 
attractive buy-in opportunities to profit from the situation, 
according to the Chief Executive Officer of U.S. mining company 
Freeport McMoran.  Analysts estimate some 50% of junior miners could 
be out of buiness in a year's time.  The fittest companies will be 
well-placed to acquire properties at bargain prices and to profit as 
the commodity cycle turns and demand for minerals resurfaces, which 
is estimated to occur in mid-2009 (others say 2010/11).  Currently, 
all mining share and mineral price indices have suffered, with some 
shares down by as much as 80%.  At the same time, the combination of 
rising capital costs for new projects and mining input costs 
increasing by more than 20% per year is putting further stain on 
under-funded juniors. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Platinum Mining Takes the Hardest Knock 
QPlatinum Mining Takes the Hardest Knock 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) The platinum group metals (PGMs) basket price for 
platinum, palladium and rhodium is down by 55-68% (from $2,470 to 
$750 per ounce), or by some 40% in rand terms as the currency has 
weakened by 40% over the past few weeks.  A Cadiz mining analysis 
said that new capital expenditure on PGM mines could only be 
justified if prices rise by 20% to 40% ($1,100-1,200 per ounce) 
above current levels.  African Rainbow Minerals platinum division 
CEO Steve Mashalane said that 15 out of 27 PGM projects, mainly on 
the Eastern and Northern Bushveld Complex, are unlikely to go into 
production at current PGM prices. 
 
¶19. (SBU) The collapse of PGM prices has placed many South African 
platinum mines in "survival mode", said a PGM analyst, and cuts to 
production and capital expenditure have become necessary.  He said 
platinum production is largely unresponsive to price until it drops 
below a certain level, and thereafter it declines as lower-grade 
 
PRETORIA 00002404  006 OF 006 
 
 
sections are closed and expansions are curtailed.  The analyst 
believes that once the platinum price drops below $1,100 per ounce 
(it was $790 per ounce on October 24) there is hardly any growth 
potential left above the current base production of 5 million ounces 
per year.  However, deep, hard-rock mining is not as responsive to 
price changes in the short-term because of outstanding capital 
commitments and large labor forces that can not easily or desirably 
be retrenched every time metal price volatility results in low metal 
prices. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
To Save Sterkfontein from Acid Mine Water 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Watermark Global has selected the CSIR's (Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research) alkaline barium and calcium 
(ABC) process as the best technical and commercial solution for 
treating gold mine acid mine drainage (AMD) water.   A 
pre-feasibility study on the viability of treating AMD water from 
the West Rand Witwatersrand Basin is currently being finalized.  A 
five-month pilot-scale operation has shown that the CSIR technology 
meets the South African National Accreditation System standards for 
industrial quality and potable water.  Phase one of the project 
would involve the construction of a commercial-size plant to treat 
75 mega-liters of AMD water per day for industrial and/or domestic 
consumption.  The project is aimed at reducing the toxicity of water 
flowing from defunct mines on the West Rand that threatens to flow 
into the Cradle of Mankind World Heritage Site, including the 
Sterkfontein and other caves which host evolutionary human and 
humanoid fossils.  The caves are composed of dolomite and could be 
severely damaged by acid waters. 
 
-------- 
DIAMONDS 
-------- 
 
---------------------------------- 
State Diamond Trader Seeks New CEO 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) The South African State Diamond Trader (SDT) CEO Abbey 
Chikane's contract has not been renewed and no replacement has yet 
been named.  This follows the Trader's inability to supply 
sufficient stones to the local small diamond-cutting industry, which 
has seen the industry shed nearly 40% of its jobs over the past 18 
months.  An SDT spokesperson said the business of procuring rough 
diamonds was continuing as usual.  The SDT was established to buy 
10% of the country's diamond production for sale to local small 
cutters and polishers, in an attempt to boost local beneficiation 
and create jobs, but has fallen short of meeting these objectives. 
SDT management say they are awaiting approval from National Treasury 
to increase its borrowing power, from the current $4.5 million to 
$12.5 million per cycle, to enable it to purchase more rough stones. 
 There is currently some uncertainty as to how the organisation will 
continue to operate. 
 
LALIME