09PRETORIA674
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Mon Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO0448
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #0674/01 0961237
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061237Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8016
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 6733
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0853
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9080UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRETORIA 000674 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, MARCH 2009 
 
PRETORIA 00000674  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings Newsletter, March 2009, Volume 4, 
Number 3, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICANS JOING EARTH HOUR - 
   REDUCE POWER USANGE BY 15% 
 
-- NEW HOMES FOR SOUTH AFRICAN PENGUINGS 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICA BANS COMMERCIAL ALBALONE FISHING 
 
-- DANES PROMOTE WIND MAPPING 
 
-- MYSTERY FOAM POLLUTES JOBURG RIVER 
 
-- LOCALS THREATEN TO BBQ FLAMINGOES 
 
-- NECROTIZING BACTERIA DISCOVERED IN KZN LAGOON 
 
-- LIONS TREE POACHER 
 
-- CAPE WHALES FACE NEW THREAT 
 
 
-- DISCOVERING THE HADEDAS NOISY SECRETS 
 
-- SMUGGLER SLAUGHTERS LIONS AND RHINO IN HIS BACKYARD 
 
-- MONTHLY FACTOID 
 
------------------------------- 
South Africans Join Earth Hour - 
Reduce Power Usage by 15% 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) ESKOM spokesman Fani Zulu said South Africans reduced their 
power usage by 15 percent during Earth Hour 2009.  Zulu said there 
was a 400MW of power cut between 20:30 and 21:30 on Saturday March 
28, which means South Africans turned off 4.7 million 60 watt light 
bulbs.  World Wildlife Fund South Africa (WWF/SA) Head Morne Du 
Plessis noted that over 100,000 South Africans signed up to 
participate in the campaign.  Patrons in some restaurants around 
Johannesburg were also asked to dine by candle light in order to 
join in. 
 
----------------------------------- 
New Homes for South African Penguins 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The Boulders Beach penguin colony near Cape Town has fallen 
30 percent from a peak of 3,900 birds in 2005 to 2,600.  Breeding 
pairs on the more remote Dyer island have plummeted from 23,000 
breeding pairs in the early 1970s to just 1,500 pairs in 2008. 
Penguins normally mate for life.  Some experts fear the species will 
die out in as little as a decade.  The African penguin, also called 
the jackass because of its bray, is the only one to inhabit the 
African continent.  It has shorter feathers than the Antarctic birds 
because it doesn't face cold and is just 50 centimeters (20 inches) 
tall.  The Boulders Colony began in 1985 when a couple of penguins 
moved from Dyer onto the beach near the Simon's Town naval base. 
Dyer Island Conservation Trust Chairman Wilfred Chivell blames poor 
fisheries management for dwindling supplies of sardines and 
pilchards, the penguins' main food.  Table Mountain National Park 
Ranger Monique Rutherford says the competition for fish is so 
intense that young seals attack penguins to rip the fish from their 
bellies. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Gulls prey on the eggs and young chicks, often working as a 
team. 
When nesting penguins leave their eggs to chase away invaders, other 
gulls sneak in and steal the eggs.  Table Mountain Park Rangers 
recently placed 200 penguin nesting boxes at Boulders Beach.  Each 
box is big enough to house a family of parents, eggs and chicks. 
The boxes, made of a fiberglass mix, are shaped like a burrow and 
dug into the sand, mimicing real Boulders Beach penguin nests. 
Rangers say the boxes will provide shelter from the heat and a 
better defense against egg-stealing gulls.  The experiment has 
already worked well on Dyer.  The 1,000 boxes there have 80 percent 
occupancy.  Rutherford hopes the Boulder Beach penguins will take to 
the newly installed boxes in time to lay a second batch of eggs 
before the laying season ends in April. 
Qbefore the laying season ends in April. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
PRETORIA 00000674  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
South Africa Bans Commercial Abalone Fishing 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (U) The Department of Environment Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) 
announced February 28, 2009 that it would ban commercial abalone 
fishing.  Key factors contributing to this decision were the 
continued decline in abalone stocks, increased poaching and the 
migration of West Coast Rock Lobster into abalone areas.  The total 
allowable catch (TAC) had already been reduced annually from 615 
tons in 1995 to a record low of 125 tons for the 2006/7 season. 
DEAT met with the South African Abalone Association to discuss 
alternative livelihoods opportunities prior to announcing closure of 
the fishery.  DEAT officials said they provided information on 
Boat-based Whale Watching (BBWW), White Shark Cage Diving (WSCD), 
and marine aquaculture.  DEAT representatives claim the abalone 
fishers had little interest in these opportunities and demanded that 
the commercial fishery be re-opened.  DEAT officials added that the 
fishing community was to provide candidates for these alternative 
occupations by February 16, 2009, however no nominations were 
received.  In December 2008, DEAT distributed questionnaires to 
fishers asking what relief they wanted.  DEAT officials state that 
only three completed questionnaires were received out of a total of 
more than 308 fishers. 
 
-------------------------- 
Danes Promote Wind Mapping 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) A Danish-South African joint venture will produce a South 
Africa wind atlas to assist in determining the wind resource 
available for energy generation.  Riso Wind Consult National 
Laboratory for Sustainable Energy Manager Jens Carsten Hansen said, 
"Determining the wind resource accurately is important, and 
difficult.  If the wind speed differs just 5% from one location to 
the other, there is a 15% difference in the income generated for the 
same investment."  Risx forms part of the Technical University of 
Denmark, and is the world's largest wind energy research 
association.  Department of Minerals and Energy (DME) South Africa 
Wind Energy Program (SWAEP) Project Manager Andr Otto advised that 
DME will contribute R5-million ($50K) to the wind atlas project, 
with the Danish embassy providing R20-million ($2M).  The new wind 
atlas project will target the Western Cape, as well as areas of the 
Northern and Eastern Cape.  The first version of the atlas should be 
available in 2010. 
---------------------------------Mystery Foam Pollutes Joburg 
River 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) White foam accumulated in and around a section of the Sand 
River in Sandton on March 30, 2009.  The foam, which was pouring out 
of a storm drain,  appeared to be soap suds and was 1.5 meters high 
by the early afternoon.  Joburg Water Spokesperson Baldwin Matsimela 
said there had been complaints that factories in nearby Wynberg were 
dumping contaminants into the river.  Wetlands and riparian expert 
Paul Fairall said a Wynberg washing powder factory regularly washes 
its solphonic acid into the storm water drains that flow into the 
 
Sand River.  (Solphonic agent is the foaming agent of washing 
powders.)  Fairall added, "The acid kills any kind of living 
organism in that concentration."  CSIR Ecosystems and Human Health 
Research Group Leader Dr Paul Oberholzer said that the contaminant 
would change the chemical structure of the water by either raising 
Qwould change the chemical structure of the water by either raising 
or lowering the pH.  He commented, "This affects the entire food 
chain - birds, fish, micro vertebrates, and phytoplankton (algae) - 
because some species have a certain ph tolerance."  Oberholzer also 
noted that detergents also contain phosphate, a substance that 
encourages blue-green algae growth, which can be toxic. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Locals Threaten to BBQ Flamingos 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Birdlife SA Executive Director Mark Anderson has dismissed 
threats from the Kimberly Residents Association to "make flamingo 
braais and fillets" from the South African's only breeding 
population of lesser flamingo at the Kamfers Dam.  Residents are 
concerned that environmental appeals will stop the planned R2 
billion Northgate Development, which includes shops, eight schools 
and 3,500 houses.  Anderson noted that the Kamfers Dam flamingo 
nesting site is located opposite the project.  More than 8000 
flamingos have been seen at the Dam, an artificial breeding site 
that Birdlife SA created and which is now one of only six breeding 
sites in the world.  Anderson maintains that the EIA process for 
Northgate was flawed because alternative sites were not evaluated - 
an essential component when the potential adverse impact on birds 
 
PRETORIA 00000674  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
has been scientifically documented.  Anderson also issued warnings 
about malfunctioning sewage works, stating that recent water quality 
tests reveal high percentages of coliform bacteria and E. coli. 
Northern Cape Dept. of Environment and Conservation (DTEC) spokesman 
Mandla Ndzilli noted that, "Any contact with flamingoes or the water 
in the Kamfers Dan should be avoided to prevent individuals from 
becoming infected with water-borne disease."  Lesser flamingos are a 
protected species.  Killing them could result in prosecution, a 
maximum fine of R10,000 and two years in jail. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Necrotizing Bacteria Discovered in KZN Lagoon 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) KwaZulu Natal South Coast's Mpenjati Reserve remains closed 
until scientists can discover what caused a bacterial infection that 
led to amputation of the leg of well-known author and journalist RW 
Johnson.  Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife spokesman Simpiwe MxakaZa said they 
have not yet determined the exact bacteria causing the infection, 
although water samples have been taken.  Sources outside the 
government state that water samples show a concentration of 
necrotizing fasciitis, commonly referred to as a "flesh-eating 
virus."   Hospital records indicate that fourteen strains of 
bacteria were identified in the wound.  Johnson, a former London 
Times correspondent, cut his foot on a rock during a swim in the 
lagoon on March 11, 2009.  Less than 24 hours later, he was 
hospitalized and his leg was amputated on March 19, 2009.  His left 
hand continues in poor condition and his finger tips may also need 
to be amputated.  Johnson was appointed Director of the Helen Suzman 
Foundation after his return from the U.K. and has written several 
books, including "South Africa's Brave New World", and "Since the 
End of Apartheid". 
 
------------------ 
Lions Tree Poacher 
------------------ 
 
¶10. (U) A small game poacher spent two hours in a tree, trying to 
hide from lions in the Munyawana Game Reserve in northern 
KwaZulu-Natal on April 1, 2009.  Police spokesperson Captain 
Jabulani Mdletshe said the man was one of a group of four poachers 
who went into the reserve to poach small game.  He added, "They 
managed to get a wild hog.  On their return home, they were attacked 
by two lions.  Three of the group escaped but one decided to climb a 
tree, leaving his hunting dogs at the bottom to defend him." 
Mdletshe said the lions killed all six dogs, leaving the bones 
scattered around the tree.  The poacher was able to escape when the 
lions chased after a hyena.  Mdletshe added that the poacher had 
been taken to a clinic for treatment of claw scrapes, but fled 
before police could arrest him.  Phinda Private Game Reserve 
Director Kevin Pretorius said the Reserve did not normally have 
problems with poachers.  Mdletshe noted that a case had been opened 
and the police anticipate an arrest in the near future. 
--------------------------- 
Cape Whales face New Threat 
--------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Rescue Vleesbaai Action Group Chair Mareo Bekker condemned 
PetroSA's plans for a liquid natural gas mooring facility in a known 
whale-breeding site on the Western Cape.  He noted that the plan is 
"ill-conceived, short-sighted and environmentally damaging." 
PetroSA defended the plan, commenting that reserves off Mossel Bay 
are dwindling and that facility is needed to prevent closure of the 
Qare dwindling and that facility is needed to prevent closure of the 
gas-to-liquids operation there.  Most of the gas will be used to 
power Eskom's Gourikwa power station, which was expanded in 2008. 
Locals argue that PetroSA achieved the rezoning by stealth.  Bekker 
said, "The Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) process is fatally 
flawed; PetroSA has already entered into contracts for the supply of 
gas and the erection of buildings.  We fear the EIA is a smoke 
screen to appease the public."  Coastal ecologist Allan Heydorn 
expressed concern about both the effect of noise and pollution on 
the whales and dolphins that frequent the bay, and the possibility 
that the animals could become entangled in underwater cables.  He 
warned, "In the event of slow or insidious pollution and littering, 
the entire inter- and sub-tidal ecosystem and the near-shore marine 
food webs will be placed at risk.  This will have serious 
consequences for the coastal ecology and the livelihood of people in 
terms of fishing."  PetroSA responded that the Mossel Bay Refinery 
would close by 2010 if the project was not allowed to proceed, with 
the loss of 2,000 jobs. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Discovering the Hadedas Noisy Secrets 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Wits University School of Animal, Plant and Environmental 
 
PRETORIA 00000674  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
Sciences Professor Craig Symes launched a study of the ubiquitous 
Gauteng hadeda.  Hadedas, found throughout the province on roofs and 
lawns, awaken neighborhoods each morning with their loud squawks. 
They are not native to the province and originated from wetter 
coastal regions, arriving in Cape Town in the mid-1980.  Hadedas 
then traveled north to Gauteng.  Symes will use color-coded rings to 
identify birds.  Ringing the birds has not been an easy task; Symes 
has had to tackle birds and climb trees to get to fledgings.  A 
similar project has been running in Cape Town.  In Cape Town birds 
breed in winter while in Gauteng they breed in summer.  Symes hopes 
to learn whether the same birds nest in the same place each year and 
whether they mate for life. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Smuggler Slaughters Lions and Rhinos 
in his Backyard 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶13. (U) A suspected smuggler was arrested in an upscale Pretoria 
neighborhood on April 1, 2009 for allegedly killing lions and rhinos 
in his backyard.  Police had received a tip that wild animals were 
being killed at the home.  South Africa Police Service (SAPS) Crime 
Intelligence Gathering Unit, Tshwane Metro Police, and the Tshwana 
Agriculture and Environment Management Office raided the house, 
along with DEAT's Green Scorpions.  They recovered dozens of animal 
skulls, bones and teeth.  Tshwane Community Safety Department 
Spokesman Console Tleana said bones were found hidden in the 
bathroom, in meal bags, in bedrooms and with maize (corn) meal bags. 
 He added the police also found a "substantial amount" of foreign 
currency in the house.  Tleana said police believe the animals were 
killed for their skins, bones and horns which are sold in Eastern 
markets as medical and sexual aids.  The Health Department is 
conducting tests, and will fumigate and sanitize the home once 
testing is completed.  Tleana noted the police do not know if the 
animals were native to South Africa or brought into the country 
illegally prior to being slaughtered.  He confirmed that thirteen 
lions had been killed at the house, and added that but authorities 
had not been able to determine how many rhinos had been slaughtered. 
 The smuggler is a Vietnamese national who had been renting the 
house since January 2009.  Police authorities believe he has been in 
the country for over a year. 
 
--------------- 
Monthly Factoid 
--------------- 
 
¶14. (U) In 1991, South Africa became the first country in the world 
to provide full protection status for the Great White shark within 
its jurisdictional waters.  Countries including USA, Australia, 
Malta and Namibia followed later. 
 
La Lime