08PANAMA872
PANAMA: DEALING WITH THE DARIEN
Mon Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0872/01 3222259
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 172259Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2666
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2711
RHMFISS/DIRJIATF SOUTH
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHFJUSC/USCUSTOMS WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEABND/DEA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUCNFB/DIRFBI WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000872 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA FOR CEN AND AND 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/07/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: DEALING WITH THE DARIEN 
 
REF: A. A:PANAMA 00650 
     ¶B. B:PANAMA 00725 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reasons 1.4 (b) and 
 (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S//NF)  The Darien, Panama's forgotten frontier, is 
under pressure from drug traffickers and remnants of the 
FARC. The FARC do not present a serious military threat to 
Panama or Colombia, but they do threaten to degenerate into 
banditry, as the organization implodes. While the U.S. is 
helping to strengthen Panama's security forces on the border, 
it will be some time before they are strong enough to 
militarily confront the FARC. There is an extensive law 
enforcement investigation underway against the FARC 
logistical infrastructure in Panama, that may deal a stronger 
blow than any military blow could. Meanwhile the FARC and the 
drug dealers pose a threat to the indigenous communities, as 
drugs and guns flood in, alienating the local population. 
Post believes the best way to limit the ability of all 
illegal groups to operate in the Darien is reinforce the 
negative reaction local groups have to the illegal groups by 
assisting the GOP to effectively govern the Darien, following 
on the successful experience of the Government of Colombia in 
the Social Recovery of Territory. End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Panama's Step-Daughter Under Pressure 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  The Darien region of Panama is a forgotten corner of 
the country that few Panamanians know, travel to, or care 
about.  Dominated by thick forest and criss-crossed by major 
rivers, it is the ultimate frontier for Panamanians. The most 
famous thing about the Darien is what there is not - a 
continuation of the Pan-American Highway (the Darien Gap). 
Its very underdevelopment has long been seen by Panamanians 
as an effective barrier against Colombia's political and drug 
violence.  As a result, it has never received significant 
public or private investment.  There are schools or health 
clinics in the Darien, and even fewer roads.  Most 
transportation is by foot or by boat, making it very 
difficult to move people or goods (licit or illicit).  The 
population of the Darien is less than 50,000, grouped in 
three main types of population centers: the mestizo 
agricultural communities, concentrated along the one main 
road; the mestizo and Afro-Panamanian fishing communities, 
grouped in water-side communities; and traditional 
Embera-Wounaan Indian communities, grouped in two separate 
semi-autonomous "comarcas", one to the north of the 
Pan-American Highway (Cemaco), and one to the south (Sambu). 
Abandoned by the central government for the last 100 years, 
the people of the Darien have largely ignored the central 
government in response, being more or less content to scratch 
out a meager living from the land and the water. This status 
quo has been challenged lately by two factors: an increased 
interest on the part of the GOP in exploiting the economic 
potential of the Darien, and the increased presence in the 
Darien of drug traffickers and members of illegal armed 
groups, especially the FARC. 
 
------------------- 
No Eight Foot Giant 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S//NF)  Post believes that there are at any given time 
between 200-600 members of the FARC in the Darien. Reports 
from indigenous leaders indicate that they are concentrated 
in two river valleys near the border, and far away from any 
population centers. These camps are R&R points, where FARC 
fighters retreat to when things in Colombia get too "hot." 
Unofficial reports from U.S. military personnel who have 
close contact with Panamanian Frontier Forces in the Darien 
indicate that the FARC fighters are arriving over the border 
in deplorable condition, without adequate equipment, and 
ill-nourished. Recent FARC activities in the Darien have 
included the repeated holding up of a small bodega in the 
tiny town of Bajo Chiquito, apparently because the FARC do 
not have money to pay for supplies, as they traditionally 
have done (see reftel a). It is Post's view that the FARC 
fighters in the Darien are an increasingly rag-tag group, 
without effective leadership, communications, or logistical 
support.  The Darien is less a secure base for them as it is 
a log a drowning man grabs onto for dear life.  As such, the 
FARC camps in Panama do not represent a strategic threat to 
Colombia. Rather, these groups represent a growing threat to 
Panama, as the FARC disintegrates into criminal bands. This 
is the threat the GOP had in mind when they reformed the 
police to create a separate Frontier Police Service 
(SENAFRONT) (see reftel b). 
 
--------------------- 
US Help In the Darien 
--------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S//NF)  It is also Post's view that SENAFRONT does not 
yet have the capacity to confront the experienced FARC 
fighters without significant risk of defeat.  SENAFRONT 
theoretically has 2,000 men under its control, but many of 
them have been pulled away from the frontier in recent months 
to augment the undermanned Panamanian National Police (PNP) 
in Panama City and other population centers, in an attempt to 
control a crime wave that has caused social alarm.  This 
constant cannibalizing of the Frontier Forces was a major 
justification for creating a separate force -- SENAFRONT -- 
which could concentrate on the Darien.  But SENAFRONT still 
needs to be organized, trained, properly equipped, and to 
incorporate more manpower  before it can be expected to 
provide any greater capacity than at present.   While Post's 
ODC and NAS are working on training and equipping this force, 
it will take time before their efforts bear serious results. 
ODC has a 12 soldier strong Joint Planning and Assistance 
Team (JPAT), which trains SENAFRONT on basic logistics, 
maintenance, combat life saver, and light infantry tactics in 
training areas near Panama City, and then takes "technical 
assistance visits" to Meteti, in the near part of the Darien, 
to observe their trainees in action. A 10-man SEAL team works 
with a smaller group from SENAFRONT on advanced Counter-Narco 
Terrorism training. ODC is also working on equipping 
SENAFRONT with some trucks, boats, communications equipment 
and night vision kits, as well as building barracks. NAS, 
accompanied by ODC, recently took the commander of the 
SENAFRONT, Commissioner Frank Abrego, to Colombia to meet the 
leadership of the Colombian National Police, who promised up 
to 60 training slots for SENAFRONT in their Jungle Training 
School. The trip helped forge connections between the 
Colombians and the Panamanians which Post hopes will lead to 
fruitful cooperation in the future. 
 
--------- 
Red Lines 
--------- 
 
¶5.  (S//NF)  Even when all this training and equipping is 
finished, the GOP will be reluctant to confront the FARC 
directly.  While the GOP realize they must begin to exert 
greater sovereignty over their border in order to control the 
FARC as it disintegrates, the Minister of Government and 
Justice has told us that he plans to use SENAFRONT to reduce 
the FARC's operating room in Panama little by little until it 
is essentially pushed out of Panama and back into Colombia, 
without having to confront it directly. In this process, the 
GOP has clearly rejected USG offers to directly assist it in 
the Darien. Current GOP policy refuses to allow U.S. military 
personnel to train Panamanian forces in the Darien, though 
the "technical assistance visits" mentioned above are 
allowed. The GOP is reviewing our diplomatic notes on 
upcoming training very closely to make sure we are not trying 
to bend the rules. The GOP also rejected a recent DEA offer 
to fly a FAST team in to the Darien to provide helicopter 
coverage for anti-drug operations.  It seems the GOP is 
worried that U.S. forces might be wounded or kidnapped by the 
FARC, or might militarily engage with the FARC on their own 
authority. Should any of these scenarios play out, the GOP 
would lose by being forced into a major confrontation for 
which it is not prepared, and in the process drawing 
attention to the presence of the FARC, which would be bad for 
business in bustling, thriving Panama City. 
 
----------------------- 
Judicializing the Fight 
----------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S//NF)  There is a second more serious FARC presence in 
Panama. The 57th Front, based on the Colombian side of the 
border, is a logistical Front that runs a drug and arms 
trafficking operation that helps to supply FARC forces in 
western Colombia. This Front has a strong presence in Panama 
City, smuggling routes throughout Panama, and a permanent 
presence in the Darien. DEA and the U.S. Attorney's Office 
for the Southern District of New York are running a complex 
investigation of this group, based on a very sensitive 
judicialized wire-tap program (called "Matador"), funded by 
NAS.  Post hopes this investigation will lead to a decisive 
judicial blow against the 57th Front later in the year, 
though serious obstacles to taking down or arresting the ring 
leaders are still to be overcome. This would greatly weaken 
the FARC in Panama and Colombia. Matador represents an 
extraordinary level of cooperation from the GOP, who are 
essentially allowing the USG to run phone taps on Panamanian 
phones. The GOP has done an excellent job of using the 
information picked up by Matador to capture drug shipments 
without revealing where the information is coming from, thus 
allowing us to deal powerful blows to drug traffickers, while 
maintaining our overall investigation of the FARC. 
Information from Matador has allowed the USG to obtain 
tremendous amounts of information on the 57th Front, other 
drug trafficking organizations, and other high profile and 
sensitive criminal investigations.  Post considers defending 
the Matador program, and the GOP goodwill which makes it 
possible to be of paramount importance, even at the cost of 
not pushing other issues such as direct U.S. action in the 
Darien. 
 
--------------------- 
Socio-Cultural Threat 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) The FARC is a major drug trafficker in the Darien, 
but not the most important. Many other Drug Trafficking 
Organizations (DTOs) operate in the Darien. They tend to 
bring drugs into the Darien by go-fast, and then transfer 
them to land, either coming up the Pan-American Highway, or 
taking them overland by paths cut through the jungle.  The 
traffickers are using the indigenous Embera-Wounaan, either 
willingly or by force, to facilitate this trade.  Some 
organizations kidnap members of the Embera-Wounaan to guide 
them, while others hire young people to work for them. This 
is doing tremendous damage to the social fabric of the 
indigenous comarcas, as the Grand Cacique (Chief) of the 
Embera tribe, Betanio Chiquidama, told the Ambassador October 
¶24. Chiquidama explained that Embera youth are being 
recruited by drug traffickers to guide them and work for 
them, and are being paid in weapons and drugs. They are also 
being encouraged to form youth gangs to work for the 
traffickers, which in turn challenges the traditional social 
structure of the Embera-Wounaan.  Chiquidama asked the 
Ambassador for help bringing the trafficking under control. 
Post believes the position taken by the Embera leadership 
gives us a major opportunity to increase cooperation and 
coordination in the region on security and other issues, as 
detailed below. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Drain the Water, Before They Learn to Swim 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (C)  The key limiting factor on FARC activity in the 
Darien is the lack of a sympathetic local population. 
Panamanians in general do not like Colombians, and there is 
no local sympathy for the FARC in the Darien. While some 
villages may engage in low-level commerce with FARC elements, 
it is on a strictly pay-as-you-go basis. The recent FARC 
incursion into Bajo Chiquito to steal goods from a local 
store (see reftel a) led the locals to call in SENAFRONT. 
This lack of local support for the FARC or other Colombian 
groups gives Panama a major advantage as it struggles to 
respond to the threat the potential disintegration of the 
FARC represents. But given the lack of effective governance 
on the ground in the Darien, the central government has few 
options to respond should the situation take a turn for the 
worse. 
 
--------------- 
Colombian Model 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  (C)  Post believes that the Colombian experience with the 
"Social Recovery of Territory (SRT)," as coordinated by the 
Center for the Coordination of Integrated Action (CCAI) 
within the Office of the President of Colombia, offers an 
excellent example of what the way forward should look like. 
The extension of effective Panamanian sovereignty over the 
Darien requires a holistic approach, and not just a military 
approach. The real threat in the Darien is the potential 
disaffection of the local population, which might turn the 
latent military threat of the rag-tag FARC elements into a 
genuine problem. Bringing effective government to the people 
of the Darien is the best way to prevent that. In analyzing 
the Colombian experience with SRT, Post believes that there 
are valuable lessons for Panama. The Government of Colombia 
(GOC) has stressed the need to provide local security and 
rule of law, by bringing local police, judges and prosecutors 
to remote regions. Cacique Chiqidama specifically complained 
to the Ambassador that SENAFRONT does not enter the 
semi-autonomous indigenous Comarcas where most of the 
Embera-Wounaan live, instead remaining in their base in 
Meteti or patrolling the highway. They are thus not seen as 
providing protection to the local population, or helping them 
protect their children from the threat of co-optation by 
armed groups. Post has proposed organizing a meeting between 
Commissioner Abrego of SENAFRONT and the Embera leadership to 
encourage joint patrols with local Embera volunteer community 
police. Even relatively small moves to re-deploy SENAFRONT 
forces to villages and towns could have a major effect on 
local opinion, and provide the police with excellent sources 
of intelligence. Commissioner Abrego and NAS Panama heard 
over and over from Colombian police officials on their recent 
visit to Colombia that community policing was the key to 
Colombia's success. Post wants to use Merida funds to 
encourage the Panamanian police to adopt community policing 
in the Darien as well as in inner-city neighborhoods. 
 
¶10.  (C)  Cacique Chiqidama also asked the Ambassador to help 
convey the message to the GOP that the Embera want increased 
coordination between the central government and their local 
government, so that resources are aimed at the real problems 
of the people. 27 of 28 Embera villages in Cemaco have do not 
have easy access to fresh water. Relatively easy steps which 
could eliminate bottle-necks to economic growth, like 
improving access to markets for local bananas, have not been 
taken. Again, this is a key element of the Colombian SRT 
strategy, with all government agencies being coordinated by 
the CCAI to help improve governance and service delivery in 
marginal communities. Post will try to leverage our 
Merida-funded Darien programs to convince the GOP to 
establish a coordinating mechanism in the Darien which can 
ensure that the voice of the people of the Darien is heard in 
policy making. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Put Our Money Where Our Mouth Is? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (C)  Realistically speaking, our call for coordinated 
action in the Darien will be more readily heard if the USG 
brings resources to bear on the issue. USAID has a proposal 
for funding under 1207, if funds are available, for a local 
government strengthening program in the Darien which would be 
an excellent way to focus the GOP on the issue, and give the 
USG a say in how the problems are addressed. Post will try to 
use a forest management program that USAID has in the Darien 
to promote this issue, but it is not clear how far that will 
get us. USAID also plans to use some of the Merida Community 
Action funds to work on gang prevention in the Darien, with 
an eye towards promoting this overall strategy. Post will 
also continue to work creatively with ODC to make maximum use 
of its Humanitarian Assistance Program and Medical Readiness 
Training exercises to promote greater government 
coordination, and local development in the Darien. ODC 
conducted the first Medical Readiness Training exercises in 
the Darien in many years in May 2008, signaling a loosening 
of the previous GOP policy to refuse all requests for U.S. 
military deployments in the Darien. 
 
---------------------- 
Step-Daughter No More? 
---------------------- 
 
¶12.  (C)  This strategy will not work if there is not buy-in 
from the GOP. This may now be possible because the GOP is 
beginning to focus on the economic potential of the Darien. 
During the Panamax exercise in August, PolOff was given a 
briefing by a GOP official on the potential economic 
development of the Darien, especially as an exporter of 
organic beef and valuable timber. The briefer stressed the 
relationship between the economic development plans in the 
Darien and the security reforms. The clear impression was 
that Panama needed to gain control of its territory to fully 
exploit it. Post will stress to GOP counterparts that 
effective governance, provision of basic services, and 
community support are also keys for the success of any 
attempt to promote economic development in the Darien. The 
more legitimate activity there is in the Darien the less room 
there will be for illegal activities, and the more support 
there will be for a strong, integrated police presence. This 
is the best path forward to bring the Darien into Panama's 
social structure, and to push out the FARC and other armed 
groups. 
STEPHENSON