09CAIRO747
ADMIRAL MULLEN'S MEETINGS WITH FIELD MARSHAL
Thu Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO3488
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #0747/01 1201501
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 301501Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2327
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYS E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000747 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/26/2019 
TAGS: PREL MASS MOPS PARM KPAL IS IR SO EG PTER
SUBJECT: ADMIRAL MULLEN'S MEETINGS WITH FIELD MARSHAL 
TANTAWI AND MOD CHIEF OF STAFF LTG SAMI ANAN 
 
REF: CAIRO 693 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey per 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  Key Points: 
 
- (S/NF) During an April 21 meeting with Chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Michael Mullen, Minister of 
Defense Field Marshal Tantawi noted the strong Egypt-U.S. 
military relationship and looked forward to increased 
cooperation with the new U.S. Africa Command. 
 
- (S/NF) On counter smuggling, Tantawi said "we are trying 
our best" to prevent arms smuggling to Gaza and expressed 
appreciation for U.S. efforts to disrupt smuggling networks 
further afield. 
 
- (S/NF) Tantawi hoped the new Israeli government would not 
"exploit political differences" between Israel and Egypt, 
saying statements by the new Israeli government created 
"problems with public opinion" in Egypt. 
 
- (S/NF) During a separate meeting, Egyptian military Chief 
of Staff LTG Sami Anan stressed the importance of resolving 
the Arab-Israeli conflict in order to deter Iranian 
interference in the region. 
 
- (S/NF)  Anan described Egyptian efforts to counter 
smuggling, including deploying additional Border Guard Forces 
to the Egypt-Sudan border.  He requested additional 
intelligence on arms smuggling networks, saying "if we are 
provided with enough information, we will take all efforts" 
to intercept shipments. 
 
- (S/NF) Anan said that Egypt would "immediately consider" 
any request to deny overflight clearance for suspected 
Iranian arms shipments to Gaza, but requested additional 
information on the flight, cargo, and suspected final 
destination (reftel). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
MinDef Tantawi: Regional Security, Counter Smuggling 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF) Admiral Mullen briefed Tantawi on U.S. efforts in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan to counter the deteriorating 
security situation.  "I hope you succeed," Tantawi replied, 
noting that instability in Afghanistan and Pakistan affected 
Egypt.  Admiral Mullen stressed the importance of the Middle 
East peace process, highlighting the increased capacity of 
Palestinian Authority security forces in the West Bank. 
Tantawi expressed Egypt's desire to participate in the new 
U.S. Africa Command, saying "we can help you" in Africa.  On 
piracy, Tantawi blamed political instability in Somalia for 
fueling piracy.  On Iraq, Admiral Mullen stressed the 
importance of Egypt re-opening its embassy in Baghdad as soon 
as possible. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF) On counter smuggling, Admiral Mullen said the U.S 
stood ready to provide Egypt with additional support to 
combat arms smuggling.  Admiral Mullen briefed Tantawi on 
increased U.S. efforts, through U.S. Central Command, to 
improve intelligence on smuggling networks. "Egypt is 
critical to efforts" to prevent Hamas from re-arming and to 
establish a durable cease-fire in Gaza, he added.  Tantawi 
looked forward to a "strong and important" Bright Star 
exercise in fall 2009. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
COS Anan: Peace Process, Counter Smuggling 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (S/NF) LTG Anan noted the strong bilateral relationship, 
saying "differences in opinion will never be allowed to 
spoil" the U.S.- Egypt relationship.  Resolving the 
Arab-Israeli conflict must be prioritized, Anan said, in 
order to deny Iran and groups like Hezbollah an opportunity 
to interfere in regional affairs.  Anan criticized countries 
like Qatar for supporting Hamas, saying they were more 
interested in establishing a greater role in regional affairs 
than supporting the Palestinian people.  He also noted the 
importance of a strong and capable Egyptian military in 
promoting regional stability. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF) LTG Anan provided a brief on Egyptian counter 
smuggling efforts along the Egypt-Gaza border, including 
Border Guard Force (BGF) patrols, an active military 
intelligence unit, and increased arrests of suspected 
smugglers.  "We have been relatively successful" he said, 
adding that "strict counter smuggling measures" recently 
caused angry Sinai Bedouin involved in the smuggling business 
to attack Egyptian security forces.  According to Egyptian 
military intelligence, Egypt's "strong hand" also angered 
Hamas, who also plans to attack Egyptian security forces. 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  Admiral Mullen encouraged Egypt to accept "all 
available technology" to combat smuggling.  MG Fouad 
al-Helmi, Senior Advisor to the Minister of Defense, said 
that MOD would fully cooperate with the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers for the "quick" installation of the FMF-funded 
Border Tunnel Activity and Detection System (BTADS) along the 
Egypt-Gaza border. Anan noted that technology "will not stop 
100 percent of smuggling," adding that "as long there is a 
blockade, there will be smuggling."  Anan stressed that arms 
smuggling into Gaza was "a direct threat to Egyptian national 
security." 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  Anan described increased efforts to combat arms 
smuggling along the Egypt-Sudan border, including additional 
border guards, increased border patrols, and a military 
intelligence unit that was doing a "tremendous job" 
controlling the border.  Patrols focus on areas with 
high-levels of suspected smuggling activities, but a 
comprehensive aerial reconnaissance and surveillance plan 
helps cover areas without a physical BGF presence.  Anan 
asked for additional intelligence, saying "if we are provided 
with enough information, we will take all efforts" to 
intercept arms shipments.  Admiral Mullen said the U.S. was 
committed to intelligence sharing and noted the importance of 
intelligence for successful interdiction efforts.  On denying 
overflight clearance for suspected Iranian arms shipments to 
Gaza, Anan promised that Egypt would "immediately consider" 
any request to deny clearance, but stressed the importance of 
getting "full information" on the flight, its cargo, and the 
suspected final destination (reftel). 
 
¶8.  (U) Admiral Mullen did not have the opportunity to clear 
before his departure. 
SCOBEY