09CAIRO2350
EGYPTIAN OFFICIALS DISCUSS NPT REVIEW WITH UNDER
Tue Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #2350/01 3561332
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 221332Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4523
INFO RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 1101
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 1991
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0324
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0161
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYS E C R E T CAIRO 002350 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/06/2019 
TAGS: PREL KNNP PARM IS IR SY EG
SUBJECT: EGYPTIAN OFFICIALS DISCUSS NPT REVIEW WITH UNDER 
SECRETARY TAUSCHER 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey per 1.4 (b) and (d).
¶1. (C) Key Points: -- During a December 3 meeting, Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security Ellen Tauscher and Foreign Minister Aboul Gheit discussed preparations for the May 2010 Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) review conference. -- Tauscher stressed that a successful review conference was critical to international efforts to address the Iranian nuclear threat and looked forward to cQse cooperation with the Egyptians before and during the NPT review. -- Aboul Gheit agreed that an Iranian nuclear weapon would be "disastrous," but stressed that he could not pressure Iran and put aside his concern about Israel, and would continue to push for implementation of the 1995 NPT Revcon resolution that called for a nuclear weapons-free zone in the Middle East. Gheit and Tauscher agreed that Egypt and the U.S. would work together to draft common language for the Review Conference. -- During a separate meeting, Arab League Secretary General Amre Moussa noted that while the U.S. and the Arab League may not agree on how to address certain NPT issues, like Israel, he believed that many common interests provided a strong foundation for increased cooperation ahead of the NPT review. --------------------------------------------- ------- FM: Welcomed Cooperation, Stressed Weapons-Free Zone --------------------------------------------- -------

¶2. (C) Under Secretary Tauscher said the U.S. wanted to cooperate with Egypt to ensure a successful NPT review conference. Aboul Gheit welcomed cooperation, but stressed that Israel's refusal to join the NPT must be addressed during the conference, saying that Israel's "vague" nuclear program posed a threat to regional security and fueled Iranian efforts. Tauscher noted that the U.S. continued to support the universality of the NPT, but emphasized that the Iranian threat was not vague and demanded a timely response by the international community. A successful NPT Revcon, she continued, was crucial to addressing the Iranian threat.

¶3. (C) While concerned about Iran, Aboul Gheit said he could not put pressure on Iran and put asidQhis concerns about Israel. Egypt would continue to focus on its efforts to implement a nuclear weapons-free zone in the Middle East. "We have standing in the Arab World and our population is focused on Israel," he continued. Aboul Gheit expressed frustration with the Iranian resolution passed during the last IAEA Board of Governors meeting, saying Egypt could not support the resolution because it did not include a reference to a nuclear weapons-free zone (Note: Egypt abstained from the resolution critical of Iran. End Note). "We wanted to help," he added, "but we have to protect our domestic and international image."

4.(C) Tauscher noted that close U.S.- Egyptian cooperation during the NPT revcon would better serve both countries' interests. Aboul Gheit then turned to his staff present, including the Assistant Minister for Disarmament Affairs Khalid Shamaa and Cabinet Advisor Wael Badawi, and issued clear instructions to "work with the Americans" on language for the Review Conference. He stressed that Egypt supported P5 1 efforts with Iran, but noted that "we need our concerns met as well."

¶5. (C) Aboul Gheit agreed that a nuclear Iran or Syria would be "disastrous." Aboul Gheit reiterated Egypt's willingness to work with the U.S. on NPT revcon issues, but emphasized that Egyptian concerns over Israel's refusal to join the NPT must be addressed. "You need to take Israel by the hand and compel them to join," he added. Tauscher stressed the importance of Egyptian cooperation to address the immediate Iranian threat and told Aboul Gheit that T Senior Advisor Jim Timbie and NSC Nonproliferation Director Adam Scheinman were prepared to work with Egypt to develop mutually acceptable language for the Review Conference in May.

¶6. (S/NF) Tauscher and the delegation also briefed Aboul Gheit on the latest information regarding Syria's nuclear program and its continued refusal to fully cooperate with the IAEA. Aboul Gheit believed that uncertainty over Israel's nuclear weapons program drove Syrian actions. -------------------------------------- MFA Disarmament Official on NPT Review --------------------------------------

¶7. (C) During a subsequent meeting with Deputy Assistant Minister for Disarmament Khalid Shamaa, Tauscher reiterated U.S. support for the 1995 NPT Middle East resolution that called for a nuclear weapons-free zone in the Middle East, but noted that addressing the immediate Iranian threat to regional stability must be the international community's first priority. Scheinman briefed Shamaa on the USG approach to the NPT revcon, which focused on rebuilding international confidence in the treaty by improving verification procedures and strengthening safeguards. He noted that the U.S. was already taking steps in terms of disarmament, including seeking Congressional ratification of the CTBT and START negotiations with Russia.

¶8. (C) Shamaa believed that a greater focus should be placed on ensuring equal security for all countries, adding that many states would not accept stricter safeguards while countries like Israel refused to submit their facilities to any safeguards. While chemical and biological weapons proliferation was a concern, Shamaa said that nuclear issues remained Egypt's priority. Tauscher emphasized that the international community had a very limited amount of time to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons. A large international coalition was forming against Iran, she continued, and the U.S. needed Egyptian support for Qose time sensitive efforts. Tauscher emphasized that the Israeli nuclear question had been there for decades, and had not caused states in the region to reconsider their NPT obligations, whereas the Iranian program is causing states throughout the region, even Egypt, to reconsider their nuclear status. This is a big difference, and makes clear the need for cooperation to prevent a nuclear armed Iran. Shamaa agreed with Tauscher,s assessment. Shamaa ended by asking when the U.S. would provide its comments on the Egyptian proposals for implementation of the 1995 and 2000 resolutions. Tauscher and Timbie responded that there was agreement with the Foreign Minister that the next step was to begin to draft language for the Review Conference. ------------------ Arab League on NPT ------------------

¶9. (C) During a separate meeting with Arab League Secretary General Amre Moussa, Tauscher looked forward to greater cooperation with the Arab League on shared proliferation concerns. Moussa said he fully supported President Obama's non-proliferation efforts, including the goals outlined in the April Prague speech, adding that the Arab League opposed any Iranian military nuclear program. He stressed the need for U.S. leadership during the NPT review, especially on issues like universality.

¶10. (C) Scheinman briefed Moussa on overall U.S. goals for the NPT revcon. Arab League Director of Multilateral Affairs Wael al-Assad believed that NAM countries would not accept tougher safeguards until they saw progress on disarmament and the implementation of the Middle East nuclear weapons-free zone. Moussa noted that while the U.S. and the Arab League may not agree on how to address certain NPT issues, like Israel, he believed that many common interests provided a strong foundation for increased cooperation ahead of the NPT review. In particular, he supported the Obama approach and did not want it to fail. Tauscher agreed on the usefulness of a dialogue and invited Arab League technical experts to Washington for further discussions.

11.(U) This message was cleared by U/S Tauscher. Scobey