09PANAMA625
THE GANG THREAT ON PANAMA'S COSTA RICAN BORDER
Mon Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0625/01 2291909
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 171909Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3659
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2836
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0793
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3848
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 2034
RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR 1564
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0434
RUEABND/DEA WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/DIRJIATF SOUTH
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUCNFB/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000625 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/21/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SNAR PM
SUBJECT: THE GANG THREAT ON PANAMA'S COSTA RICAN BORDER 
 
REF: PANAMA 00470 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR BARBARA J. STEPHENSON FOR REASONS 1.4 (b) AND 
 (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S//NF)  The border between Panama and Costa Rica has 
been described as a "no mans' land", where drugs flow across 
into Costa Rica and guns and money flow back into Panama. 
With parallel roads along either side of the border, over 200 
possible crossing points, a free trade zone town sitting on 
the border itself, and chaotic and corrupt security agencies 
on the Panamanian side, it is virtually impossible to control 
the border itself.  This wide open border has led to the 
growth of an important gun market on the Costa Rican side of 
the border which supplies the FARC, DTOs and local gangs with 
weapons, while large amounts of drugs and cash flow across 
the border. It has also created an "undergoverned space" that 
Central American and Mexican gangs may be exploiting to lay 
low and build a new base of operations. Panama's National 
Frontier Service (SENAFRONT) reports an increase in 
assassinations in the area, which has traditionally been 
largely free of violent crime. The National Aero-Naval 
Service (SENAN) believes that recent maritime interdiction 
efforts may be forcing traffickers to move loads to land and 
take them through Panama on the Pan-American Highway, and 
across the border into Costa Rica. Post is concerned that an 
increase in overland drug and arms trafficking may further 
destabilize Panama and the other Central American nations. 
This is the exact opposite result than was intended when the 
strategy to increase maritime pressure was implemented (see 
reftel). Post is further concerned that incremental attempts 
to increase law enforcement pressure on the land route may 
lead the Mexican, Central American or Colombian DTOs to move 
to take control of the border through increased acts of 
violence to ensure their control over the route. 
 
¶2.  (S//NF)  Post will work with the GOP to design a law 
enforcement strategy for the border area to disrupt the land 
trafficking routes, and so discourage the cartels from trying 
to gain control of the area. Law Enforcement agencies at Post 
are redirecting assets to the Costa Rican border, and NAS is 
proposing the expansion of the ICE vetted unit so that part 
of it can be turned over to the Panamanian National Police 
(PNP) as a major crimes unit that can concentrate on the 
Costa Rican border area, where local police units are highly 
corrupt. Post will also work with PNP to develop an effective 
highway patrol force to interdict drugs throughout the 
Pan-American highway, and move maritime assets to cut off 
maritime-land transfer points along the coast. As the 
Department determines Merida Initiative funding and 
allocations for the next year, Post encourages all concerned 
to direct as much support as possible into flexible NAS and 
USAID funding that can be used to respond to emerging threats 
in a creative and flexible manner. End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
The Virtual Border 
------------------ 
 
¶3.  (S//NF)  The Panama-Costa Rica border is described by 
CBP, ICE, DEA and NAS personnel as a "joke." Panamanian 
Minister of Government and Justice Jose Raul Mulino told 
Charge July 24 that the border area was a "no man's land" 
without effective GOP control. There is virtually no control 
over people or goods flowing across the border due to two 
factors. First, at the main international crossing point on 
the Pan-American Highway at Paso Canoas, there is a small 
Free Trade Zone (FTZ) sitting directly on the border. Mostly 
controlled by Palestinian families linked to relatives in the 
Colon Free Trade Zone, this FTZ is not in and of itself of 
great concern to law enforcement, though some of the 
businesses are involved in money laundering and smuggling. 
Rather, the very existence of the FTZ renders the border 
ineffective, as there are houses and businesses with one door 
in one country, and another door in the other. People wander 
in and out of the two countries as they shop. In order not to 
disrupt a local generator of wealth, officials in both Costa 
Rica and Panama have adopted laissez faire customs and 
immigration policies to accommodate the FTZ. The second 
factor is the existence of parallel roads on either side of 
the border from the Pacific to the top of the Talamanca 
mountain chain that runs through the two countries. In 
Panama, this corresponds to the province of Chiriqui, long a 
laid back agricultural area. The presence of the parallel 
roads on either side of the border, with over 200 crossing 
points between them, means that there is no way to 
effectively control the cross border traffic in people or 
goods at the border. Post believes that Panama must move to a 
U.S. Border Patrol-style mobile patrol doctrine to control 
the goods and people following into Panama from Costa Rica. 
To that end, NAS has been sponsoring periodic deployments of 
U.S. Border Patrol agents to Chiriqui to help train the 
SENAFRONT police who patrol the area. 
 
-------------------- 
Ingrained Corruption 
-------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S//NF)  Adding to the difficulties of controlling the 
Costa Rican border, Post has credible information that the 
Panamanian National Police (PNP) commander for the Chiriqui 
province, Sub-Commissioner Bartolome Aguero, is himself 
working with criminal networks in Panama. Aguero is 
reportedly a member of a network of corrupt officers at the 
sub-commissioner rank in the PNP. PNP Director Gustavo Perez 
told POLOFF and NAS July 23 that the PNP had a corruption 
problem at "very high levels" in Chiriqui, and that he was 
examining how to deal with it. Even if Aguero is relieved of 
his command, the PNP upper ranks in the province are probably 
also tainted, and cleaning up the police force in the region 
will take time, and probably lead to a period of lower 
operational efficiency. At the same time, members of the 
SENAFRONT deployed on the Costa Rican border are reluctant to 
search vehicles for fear of uncovering criminal acts linked 
to powerful local or national politicians, according to PNP 
sources in Chiriqui. Several of the local criminal networks 
are led by local elected politicians, who traffic drugs and 
weapons in vehicles with official license plates. While 
SENAFRONT officers are generally more dedicated and honest 
than PNP officers in Chiriqui, their institution is focused 
on securing the Darien Province on the other end of Panama 
from the FARC and Colombian DTOs, and the officers on the 
Costa Rican border have not felt, up to now, that they had 
high level support to confront entrenched corruption among 
politicians. There is also considerable corruption among 
officers of the National Immigration Service (SNM) and the 
National Customs Authority (ANA) throughout Panama, meaning 
that governmental institutions are disinclined to work 
together because they cannot be sure if their colleagues from 
other institutions are honest or corrupt. This fact has 
undermined the effectiveness of the NAS-funded and 
CBP-assisted Guabala checkpoint on the Pan-American Highway 
in eastern Chiriqui, which is the last real checkpoint on the 
highway before the border. The checkpoint has highlighted the 
difficulty of controlling smuggling in the area through fixed 
checkpoints, as new roads quickly sprouted up around it 
allowing vehicles to circumvent the checkpoint. 
 
------------------------ 
The Mexicans are Coming! 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (S//NF)  DEA, NAS and other agencies at Post report that 
there is a growing presence of Mexicans near the Costa Rican 
border. However, they also report that the presence is not 
yet massive, nor are there signs that one particular cartel 
is dominating the market. One member of MS-13 has been 
identified on the border, and there are reports that up to 
ten MS-13 members are in the area. It is not clear if the 
Mexicans and Central American gangs are using the area to 
hide out (some are reportedly prison escapees from Honduras), 
or if they are setting up operations in the area. Their 
presence on the border, however, coincides with an increase 
in violence, including horrific murders of a kind associated 
with Mexican and Central American gangs. SENAFRONT Deputy 
Commander Commissioner Cristian Hayer told PolOff July 24 
that there had been ten executions in the area this year, 
where previously there had been none. He speculated they 
could be a result of score settling, or attempts to rob drug 
shipments. The up-tick in violence, and the Mexican and 
Central American presence near the border have drawn 
attention to Panama's vulnerability to these gangs should 
they eventually decide to move decisively into the area. With 
U.S. and Panamanian security assets mostly concentrated on 
the drug trafficking problem in Panama City, the Darien, and 
Panama's territorial waters, the Costa Rican border is 
Panama's unguarded back door. 
 
--------------------- 
Drugs, Guns and Money 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S//NF)  Adding to Post's concern over the Costa Rican 
border is the possibility that overland traffic is becoming 
more important. SENAN Deputy Director Commissioner Juan 
Vergara told PolOff July 17 that as a result of recent 
increased pressure by U.S. and Panamanian maritime assets in 
Panama's territorial waters (see reftel), there had been an 
increase in the number of go-fast vessels making short trips 
up from Colombia to the Gulf of San Miguel in the Darien, and 
transferring their drug loads onto vehicles for shipment 
through Panama and across the border by road. Post's TAT and 
DEA/TAT Cartegena have also reported that Colombian drug 
traffickers have shifted their tactics in response to the 
added pressure, and are now taking a shore-hugging route at 
low speed, and transferring their loads to the road as soon 
as possible. Post TAT has also noted that some maritime 
trafficking routes end off the coast of Chiriqui, where loads 
are transferred to the Pan-American Highway at one of several 
small isolated landings within a short distance of the 
highway. In one case, a go-fast loaded with cocaine from the 
FARC 57th Front was loaded directly on to a truck before 
being seized by police. In the last month DEA has had several 
multi-ton land seizures from tractor trailers traveling on 
the Pan-American Highway. If this trend is confirmed, the 
border area would emerge as a strategic choke point in the 
drug trade. Panamanian attempts to suppress this route might 
then be expected to bring about a violent response, and to 
encourage Mexican, Central American  or Colombian 
gangs/cartels to move aggressively to control the area and 
resist Panamanian efforts. 
 
¶7.  (S//NF)  Javier Fletcher, former Deputy Secretary General 
of the National Intelligence and Security Service (SENIS) 
told PolOff June 11 that the Costa Rican side of the border 
functioned as a weapons super market for Drug Trafficking 
Organizations (DTOs), the FARC and other illegal armed groups 
in Panama and Colombia. He said buyers in Panama could 
approach agents of weapons dealers in David, the capital of 
Chiriqui, or at pre-identified locations along the border, 
indicate the weapons they were interested in, examine 
representative samples, and if they were satisfied, place 
their orders. Agencies at Post concur with this assessment, 
and add that the weapons are then delivered to buyers via 
local smuggling organizations. Small shipments may be handled 
by one of the 30 small Panamanian gangs operating in the 
area, while larger shipments are brought over by established 
smuggling networks, which are usually Panamanian-Colombian in 
their make up, and often have local political ties. SENAFRONT 
estimates that $10-20 million in cash may pass across the 
border to Panama every month as repatriated drug profits, but 
Post cannot confirm the number. 
 
------------------------ 
Law Enforcement Strategy 
------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (S//NF)  Post believes that the reason the Mexican 
cartels and Central American gangs have not moved in force to 
take control of the Panamanian-Costa Rican border area has 
been that the guns, drugs and money are flowing so freely, 
that it is not necessary at this time. Post also believes 
that if they were to move into the area, the Panamanian law 
enforcement agencies would stand no chance against them, due 
to their poor morale, pay, and training, in addition to their 
relative lack of highly trained tactical units, body armor, 
or armored vehicles. However, allowing the Pan-American 
Highway land route to absorb ever greater volumes of drug 
trafficking threatens the stability of Central America, as it 
brings with it an even greater logistical support structure 
that strengthens the corruption, gangs and violence that 
threaten the region. 
 
¶9.  (S//NF)  Post believes that it is essential to launch a 
comprehensive and synchronized campaign to strengthen the 
GOP's ability to control this area immediately, in an attempt 
to reduce its relative importance in the Central American 
transit corridor before it attracts the attention of the 
major cartels. To this end, NAS proposes to expand the size 
of the recently created ICE vetted unit in the PNP by 25 men, 
and to place part of this group under the control of PNP 
Director Gustavo Perez and his deputy, Jaime Ruiz. Such a 
unit, operating out of Panama City, would be used to 
intercept drug and weapons shipments discovered by PNP 
intelligence units without having to share the information 
with local PNP units penetrated by drug-traffickers. This 
unit would be protected by PNP and SENAFRONT tactical units, 
to dissuade acts of intimidatory violence on the part of 
Panamanian, Mexican and Central American gangs present in the 
area. Post will also encourage the PNP to increase the mobile 
patrolling of the Pan-American Highway to reduce the 
effectiveness of the land route. Post is also discussing with 
the MOGJ the possibility of creating a counter-narcotics 
maritime task force by combining SENAN assets with the 
NAS-supported PNP maritime unit, the UMOF. This would 
centralize Panama's maritime counter-narcotics assets, and 
allow Panama to attempt to block the maritime access routes 
to the Pan-American Highway in Chiriqui, which would help 
relieve pressure on the area, and reduce its attractiveness 
to Mexican cartels. Taking advantage of the desire of the new 
leadership in the SNM and ANA, Post's CBP and ICE offices 
will also work to set up establish units that can work with 
the police and help establish an effective border control 
system. Post's DEA office is also planning to increase the 
size of its highly successful Sensitive Investigative Unit 
(SIU) and increase its coverage of Chiriqui. 
 
------------------------- 
Merida Initiative Support 
------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (S//NF)  As Post moves forward with this flexible 
inter-agency strategy to suppress land-based trafficking in 
drugs and weapons in Panama and on the Costa Rican border, we 
request that the Department exert efforts in the Central 
American Security Initiative budget process to direct as much 
support as possible to NAS in the form of flexible funds that 
can be used to fund creative responses to a rapidly evolving 
security situation. NAS funds have been critical in 
developing Post's extremely successful Community Policing 
Strategy, which has been wholeheartedly adopted by the new 
PNP leadership under Director Perez. NAS has also been a 
leader at Post in focusing on the problems on the Costa Rican 
border. But earmarked funds from Washington do not allow Post 
to quickly react to a shifting threat, or to rapidly move to 
support a good idea, or to abandon one that is not taking 
off. 
 
-------------------- 
Anti-Gang Programming 
-------------------- 
 
¶11.  (S//NF)  Recent reports from the PNP and local contacts 
also indicate a significant increase in gang activity along 
the Panamanian highway west from Santiago, in Veraguas, to 
the Costa Rican border.  Some of these gangs may be linked to 
gangs in Panama City, indicating a disturbing trend towards 
national gangs. To respond to the increased gang activity in 
these non-traditional areas, USAID proposes expanding the 
scope of the USAID Merida-funded gang-prevention program. The 
USAID program focuses on the role of the community and 
broader civil society in preventing and mitigating youth 
violence, and strengthening coordination of government and 
non-government actors to provide expanded positive 
alternatives for youth.  The USAID approach works closely 
with key government counterparts, notably the Ministry of 
Social Development and the PNP, in order to provide improved 
and coordinated multi-sectoral responses, while engaging a 
network of private sector entities and community groups to 
take a proactive role in providing expanded alternatives for 
young people while simultaneously fostering a demand for 
improved services from government entities. 
 
------------------ 
Increased Manpower 
------------------ 
 
¶12.  (S//NF)  Post would also strongly encourage increased 
staffing of its DEA, TAT and ICE offices. Among the most 
efficient in the region, these offices need more staff to 
apply sufficient pressure on the Costa Rican border area 
while maintaining pressure on the maritime routes. The 
successful implementation of this strategy would also relieve 
drug trafficking pressure on other Central American 
countries, and disrupt FARC drug and weapons trafficking to 
and from Colombia. 
 
 
STEPHENSON