09PANAMA16
PANAMA: NEW AERO-MARITIME SERVICE DIRECTOR MAKES
Wed Jan 07 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
R 072233Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2821
INFO AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 
AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 
DEA WASHDC
COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
DIRJIATF SOUTH
CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
CIA WASHDC
DIA WASHDC
JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
NSC WASHDC
SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000016 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SNAR PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: NEW AERO-MARITIME SERVICE DIRECTOR MAKES 
THE RIGHT NOISES 
 
REF: 08 PANAMA 00725 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reasons 1.4 (b) and 
 (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S//NF) "Something is going on," Rigoberto Gordon, 
Director of the National Aero-Naval Service (SENAN), told 
EMBOFFs December 5, referring to apparent corruption among 
former National Maritime Service (SMN) members now in SENAN's 
ranks. (Note: SENAN, formed on December 22, combines the 
perviously independent SMN and the National Air Service (SAN) 
into one civilian service to fill a coast guard-like role. 
End Note) He said the situation was worse than he expected, 
and that he would remove officers he suspected of wrong-doing 
from sensitive jobs. He said the SENAN had serious 
operational limitations, including a shortage of technicians 
and an operational staff of no more than 400. Gordon 
described several key initiatives he was undertaking, 
including combining the operations centers from the legacy 
air and naval services and collocating them with the 
intelligence center. He was also bringing back together the 
U.S. trained maintenance crews for the Operation Enduring 
Friendship Nortech boats. He expressed interest in having 
civilian/civilian U.S. Maritime Patrol Aircraft (read: U.S. 
Coast Guard and/or Customs and Border Protection aircraft) 
fly out of Panama for longer periods of time, to prevent drug 
traffickers from being able to work around the deployments. 
End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Something is Rotten in the SMN 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (S//NF)  Rigoberto Gordon, named Director of the National 
Aero-Naval Service (SENAN) on December 22, told EMBOFFs 
December 5 that he was aware  that some of the officers in 
the old National Maritime Service (SMN) were "dirty" and said 
he was "wary" of them. (Note: The SENAN was created by fusing 
together the SMN and the National Air Service (SAN) as part 
of a recent security reform (see reftel) Gordon was the 
Director of the SAN prior to being named Director of the 
SENAN. End Note) Gordon said he had caught one of his senior 
SMN officers lying to him about where one of his boats had 
been on his first day on the job. The boat had disappeared 
for 18 hours, and the crew did not have a coherent 
explanation as to what they had been doing. Gordon said he 
had a drug prosecutor on hand when the boat returned, and had 
an ion-scanned conducted to check for traces of drugs - with 
negative results. Asked what he would do about the officers 
he did not trust, Gordon said he could not remove these 
people from the payroll because they did not have a record of 
disciplinary infractions, but that he would try to remove 
them from sensitive jobs, and perhaps even transfer them out 
of the SENAN.  Gordon asserted that the problems he was 
finding indicated the SMN had been in much worse shape than 
he had expected. He said that, "Something is going on" in the 
ranks of former SMN officers, and that he would talk directly 
to President Torrijos about what he had found, and what the 
next steps should be. 
 
¶3.  (S//NF)  Gordon said many boats were out of service for 
small defects that could be easily and cheaply repaired. He 
said he could not discount the possibility that the boats 
were being left un-repaired on purpose to subvert the 
SMN/SENAN's response capability. He noted, however, that the 
SENAN had very few technicians for its boats: five for the 
small go-fast boats, 40 for the larger boats, and all 
together only 12-13 who were truly qualified. He said the 
SENAN desperately needed to improve its ability to maintain 
its fleet. Gordon also asserted that the SMN had brought too 
many administrative staff into the merger, and was not a very 
"operational" organization. Gordon said that SENAN had a 
staff of 1,500, but that many were administrative staff and 
political place-holders, leaving him with an operational 
staff of approximately 400. 
 
---------------- 
A Problem Solver 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  (S//NF) Gordon said that he had already given orders for 
the SAN and SMN operations centers to be combined in the new 
SENAN headquarters in the former SMN headquarters located at 
Cocoli Base, the former U.S. MARFORSOUTH HQ, and adjacent to 
former USN Station Rodman. He said he has also ordered that 
the intelligence section to be co-located with the new 
unified operations center. He said he was now working to have 
the teams that were trained in the U.S. to maintain the 
Nortech boats of Operation Enduring Friendship brought back 
together and put in charge of maintaining the Nortechs again. 
(Note: These teams had been dispersed throughout the SMN, 
leading to a deterioration of the Nortech boats. End Note) 
Discussing the perennial SMN complaint that they do not have 
communications capabilities, Gordon said he was in favor of 
solving this by acquiring and distributing satellite phones. 
Gordon expressed interest in any training opportunities that 
might arise for his men, noting that improving the 
professional capabilities of the SENAN is key to rebuilding 
the service. 
 
------------- 
Expanded MPA? 
------------- 
 
¶5.  (S//NF)  Gordon asked that the deployment of U.S. Coast 
Guard (USCG) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Maritime 
Patrol Aircraft (MPA) be expanded to cover longer periods of 
time. Gordon asserted that drug traffickers were able to plan 
their actions around the typical ten-day deployment cycles, 
and thus avoid detection. He said he would prefer to see the 
planes deployed to Panama for periods of 30 days at a time. 
On SENAN capabilities, Gordon said that all three of their 
Aviocars were working, and that one was being upgraded for 
night operations capability. 
 
---------- 
The A Team 
---------- 
 
¶6.  (S//NF)  Asked who he would depend on to run the SENAN, 
Gordon named Major Jeremias Urieta, CDR Osvaldo Uena, CDR 
Jose de Jesus Rodriguez, and Commissioner Juan Vergara. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (S//NF)  Gordon's selection as the SENAN director is 
excellent news. As the former pilot for Panamanian President 
Torrijos, he has direct access to the President, and a 
reputation as a straight shooter. The day after he was named 
director of the SAN, he went public with how bad things were 
in the organization. His warnings were born out with the 
tragic crash of the SAN-100, though Gordon was almost forced 
to take political responsibility for that. He has now been 
given responsibility for an organization that three of the 
presidential candidates have sworn to disband if they win. 
The SENAN owes its existence to the highly controversial 
security reforms (see reftel) and that means the opposition's 
default position is that the merger of the SAN and the SMN 
should be reversed. As the Torrijos Administration draws to a 
close, and the May 3 general elections and July 1 
inauguration near, Gordon has six months to prove that the 
creation of the SENAN was a good idea, regardless of how it 
came about, and that the new organization is worth saving. 
Post believes Gordon deserves full support as he tries to do 
this. While the SMN was a corrupt and operationally limited 
organization, the upside if Gordon can turn the SENAN around 
is tremendous. Panama's territorial waters on the Pacific and 
Caribbean sides are two of the most active drug trafficking 
routes in the region. USCG and CBP assets cannot cover them 
adequately, and U.S. Navy assets are not a viable option, 
given strong GOP objections on sovereignty grounds to 
deployment of any "military" assets on its territory or in 
its territorial waters to conduct operations. Gordon's moves 
to co-locate operations and intelligence has long been 
advocated by Post, and his personnel moves seem excellent. 
Post has an outstanding counter-narcotics relationship with 
Panama, and the SMN has always been the exception to the 
rule. If Gordon could put willing and competent officers and 
men in the right places, then USG cooperation could create a 
real deterrent force in Panama's territorial waters for the 
first time in years. Post will broach this subject with RADMs 
Brice-O'Hara, Nimmich and Lloyd during their visit to Panama 
on January 15. Among the ideas being considered to assist the 
SENAN are bringing a USCG cutter into Panamanian territorial 
waters to conduct counter-narcotics operations with the 
SENAN. Post would also like to know whether Gordon's 
suggestion that U.S. civilian MPA assets be deployed for 
longer periods of time in Panama is logistically and 
operationally feasible and/or desirable. 
 
 
STEPHENSON