09RIYADH985
TREASURY SECRETARY GEITHNER MEETS WITH SAUDI
Thu Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Riyadh
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRH #0985/01 2111209
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 301209Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY RIYADH
TO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1298
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/FBI WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYS E C R E T RIYADH 000985 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR DAVID COHEN AND ANDREW BAUKOL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR SARA AVIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/21/2019 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV PREL KTFN KWBG SA
SUBJECT: TREASURY SECRETARY GEITHNER MEETS WITH SAUDI 
FINANCE MINISTER AL ASSAF 
 
Classified By: CDA Richard Erdman for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1. (S) Summary:  On July 14, Treasury Secretary Timothy 
Geithner met with Saudi Finance Minister Ibrahim Al Assaf in 
Yanbu, Saudi Arabia.  They discussed issues of mutual 
interest, including recovery of the global economy, the 
riyal-dollar peg, illicit finance, cooperation at the G-20 
and IMF, and the price of oil.  Assaf was joined by Deputy 
Finance Minister for Economic Affairs Dr. Hamad Al Bazai, and 
Deputy Governor of the Saudi Arabia Monetary Agency Dr. 
Abdulrahman Al Hamidy.  The Secretary was accompanied by 
Charge d'Affaires Ambassador Richard Erdman, Assistant 
Secretary for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes David 
Cohen, Acting Assistant Secretary for International Affairs 
Andrew Baukol, Deputy Treasury Attache Amanda Edwards, and 
Special Assistant to the Secretary Sara Aviel.  End summary. 
 
GLOBAL RECOVERY: PACE OF DECLINE 
IS SLOWING, BUT "TOO SOON TO RELAX" 
----------------------------------- 

¶2. (S) Geithner described his priorities as: 1) slowing the 
force at which the economy was falling and 2) restoring 
financing stability.  He discussed the modestly encouraging 
signs that the global crisis was receding.  He indicated the 
pace of decline in the United States had slowed to one to two 
percent in the second quarter of 2009 and that we expected 
modest but positive growth in the second half of the year. 
 
¶3. (S) While noting that the recovery would be "bumpy," 
Geithner stated that business and consumer confidence had 
begun to "churn" as a result of international cooperation. 
He emphasized that recovery required that "the world move in 
concert" on fiscal stimulus and financial stability programs. 
 He applauded the large infrastructure projects under 
development in the Kingdom. 
 
¶4. (S) Referring to Saudi Arabia's conservative regulatory 
strategy that had shielded the Kingdom from the worst of the 
global recession, the Secretary said the U.S. was trying to 
become "more Saudi" by being more cautious moving forward and 
using less leverage.  That said, Geithner stressed that 
recovery would be slower than normal and that confidence is 
fragile. 
 
¶5. (S) Assaf described the economic situation in the Kingdom, 
noting that the oil sector was pulling down growth but it was 
difficult to say by how much.  Oil-price volatility remained 
a concern, and it would be important to regulate 
non-commercial oil contracts so prices would reflect 
fundamentals, not speculative activity.  Assaf said they were 
working to increase investment and production both upstream 
and downstream.  Specifically, they were at an advanced stage 
of a joint venture project to build what will be the largest 
oil refinery in the world. 
 
¶6. (S) Assaf indicated that the Saudi government (SAG) was 
deferring collection of taxes and royalties as an investment 
incentive for Aramco to increase production.  The Secretary 
shared with Assaf that the U.S. had not found a "good way" to 
limit oil-price volatility.  If the Minister had ideas on 
this, we would welcome them.  Assaf said any steps that would 
prevent bubbles would be welcomed.  Geithner said that it 
would be positive for the global recovery if oil prices did 
not rise further, whether from speculation or OPEC production 
cuts.  Assaf commented that the King had stressed $75 per 
barrel as a reasonable oil price that would protect both 
consumers and producers and that the world now seemed to be 
converging toward that price. 
 
¶7. (S) Later in the conversation, Assaf shared his optimism 
that he was hopeful the global economy would turn around by 
the end of the year, but noted that "some weren't so 
optimistic."  He believes the Kingdom's conservative policies 
are what saved them from the downturn others have 
experienced.  When asked about inflation, Assaf said that 
inflation was currently around 5.2%, but that he would like 
to see it lower.  (Note:  Inflation was at eleven percent in 
¶2008.  End note.) 
 
THE DOLLAR AND OPEN INVESTMENT 
------------------------------ 

¶8. (S) Assaf said "we still believe that the dollar will be 
the dominant reserve currency and trading currency for a long 
time to come."  Our policy, he continued, is to support this 
and maintain the riyal-dollar peg.  The Secretary said the 
 
U.S. appreciated Saudi Arabia's continued support.  He noted 
that, despite some political talk of moving away from the 
dollar, China has in fact increased its dollar holdings and 
had confirmed that shifting from the dollar was not its 
policy.  Assaf said the Kingdom encouraged foreign investment 
on both sides -- U.S. investment in Saudi Arabia and vice 
versa.  We needed to work on this in Saudi Arabia, he said, 
establishing principles and legal framework, and were 
organizing a conference toward this end.  Geithner said we 
share a commitment to open investment. 
 
¶9. (S) On the dollar, the Secretary indicated it was 
benefitting from the flight to quality and emphasized the 
U.S. commitment to a strong dollar.  The USG was dedicated to 
reversing the exceptional measures it had taken in the 
financial sector once recovery was self-sustaining.  It was 
important to avoid the mistakes of the past by putting on the 
brakes too soon, thereby setting back economic recovery. 
(Note: In a subsequent conversation with the Charge, Assaf 
said he was in full agreement with this approach. End note.) 
 
COUNTER-TERRORIST FINANCE COOPERATION 
------------------------------------- 

¶10. (S) Assaf raised raised the issue of fighting terrorism, 
including terrorist financing, and emphasized this was an 
important area of cooperation.  The U.S. and Saudi security 
services were working closely together on these issues, and 
the King was committed to supporting this effort 100%.  In 
this regard, our active exchange of information would 
continue, he promised, while expressing disappointment that 
they sometimes received negative messages from "financial 
institutions" indicating a concern about doing business with 
the U.S. due to our sanctions programs. 
 
¶11. (S/NF) The Secretary expressed appreciation for the level 
of cooperation, while noting there was more to do and 
concerns remained in some areas.  He cited, in particular, 
our concern that funds from Saudi Arabia were still finding 
their way to terrorist organizations outside the Kingdom. 
The Secretary emphasized that need to expand the net 
continuously so that the terrorists and their supporters 
could not find a way around our measures to prevent such 
financing.  Assaf stressed we should handle these issues in 
security channels when there is intelligence.  "We don't want 
money going abroad to fund terrorism," he said, noting that 
the presence of over a million Pakistanis in the Kingdom 
complicated efforts.  Geithner said Treasury sought to ensure 
there was close cooperation between the intelligence 
communities. 
 
ABN AMRO 
-------- 

¶12. (S) Assaf turned to a regulatory issue surrounding ABN 
Amro -- a financial institution fined by U.S. regulators in 
2005 for its dealings with Iranian beneficiaries.  ABN Amro's 
40% ownership of a Saudi bank -- Saudi Hollandi Bank (SHB) -- 
had reportedly caused difficulties for the local bank.  Assaf 
contested that SHB was uninvolved in ABN Amro's Iran dealings 
and the Saudis were trying to resolve the issue with the U.S. 
Department of Justice.  Deputy Governor Hamidy noted that was 
not helpful to politicize issues around financial 
institutions.  Geithner promised Assaf he would look into the 
issue, as appropriate. 
 
FINANCIAL REFORM, IMF, AND G-20 
------------------------------- 

¶13. (S) On the G-20, Geithner outlined that the G-20 agenda 
should include:  1) stock taking on the global economy, 2) 
moves to push ahead with financial reforms, 3) a review of 
IMF resources and governance, 4) strategies to ensure more 
balanced global growth going forward, and 5) more on trade 
and climate.  The G-20, Geithner said, was a useful mechanism 
and it would be more effective with Saudi participation.  On 
King Abdullah's attendance at the G-20 in Pittsburgh, Assaf 
shared that they are still working on his attendance, but 
that the meeting coincided with the opening of the King 
Abdullah University for Science and Technology. (Note:  The 
King subsequently told Geithner he would not attend.  End 
note.) 
 
¶14. (S) Turning to the IMF, the Secretary noted that Congress 
had approved our contribution to the New Arrangements to 
Borrow (NAB).  We saw the NAB as a way to catalyze governance 
reforms at the IMF.  Geithner said the U.S. was "completely 
committed," but that Europe was not yet ready to think about 
reforms.  Assaf welcomed the reform process and said Saudi 
Arabia believed, as part of this, that "some countries" 
needed a greater "say" in IFI decision-making.  In 
determining new quotas, both a country's willingness and 
ability to play a helpful role needed to be taken into 
account.  Saudi Arabia, he added, would continue its support, 
but this would become "harder and harder" if the Kingdom's 
quota share was reduced. 
 
¶15. (S) The Secretary said that our basic strategic judgment 
was that China and the other emerging economies wanted 
strengthened financial institutions and needed to have 
greater investment in these institutions.  Assaf said China 
definitely deserved an increased quota, but some others did 
as well.  If they didn't see their quotas increased, he 
cautioned, they would move away from multilateral to 
bilateral solutions. 
 
GCC CURRENCY REGIME 
------------------- 

¶16. (S) Geithner and Assaf briefly spoke about the GCC 
monetary union.  Assaf did not believe that it would be 
possible to reach the goal of establishing a GCC currency 
regime by 2010, particularly now that there are only four 
economies willing to participate instead of five. (Note: This 
is a reference to the UAE pull out from the monetary union. 
End note.) 
 
REGIONAL ISSUES 
--------------- 

¶17. (S) In a separate session, Secretary Geithner expressed 
appreciation for the Kingdom's efforts to support key 
regional players, such as the Palestinian Authority, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan.  He inquired about the Kingdom's 
plans to disburse funding to the Palestinian Authority, 
noting that the U.S. disburses funds directly to the PA 
budget. Assaf noted that the Kingdom continues to provide $7 
million per month in budget support and has large additional 
funds allocated to project financing.  The project funds, 
however, would not move quickly given difficulties on moving 
projects forward. 
 
¶18. (U) This message was cleared by Secretary Geithner's 
staff. 
RUNDELL