09DUBLIN130
IRELAND'S BANKING SECTOR - ENOUGH TO MAKE FIANNA
Fri Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO5558
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0130/01 0791450
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 201450Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9898
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 0967
RUEATRS/TREASURY WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000130 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR VIMAL ATUKORALA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON EFIN EI
SUBJECT: IRELAND'S BANKING SECTOR - ENOUGH TO MAKE FIANNA 
FAIL? 
 
REF: DUBLIN 0086 
 
DUBLIN 00000130  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Section Chief Ted Pierce; Reasons 1.4(b/d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) The Irish banking industry continues to weather the 
fallout from the Anglo Irish Bank nationalization.  While 
there are no new developments in the Anglo Irish criminal 
investigation, a fifth member of the "Golden Circle" has been 
revealed, as have additional inappropriate dealings by former 
Chairman Sean Fitzpatrick.  The government has proposed a 
series of reforms to its banking regulatory structure and 
bank executive compensation, but has not yet finalized plans 
for dealing with problem loans at Allied Irish Bank (AIB) and 
Bank of Ireland (BOI).  Economists fear that the property 
market is considerably worse than originally expected and 
that write-offs at all Irish banks will exceed the previous 
worst case scenario.  This situation, coupled with an S&P 
downgrade of the Irish banking sector to group three, has led 
some to predict a need for additional government funding. 
Difficulties have spread to smaller banks and credit unions; 
EBS Building Society recorded a large loss and at least ten 
credit unions have been asked to cease lending activities. 
We expect this weakness in the banking sector to contribute 
to a further deterioration of the Irish economy.  In light of 
the government's handling of the banking industry, opposition 
parties are expecting to gain ground in the European 
Parliament election and Irish local elections in June 2009 
and have hinted at the possibility of an early general 
election.  End Summary. 
 
Anglo Irish: The Saga Continues 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Police continue to investigate alleged fraudulent 
activities at Anglo Irish, but difficulties in agreeing on a 
legal framework for the analysis of electronic information 
has hampered the investigation.  Fallout continues as Paddy 
McKillen, property developer and Fianna Fail contributor, was 
named as the fifth member of the "Golden Circle," a group of 
ten individuals who borrowed funds from the bank to buy 
shares in Anglo Irish and artificially inflated its share 
price (reftel).  Finally, Anglo Irish disclosed that it paid 
Euro 31,500 (USD 43,000) per year to rent a London apartment 
from former chairman Sean Fitzpatrick's family. 
Fitzpatrick's family members were permitted to stay in the 
apartment during this time. 
 
Banking Sector: Problems Mounting 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Irish government is moving ahead with a plan to 
isolate problem loans from all Irish banks in a separate 
toxic asset company.  However, this would require sharp 
write-downs far beyond the worst-case scenario originally 
envisaged by the banks.  For example, experts predict that 
the value of residential development land in Dublin could 
fall 70% from its peak.  This has led some economists to 
predict that government funding may not be sufficient. 
Ireland's banks continue to respond to the crisis with 
leadership changes.  Following a loss of Euro 38.2 Million 
(USD 43.7 million) in 2008, the EBS Building Society chairman 
and finance director tendered their resignations.  Finally, 
regulators revealed that the Bank of Ireland loaned Euro 11.3 
million (USD 15.4 million) to a business associated with one 
of its directors, but did not disclose the transaction. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In late February, the financial Regulator's 
Registrar of Credit Unions, Brendan Logue, instructed at 
least ten credit unions to cease lending to businesses due to 
concerns about their financial stability.  The regulator is 
now working with these credit unions on a program of remedial 
actions to stabilize their business. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The market and ratings agencies have continued to 
lose confidence in the Irish banking system.  On March 16, 
Standard & Poors downgraded the Irish banking system for the 
second time in four months.  Ireland is now listed in "group 
three" due to the reputational fallout from the events at 
Anglo Irish and weakened investor confidence in the framework 
of bank regulation.  Analysts have also been concerned by the 
reluctance of the Financial Regulator to intervene.  This 
downgrade will impact all Irish banks' cost of capital and 
could eventually contribute to a need for additional 
government funding. 
 
 
DUBLIN 00000130  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Regulatory Bodies: Broad Reforms Coming 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) In light of the developing banking crisis, Minister 
for Finance Brian Lenihan, announced on March 18 that he 
would be proposing new measures designed to crack down on 
"crony capitalism" in Ireland.  Proposals include a reformed 
financial watchdog with powers to restrict excessive bank 
lending, a ban on senior executives holding directorships in 
more than one bank, and a ban on bank chief executives from 
becoming chairmen.  Lenihan added that there is a problem in 
all small countries with "too many incestuous relationships." 
 These changes are a direct reaction to the weaknesses 
exposed by Anglo Irish Bank, where multiple 
cross-directorships were in place.  Lenihan hopes to 
establish a central bank commission following the regulatory 
model of Canada. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Lenihan is pressing forward with plans to tie the 
bank guarantee to an executive salary cap of Euro 500,000 
(USD 683,500).  This follows reports that AIB chief executive 
Eugene Sheehy expected to earn Euro 690,000 (USD 943,000) and 
that Brian Goggin, outgoing CEO of BOI expects to earn about 
Euro 2 million (USD  2.7 million).  A report by the Covered 
Institutions Remuneration Oversight Committee (CIROC) 
determined that base salaries of Irish bank executives 
exceeded those in Britain and those of similar sized 
companies in Ireland. 
 
¶8. (C) Emboff recently spoke with Tony Woods, Head of Risk 
and Compliance for Citibank Europe.  He previously worked as 
a regulator and indicated that much of Ireland's regulatory 
woes can be attributed to the fact that, during the boom 
years, the government simply could not compete with the 
financial packages the private sector was offering.  He and 
many of his former colleagues were widely sought after during 
the early-mid 1990s and he noted that "anyone with talent" 
followed the money to the private sector.  This had the 
effect of hollowing-out a cadre of government officials who 
would now be in senior regulatory roles. 
 
Early Elections?  Probably Not But... 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) The growing banking problem is adding fuel to the 
opposition parties' fire.  While there are no calls for an 
early election at the moment, neither Fine Gael nor Labour 
appear to be ruling out the possibility.  Emboff recently 
spoke with Mark Garrett, chief advisor to Labour Party leader 
Eamon Gilmore.  Garrett believes that in the absence of a 
"smoking gun" tying a government Minister to the 
improprieties at Anglo Irish, the status quo will hold.  He 
does not believe that the Green Party will give up its 
current power unless it is soundly defeated in the European 
Parliament elections.  Should that happen, he predicted, the 
Greens would be forced to distance themselves from Fianna 
Fail.  (Note: If the speeches by party leaders at the Green 
Party national convention (March 6-7, 2009) were any 
indication, this distancing may already be happening.  From 
party leader John Gormley on down, the common theme was 
rooting out corruption and cronyism.  End Note)  Garrett 
stated "the next election could be in two weeks or two 
years-we're preparing for both."  Fine Gael officials have 
told us much the same thing. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. (C) The Irish economy will get much worse before getting 
better and the banking sector woes, reflected in a dearth of 
credit, will contribute to this decline.  In the meantime, we 
believe that the government -- absent evidence of corruption 
-- will survive the Anglo Irish scandal, but its already 
battered reputation continues to erode.  In the next three 
months the government will have to sell a new emergency 
budget (April 7) designed to plug a Euro 4.5 billion (USD 
6.15 billion) hole in the state's finances, monitor the 
effectiveness of the Euro 7 billion (USD 9.6 billion) banking 
recapitalization, and compete in the Irish local and European 
parliamentary elections in June.  This doesn't leave a lot of 
room for reforming the financial regulatory structure -- a 
priority if Ireland expects to regain the confidence of the 
global financial community. 
FAUCHER