09DUBLIN258
DHS SECRETARY NAPOLITANO MEETS IRISH MINISTERS OF
Wed Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO1182
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHDL #0258/01 1891612
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 081612Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0058
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 1019C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/07/2019 
TAGS: EAIR ECON PREL PGOV EI
SUBJECT: DHS SECRETARY NAPOLITANO MEETS IRISH MINISTERS OF 
TRANSPORT AND JUSTICE 
 
REF: A. DUBLIN 203 
     ¶B. DUBLIN 204 
 
DUBLIN 00000258  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: CDA Robert Faucher; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) On June 29, Secretary of Homeland Security Janet 
Napolitano met with Irish Transport Minister Nel Dempsey and 
Irish Justice Minister Dermot Ahen in Dublin.  Dempsey and 
Napolitano discussed th bilateral pre-clearance 
negotiations.  Dempsey oted that cooperation with the U.S. 
has been admrable, but he unhapily pointed out recent "last 
minute surprises," most importantly the possibility that some 
flights pre-cleared in Ireland may be restricted to landing 
in international airports.  The Secretary said that it is 
still the U.S. government's intent to allow such flights to 
fly into domestic airports, presuming the final details get 
resolved.  The Secretary and Ahern discussed the importance 
of moving ahead rapidly with both criminal and terrorist 
data-sharing agreements.  Ahern said that the more informal 
these arrangements, the better for his government, unless 
there were an overarching U.S.-EU agreement.  Napolitano 
stressed that the USG is moving forward with bilateral 
agreements because the pace of the U.S.-EU negotiations is 
too slow.  Ahern informed the Secretary that the Irish 
government was in the process of taking two Guantanamo 
detainees, was working more cooperatively on extradition 
issues, was interested in the fate of the "undocumented" 
Irish, and was none too pleased with the latest Trafficking 
in Persons (TIP) Tier 2 ranking.  End Summary. 
 
Transport Minister Dempsey 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Minister Dempsey highlighted the "cooperative spirit" 
of the pre-clearance negotiations.  However, he pointed out a 
few issues that have "come up at the last minute."  Most 
importantly, he worried about recent information indicating 
that flights pre-cleared in Ireland would not be able to land 
at domestic terminals in the U.S.  He indicated that 
Secretary Chertoff had personally confirmed that all 
precleared flights could fly to ANY U.S. airport, domestic or 
international, and that this had formed the basis of the 
negotiations for the Irish side.  The Secretary responded it 
was her understanding that it is still the case that 
pre-cleared flights will be able to access any U.S. airport, 
saying "that is our intent" because she expects the final 
issues to be satisfactorily resolved.  In widely reported 
comments to the press, Napolitano re-stated Chertoff's 
formulation that pre-cleared flights could go to any U.S. 
airport. 
 
¶3. (C) On a different topic, Dempsey referred to "assurances" 
given by the U.S. side during negotiations that only one or 
two bags per plane would be retrieved during check-in and 
said that the carriers were concerned that the pre-clearance 
program may require more bag retrievals from the hold of the 
plane than previously expected.  This change would be 
expensive for the airlines he said, adding that since 
pre-clearance is a voluntary program, the carriers might 
choose not to participate if the costs became too great.  The 
Secretary responded that this is "more of a problem in 
anticipation than in reality."  Dempsey nodded, saying that 
the Irish "have the same interest in making this work.  We'll 
figure this out." 
 
¶4. (C) Dempsey said the use of dogs in the pre-clearance area 
came as "a bit of a surprise and came from nowhere."  He said 
it was presented as "something that was simply going to 
happen rather than something that was up for discussion." 
Dempsey indicated that for this to work his Department would 
need to have clearances from many parts of the Irish 
government.  The Secretary replied that, while she was not 
part of the original negotiations, DHS was required to 
"duplicate what we do at, say, JFK."  Dempsey said he could 
accept that and pointed out that an Irish team would travel 
to Washington later in July for meetings to finalize 
preparations for the opening of pre-clearance operations at 
Shannon. 
 
¶5. (C) Dempsey said that the Irish could accept some of the 
outstanding TSA operational issues (e.g., the screening of 
footwear) providing these took place within the pre-clearance 
area.  Napolitano said there should be ample room within the 
confines of this area for the government of Ireland to man a 
second checkpoint for U.S.-bound passengers. 
 
¶6. (C) The Secretary stressed the importance of greater 
information-sharing bilaterally and said she hoped that 
 
DUBLIN 00000258  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Dempsey would discuss this with his colleagues.  He said he 
would.  In response to Dempsey's question, the Secretary said 
that, even if there is a drop-off in the number of flights 
from Shannon in the winter, the U.S. government is still 
committed to the program and will provide the necessary level 
of staffing. 
 
Justice Minister Ahern 
---------------------- 
 
¶7. (C)  After some discussion of U.S. immigration reform 
prospects, the Secretary pressed Minister Ahern on the 
importance of promptly concluding bilateral agreements on 
criminal and terrorist data-sharing.  Ahern indicated that 
the government is constrained because they have to work 
within an EU context and that any official agreement would 
have to pass through the Irish parliament.  He indicated that 
"informal arrangements are best" from his government's 
perspective and that there is quite good ad hoc data exchange 
between the U.S. and Irish security services.  Ahern was 
aware that the two sides held an initial meeting on the 
sharing of terrorist information and that the U.S. was 
awaiting a response to its proposal.  The agreement is 
currently being reviewed by the Irish Attorney General's 
office, he said. 
 
¶8. (C)  Ahern said that the agreement's prospects were tied 
into U.S.-EU discussions and inferred that the EU would take 
this issue up after the next meeting of the High Level 
Contact Group on data privacy.  The Secretary said that the 
U.S. was committed to these data privacy negotiations but 
they have been going on for some time and "terrorism has not 
been put on hold."  For this reason, the bilateral process 
needs to move forward.  Ahern indicated that the current 
bilateral negotiations would not be held up by the U.S.-EU 
talks. 
¶9. (C) Ahern pointed out that Irish society "was pretty open 
and that, if this were to be made a formal arrangement, the 
government would need to take it to Parliament."  This 
requirement, he said, would complicate the process.  The 
Secretary said that Ireland has much to gain from these 
agreements as well and said both sides should get started 
now.  Ahern agreed. 
 
¶10. (C)  Ahern informed the Secretary of Ireland's 
willingness to take two Guantanamo detainees (Ref B) and said 
that the Cabinet took the official decision to do so just 
last week.  Now resolution is more of a "mechanical 
exercise," he said.  He also indicated that, while 
extradition issues have been problematic in the past, things 
are working better now and he did not foresee any more 
difficulties.  Finally, Ahern expressed his extreme 
displeasure with the U.S. government's latest Trafficking in 
Persons (TIP) report in which Ireland remained in Tier 2.  He 
said he was especially frustrated that his government had 
taken many steps to counter human trafficking but that this 
did not seem to be recognized.  The Secretary indicated she 
would convey the information to the Department of State. 
 
¶11. (SBU) This message has been cleared by Secretary 
Napolitano's staff. 
 
FAUCHER