04BRASILIA2119
BRAZIL'S AMAZON SURVEILLANCE AND AMAZON PROTECTION
Fri Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BRASILIA 002119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/20/2014 
TAGS: MCAP TSPL TPHY SENV MARR EAIR PGOV BR POL MIL
SUBJECT: BRAZIL'S AMAZON SURVEILLANCE AND AMAZON PROTECTION 
SYSTEMS: DEMONSTRABLE PROGRESS 
 
REF: A. (A) 03 BRASILIA 2313 
 
     ¶B. (B) 03 USDAO BRASILIA IIR 6 809 0235 03 
 
Classified By: DepPolCouns Lawrence Cohen, reason 1.4 (d) 
 
SUMMARY 
 ------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Brazil's Amazon Surveillance System (SIVAM) and 
Amazon Protection System (SIPAM) continue to show progress 
and increased operational capabilities.  SIVAM's data 
collection infrastructure is almost complete; SIPAM continues 
to create new map products for use by government and 
non-governmental organizations.  However, even with SIVAM 
fully in place, many aircraft will still be able to avoid 
detection by flying below radar patterns and look-down radar 
on airborne platforms will not have continuous coverage.  To 
provide a seamless radar picture over its frontiers, Brazil 
is actively seeking cooperative arrangements with neighboring 
countries.  Ultimately, both SIVAM and SIPAM will only be as 
effective as the GOB's efforts to utilize the information 
generated, whether to control Brazilian airspace or to 
protect the environment.   End Summary 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Emboffs accompanying CAPSTONE National Defense 
University (NDU) team to Brazil's Amazon Surveillance System 
(SIVAM) and Amazon Protection System (SIPAM) regional centers 
in Manaus received in-depth briefing on the current status of 
the two co-located facilities from Air Force Brigadier 
General Alvaro Luiz Pinheiro, Vice President of the 
Commission for Implementation of Air Space Control (CISCEA) 
and the Coordinating Commission for the Amazon Surveillance 
System (CCSIVAM).  SIVAM Commandant Colonel Scariot and SIPAM 
regional chief Engineer Captain Luciano also participated in 
the August 10 visit. 
 
¶3.  (U) Brazil's Amazon Surveillance System (SIVAM) is an 
integrated data collection project that utilizes a wide 
variety of data acquisition tools throughout the Amazon 
basin's 5.2 million square kilometers.  Developed by Raytheon 
and ATECH Technologies (Brazil), the multi-layered system 
includes aerial surveillance, transportable ground based and 
meteorological radars, airborne remote sensing and 
surveillance platforms (Embraer R99-A and R99-B aircraft), 
environmental and river sensors, weather ground stations, 
lightning detectors, surveillance and meteorological 
satellite observation, and even spot  submissions from 
individual informants.  Using the extensive raw data 
collected by SIVAM, the Amazon Protection System (SIPAM) 
integrates, evaluates, and disseminates the information into 
packages for distribution to end-user Brazilian agencies and 
non-governmental organizations.  To complete the SIPAM 
information network, end-user terminals are being placed in 
each of the Amazon region's 257 municipalities with over 
10,000 inhabitants. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Almost all of SIVAM's multi-layered data collection 
mechanisms are up and running; only a few of the facility's 
information collection and observation components are still 
not fully functional.  In coordination with SIPAM which 
provides integrated data analysis, a detailed geographic 
information system (GIS) portrait of the Amazon basin is 
emerging rapidly.  Increasingly, the data and data-created 
products are being shared in real time with appropriate 
military and civilian endusers.  The air traffic control 
component of the Amazon Region Air Traffic Control and 
Integrated Air Defense System (CINDACTA IV) is showing 
progress. The next stage in SIVAM/SIPAM development, 
resulting in greater control of Brazilian airspace and 
protection and sustainable development of the Amazon, will 
rely on improved coordination among government and 
non-government entities. 
 
Air Defense and Control by 2005 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Utilizing SIVAM data, the Air Traffic Control and 
Integrated Air Defense System for the Amazon (CINDACTA IV), a 
component of Brazil's national Air Defense and Air Traffic 
Control System (SISDACTA), should be fully operational by 
early 2005. (Note: Brazil's other regional ATC and air 
defense systems, CINDACTA I, II, and III are already 
operational. End Note)  Two transportable 3D radars are not 
yet operational; other systems, including VHF radio, should 
be completed within a few months.  To identify unauthorized 
aircraft and airspace incursions from neighboring countries, 
air-air, air-ground, and spot (look-down) SAR airborne 
sensors onboard the system's three R99-B aircraft provide 
high resolution imaging and surface information that in 
combination with surface radar systems, and when the R99-B 
aircraft are aloft, provides complete vertical airspace 
coverage.  Low-flying intruding aircraft, however, can avoid 
radar detection over much of the Amazon when the surveillance 
planes are grounded or unavailable in the particular region. 
(Note: Given the costs associated with keeping the three 
R99-Bs aloft, the planes at present will be utilized only 
when and where collaborating information suggests airspace 
incursions are occurring or will occur at a given date and 
time.  End note)  Pinheiro indicated that during CINDACTA 
IV's short lifespan to date, it has monitored a 30 percent 
increase in regional air traffic -- a result of increased air 
traffic communications between pilots and ATC stations rather 
than an increase in flights. "When pilots know they are being 
monitored, they are more prone to acknowledge their presence 
and file a flight plan," he observed. 
 
Hand Across the Borders 
----------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Pinheiro believed full air defense and traffic 
control (ATC) throughout the Amazon will be achieved by June 
2005; key to this achievement, he noted, will be ATC 
coordination and integration with Brazil's neighbors.  In 
previous discussions with mission personnel, the GOB had 
indicated its desire to enter into SIVAM cost-sharing 
arrangements over ATC data.  Pinheiro was certain that Brazil 
no longer sought cost reimbursement from other governments. 
Instead, Brazil's current objective is the creation of a 
seamless radar overlap with all its neighbors extending 50 
miles on each side of Brazil's borders.  Each regional 
CINDACTA, Pinheiro explained, has been given the go ahead by 
Brasilia to develop local data sharing mechanisms with 
neighboring countries.  (Note: Mission has not yet been able 
to confirm with other Ministry of Defense sources whether 
regional CINDACTAs are, in fact, tasked to develop 
transborder data sharing mechanisms. End note) With Peru, for 
example, since both Ministries of Defense had agreed to terms 
of reference for real time data sharing, Pinheiro affirmed 
that CINDACTA IV and its Peruvian counterpart were in the 
process of establishing close border radar overlap 
capability.  Colombia, he said, wanted to do the same, 
although the GOC's desire to obtain data for Brazilian 
airspace beyond the 50 mile border zone, he noted, was a 
"non-starter."  Brazil already works closely with Colombia on 
information sharing, and both Venezuela and French Guiana 
have expressed interest in developing joint ATC operations. 
While Bolivia does not have its own operating sensors, 
Pinheiro added, Brazil is considering provision of surplus 
radar units as it upgrades its own radars. 
 
¶7.  (C) Pinheiro and Scariot opined that when fully 
operational, the coordinated CINDACTA IV ATC system, in 
conjunction with implementation of Brazil's Lei de Abate 
("Shootdown" Law) in October, would be sufficient in 
dissuading airborne narcotrafficking in the Amazon "without 
recourse to actually shooting any aircraft from the sky." 
Pinheiro added that the SIVAM observation platform will also 
serve to deny the use of illicit airfields which can now be 
more easily located and targeted for action. 
 
 
SIVAM Products 
-------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) As a data collection system SIVAM generates a range 
of products for use by the Amazon Protection System (SIPAM) 
or other end-users.  Among the raw products promoted by the 
SIVAM Coordinating Commission (CCSIVAM) are: 
 
-   Meteorological:  Satellite images, real-time 
meteorological situation maps, historical and current climate 
study statistics, weather forecasts for airports, and 
accumulated precipitation and lightning reports; 
 
-   Electromagnetic Surveillance:  Emission contact and map 
data and communications networks; 
 
-   Environmental:  Groundcover maps and general reports, 
land use and environmental impact maps, soil damage maps, 
fauna and habitat classification maps, deforestation maps and 
fire incidence reports, mercury contamination reports, local 
and regional CO2 and O3 concentrations, statistical reports 
on greenhouse gas data, pollution threats to human 
populations, water quality and hydrographic maps, flood 
prevention and flood forecasting reports, urbanization impact 
maps and statistical reports, and epidemiological studies; 
 
-   Territorial Surveillance: Real-time airborne and surface 
vehicle movement and trajectories, identified target maps, 
border violation maps, irregular cultivation maps, 
biodiversity extraction and illicit mining maps, geologic 
maps, and locations of detected (irregular and perhaps 
illicit) rest-stops. 
 
SIPAM and its Activities 
------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (C) Past visits by mission personnel to the co-located 
SIVAM/SIPAM complex in Manaus suggested a clear dichotomy 
between the two entities.  While the two entities remain 
separate with SIVAM providing the raw data to SIPAM, the 
separation may be less distinct than before.  Moreover, 
bureaucratic concerns about allowing uniformed visitors into 
SIPAM may be lessening. During the CAPSTONE/NDU visit, SIPAM 
regional chief Captain Luciano welcomed the opportunity to 
display his center's sophisticated GIS capabilities.  For 
example, he demonstrated how SIPAM's environmental analysis 
unit incorporates SIVAM data into usable tools (e.g. maps of 
deforestation trends, forest fire monitoring, land use maps) 
for GOB entities such as the Ministry of Environment. The 
meteorological cell which has grown dramatically in just a 
few months, would soon be going to a 24/7 operation schedule, 
Luciano said.  In addition to direct links with GOB agencies, 
workspace within SIPAM is being provided to NGOs engaged in 
Amazon field work.  Luciano acknowledged that with SIPAM's 
rapid development of new data tools, data storage is becoming 
an increasing challenge. 
 
¶10. (U) Luciano expressed pride in the progress the Amazon 
Protection System has made in recent months and highlighted 
SIPAM's key focus areas: 
 
-   Environmental protection; 
-   Land use supervision and control; 
-   Border surveillance and control; 
-   Prevention and control of epidemics; 
-   Civil defense activities; 
-   Identification of punishable illegal activities; 
-   Protection of indigenous populations and their land; 
-   Air traffic control and surveillance; 
-   Support for sustainable development; 
-   Weather forecasting; and 
-   Climate studies. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Comment:  While SIVAM and SIPAM continue to show 
noteworthy progress, the ultimate success of these programs 
will be measured if/when/to what extent Brazilian agencies 
and NGOs utilize the new information tools provided. 
Ultimately, more rigorous environmental protection, 
sustainable development of the Amazon, and greater 
surveillance of Brazilian airspace leading to reduced 
narcotrafficking will be SIVAM/SIPAM's most important 
achievements. 
Danilovich