05BRASILIA1231
ARAB-SOUTH AMERICAN SUMMIT: BUSTS AND GAFFES
Tue May 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L BRASILIA 001231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL ETRD XR XF
SUBJECT: ARAB-SOUTH AMERICAN SUMMIT: BUSTS AND GAFFES 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Philip Chicola, reasons 1.4 (b 
& d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  The Arab-South American Summit began with a bust, 
and a gaffe.  First the bust. At the opening of the 
Arab-South America Investment Conference and Business Fair 
occurring parallel to the Summit, Brazilian Minister of 
Development, Industry and Trade Luiz Furlan spoke of doubling 
within two years the level of trade between South America and 
the Arab world.  (The Minister's target is not far-fetched. 
Commerce between the two regions grew from just USD 4 billion 
in 2003 to USD 8.2 million in 2004.)  Unfortunately, for the 
Minister, almost no one was listening.  The hall, with a 
capacity of 3,500, held perhaps (we're being generous) 400 
businessmen, the majority of whom were Brazilian.  About 
1,250 businessmen had registered for the event.  The Ministry 
of External Relations rationalized the embarrassing turnout 
noting that many businessmen were still arriving in Brasilia. 
 Moreover, according to Ministry of Development, Industry and 
Trade Executive Secretary Marcio Fontes, businessmen could 
participate in other similarly organized meetings in Rio and 
Sao Paulo -- more logical venues for commercially-oriented 
events. 
 
¶2.  (C)  And the gaffe.  To add salt to the wounds of the 
pitiful turnout, Arab League Secretary General Amre Moussa, 
seated at the head table, abruptly departed the hall without 
explanation, shocking both the organizers and the (few) Arab 
businessmen present.  Press reports suggested the Arab League 
leader was upset with the order of protocol which had him 
speaking fourth, after other lower ranking officials. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Worst of all, the final Summit headcount of 
attending Arab heads of state is just five out of 22, 
(Algeria, PNA, Iraq, Djibouti, Qatar.)   Even the attendance 
of some South American presidents may be half-hearted; for 
example, a Chilean diplomat confirmed that President Lagos 
will be in Brasilia only a few hours. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Comment:  While some diplomats in town described the 
Summit -- so far -- as a "fiasco," we believe speculation on 
the impact of a Summit bust on Brazilian foreign policy and 
on Foreign Minister Amorim personally is premature.  But it 
is clear that Foreign Minister Amorim's reputation, already 
damaged by the Seixto Correa fiasco in the WTO race, is 
riding on both the outcome of the Summit and forward movement 
on Brazil's UN Security Council aspirations. 
 
Chicola