05RECIFE78
UPDATE ON AMCIT MISSIONARY SHOT IN NORTHEASTERN BRAZIL
Thu Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Recife
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RECIFE 000078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC PGOV PREL BR TIP
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON AMCIT MISSIONARY SHOT IN NORTHEASTERN BRAZIL 
 
REF: RECIFE 00000074 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  John David Leonard, an American citizen 
missionary shot in Brazil, has been medevaced back home to a 
hospital in Des Moines, IA, where he remains under medical care. 
 Embassy LegAtt and A/LegAtt traveled to the area where Mr. 
Leonard was attacked, and report that investigation into the 
incident continues, although the assailants have not yet been 
identified.  Contrary to some published speculation, there 
appears to be no political motive behind the attack, nor are 
there any connections to the recent murder of American nun 
Dorothy Stang.  Rather, the most likely motive appears to be 
either Mr. Leonard's personal business practices as a landlord 
or his involvement in ministry in an area known for alcohol and 
drug abuse.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) American missionary John David Leonard returned to his 
home in Des Moines, IA via a privately arranged medevac.  All 
aspects of the medevac were managed by the American mission 
group supporting his work and its insurance carrier.  Mr. 
Leonard arrived in the US on Saturday, July 9, and remains in 
Iowa Methodist Medical Center.  Neither Mr. Leonard's family nor 
his missionary organization requested assistance from Consulate 
Recife in arranging his medevac. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Embassy LegAtt and A/LegAtt visited Maceio shortly 
after the shooting to express USG interest in the case and 
determine the status of the Brazilian investigation.  Both 
reported that they had been given ample access to the principals 
and the freedom to interview relevant witnesses and other 
American missionaries themselves.  Based on their 
investigations, LegAtt's impression is that this assassination 
attempt was not/not politically motivated against Mr. Leonard as 
an American citizen, missionary or person involved in sensitive 
political or non-governmental organization (NGO) issues. 
Rather, LegAtt thinks that the murder attempt may well have 
links to Mr. Leonard's unusual private business practices in 
Maceio as a landlord renting homes to persons with very modest 
income or his vocal stance in anti-drug efforts.  According to 
LegAtt, other American missionaries described Mr. Leonard as 
charismatic and dynamic pastor, but weren't surprised by the 
assassination attempt. 
 
¶4. (U)  According to his family, Mr. Leonard had only recently 
returned to Brazil from a professional sabbatical to care for a 
son recovering from an accident and receiving medical care in 
Maceio.  Mr. Leonard had been managing personal business affairs 
and arranging for his son's return to the US.  Beverly Leonard, 
John's wife, stated that they originally tried to have their son 
medevaced on the same flight as his father, but instead decided 
to have him return to Iowa as originally scheduled in 
approximately two weeks. 
 
 
 
SWAVELY