05RIODEJANEIRO1242
RIO STATE SECURITY CHIEF OPTIMISTIC ABOUT
Fri Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RIO DE JANEIRO 001242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC, WHA/PDG-LGOULD, DS/ITA AND DS/IP/WHA, 
DEPT FOR INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV SNAR KCRM CASC BR
SUBJECT:  RIO STATE SECURITY CHIEF OPTIMISTIC ABOUT 
COMBATING CRIME, DRUGS 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU)  State Secretary for Security Marcelo Itagiba told 
the Hyde CODEL on November 30 that police are implementing a 
number of programs to better combat crime and drug 
trafficking in violence-plagued Rio de Janeiro state.  While 
drug-related crime remains a major problem, the state's 
murder rate has dropped -- in part due to an increase in the 
confiscation of illegal firearms.  Itagiba, fluent in 
English and a close Mission contact, called on other state 
agencies, family, the media, schools and the church to do 
their part to combat widespread drug use and improve public 
security in Rio.  Itagiba's determination seemed to impress 
the CODEL, but Rio's high crime rate continues to impact 
Consulate employees; just two weeks ago an FSN was carjacked 
at gunpoint while running errands before the Marine Ball. 
End Summary. 
 
Assembling the Tools to Combat Crime 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U)  Itagiba briefed members of the Hyde CODEL on 
November 30 at the Marriott Hotel.  Participants included 
Representatives Henry Hyde (R-IL), Tom Lantos (D-CA), Mel 
Watt (D-NC), Diane Watson (D-CA), and Luis Fortuno (R-PR). 
Also present were their staffers, the Charge, CG Atkins, 
RSO, Poloff and Conoff notetaker. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)   Itagiba described a series of measures which are 
better positioning Rio's law enforcement community to fight 
the state's notoriously high crime rate. Over the past six 
years, the state's Military Police ("first responders" who 
prevent crime) and Civil Police (the investigative agency 
that solves non-Federal crimes) have augmented their staffs 
by at least 30 percent.  More patrol cars, modernized 
precinct buildings, better training, more extensive 
coursework at universities and improved technology - 
including the installation of 220 video cameras across the 
city of Rio - are improving police capabilities and have 
produced tangible results, Itagiba said.  Another 
contributing factor appears to be an increase in the seizure 
of illegal firearms; in 1995, police seized approximately 
5,000 weapons, with 8,000 murders recorded in Rio state.  To 
compare, in 2004 police captured approximately 15,000 
firearms, but only 6,400 murders were recorded.  Itagiba 
displayed a graph showing a correlation between the increase 
in the number of guns seized and a drop in the murder rate. 
 
Laying Societal Problems On the Doorstep of Law Enforcement 
------------------------------- -------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)   Responsibility for the violence plaguing Rio 
should not fall on the doorstep of law enforcement, Itagiba 
said.  Many crimes stem from personal or business conflicts 
and are thus difficult for the police to prevent. Families, 
schools and the church must do their part to provide 
guidance.  Similarly, the private sector has responsibility 
to prevent acts of "delinquency"; a nightclub, for example, 
should provide security and prevent drinking-related 
violence from spilling into the street.  The Brazilian 
government shares the blame too: haphazard planning and 
urban overcrowding have led to a 30% increase in the number 
of slums in Rio, while inadequate public transportation has 
forced low-paid construction workers to cram into far-flung 
shantytowns to build the middle -class high rises burgeoning 
in the suburbs.  In conditions of despair, Itagiba said, 
many people lose their perspective and commit crimes. 
 
Widespread Drug Use and Trafficking Makes Matters Worse 
-------------------  --------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)   A significant portion of Rio crime stems from 
drug trafficking.  Criminal gangs steal money and cars to 
raise funds for traffickers to buy drugs from outside Rio 
state.  The drugs are then trafficked elsewhere or sold 
domestically, in the hillside slums (favelas) interspersed 
throughout Rio.  Domestic consumption is a major problem as 
well.  Ten percent of the state's population, or 1.4 million 
people, use illegal drugs - often in broad daylight in 
public spaces, such as in Ipanema, home to many Consulate 
employees.  Interestingly, Rio state does not produce its 
own drugs or guns; these are imported from Colombia, Peru 
and Bolivia.  Representatives from the major drug gangs in 
these countries operate in Rio, Itagiba said. 
 
Comment 
------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU)   CODEL members were clearly impressed with 
Itagiba's claim that 78 drug lords have been arrested or 
killed under his watch (since 1999), with only one major 
player still at-large.  Nevertheless, drug-related crime in 
Rio continues to dominate the headlines and impact the lives 
of Consulate employees.  Three weeks ago, an FSN was car- 
jacked at gunpoint in a middle-class neighborhood as she was 
returning a DVD at a store.  Shortly before that, 15 gunmen 
took over an apartment building two doors down from the 
residence of the Assistant RSO, seeking to rob the 
apartments inside. Forty people were held hostage for three 
hours, including five Americans.  A month ago, an attempted 
apartment invasion was thwarted by police a block away frm 
the CG's residence.  Given the size of the internal drug 
market and lax law enforcement regarding consumption, 
trafficking and related crime remain huge problems here. 
ATKINS