06ASUNCION672
PARAGUAY: BRAZILIAN DRUG TRAFFICKER APPREHENDED
Mon Jul 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Asuncion
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAC #0672 1841555
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031555Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY ASUNCION
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4447
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 3486UNCLAS ASUNCION 000672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM SNAR PA BR
SUBJECT: PARAGUAY: BRAZILIAN DRUG TRAFFICKER APPREHENDED 
 
REF: 05 ASUNCION 0365 AND PRECEDING 
 
1.(U) SUMMARY: On 6/24, Paraguayan law enforcement arrested 
drug trafficker Arnaldo Moreira de Macedo, an associate of 
Mendez Mesquita who was extradited to the U.S. in 2005. 
Moreira de Macedo was believed to be trafficking 1,000 kg per 
month and is wanted on extradition charges in Brazil. This 
arrest serves as another example of Paraguay's ability to 
conduct important operations in cooperation with Brazilian 
and U.S. officials.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On 6/24, Paraguayan law enforcement officials 
conducted an operation with the assistance of Brazilian 
intelligence and DEA representatives and arrested Arnaldo 
Moreira de Macedo (55), a drug trafficker considered to be 
the successor of Ivan Mendez Mesquita, who was extradited to 
the Unites States in June 2005. De Macedo is a Brazilian 
citizen but has been living in Paraguay since 1993 under the 
false Paraguayan identity of Ronaldo Alves Dos Santos. 
According to the local press, he also used the false 
Paraguayan identity of Ronaldo Alves da Silva, but this alias 
did not appear in the National Antinarcotics Secretariat 
(SENAD) report. Arnaldo Moreira de Macedo was wanted in 
Brazil on drug trafficking charges and had been arrested 
previously but escaped three times. 
 
¶3. (U) De Macedo owned properties in the department of 
Concepcion and the Chaco region, and ran an Artificial 
Insemination and Genetic Improvement Center (Ciameg) as well 
as a business transporting beef. He used the refrigerated 
beef shipments to transport cocaine from Colombia, Bolivia, 
and Peru to Brazil and European countries such as Holland, 
Germany, the United Kingdom and Spain. Minister Ibarra, the 
SENAD chief, believes that De Macedo was transporting more 
than 1,000 kg of cocaine per month. His ranch in Concepcion 
is known as Estancia Virgen Serrana and was considered to be 
a model farm that hosted Paraguayan-Brazilian integration 
fairs. 
 
¶4. (U) SENAD agents have been investigating this case for 
several months. On 5/4 a penal court issued a decree for the 
preventative detention of De Macedo, with the intention of 
extradition. During the investigation SENAD discovered the 
location of De Macedo,s residence, in the city of Luque, 
near the Silvio Pettirossi international airport. SENAD 
presented the information to the antinarcotics prosecutor and 
was granted permission for forced entry into the house, in 
accordance with the court order. On the same day that 
officials raided the houses, a team accompanied by the 
assistant prosecutor also raided De Macedo,s office in 
downtown Asuncion. Several documents, including false 
identification papers, were seized in both locations. In 
addition to the documents, authorities seized two trucks, a 
car, two motorcycles, and a twin-engine plane. One of the 
trucks seized was fully armored. De Macedo,s bank accounts 
were also frozen. Among the seized documents are check book 
stubs containing the names of judges and prosecutors. On 
6/26, local press reported that the documents include a 
record of a payment of 30 million guaranies, the equivalent 
of USD 5,357, to a court. 
 
¶5. (U) De Macedo is currently detained at the Emboscada 
Penitentiary, located in the Central Department of Paraguay. 
He made a court appearance to request habeas corpus but his 
request was denied. His wife is under house arrest on charges 
related to the same case. 
 
¶6. Comment: This case serves another example of constructive 
SENAD cooperation with Brazilian and DEA officials in the 
conduct of an investigation leading to the arrest of a key 
Brazilian drug trafficker. Coupled with the seizure of 195 kg 
of cocaine in a separate operation on 6/25 (to be reported 
separately), it demonstrates SENAD's rising professional 
effectiveness.  End comment. 
CASON