06BRASILIA1509
SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 78
Thu Jul 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO2924
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1509/01 2081328
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271328Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6135
INFO RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4153
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 5643
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 4735
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 3090
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1901
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 3849
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5551
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 1090
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6366
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 1115
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 3350
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 5156
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 7545
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 2520
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DOE WASHDC
RUEHC/DOI WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DOJ WASHDC
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RUEANAT/NASA HQ WASHDC
RUCPDC/NOAA WASHDC
RUMIAAA/USCINCSO MIAMI FL
RUEHRC/USDA WASHDC
RUCPDO/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 BRASILIA 001509 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USAID TO LAC/RSD, LAC/SAM, G/ENV, PPC/ENV 
TREASURY FOR USED IBRD AND IDB AND INTL/MDB 
USDA FOR FOREST SERVICE: LIZ MAYHEW 
INTERIOR FOR DIR INT AFFAIRS: K WASHBURN 
INTERIOR FOR FWS: TOM RILEY 
INTERIOR PASS USGS FOR INTERNATIONAL: J WEAVER 
JUSTICE FOR ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES: JWEBB 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL: CAM HILL-MACON 
USDA FOR ARS/INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH: G FLANLEY 
NSF FOR INTERNATIONAL: HAROLD STOLBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR EAID TBIO ECON SOCI XR BR
SUBJECT: SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 78 
 
¶1.  The following is the seventy-eighth in a series of newsletters, 
published by the Brasilia Regional Environmental Hub, covering 
environment, science and technology, and health news in South 
America.  The information below was gathered from news sources from 
across the region, and the views expressed do not necessarily 
reflect those of the Hub office or our constituent posts. 
Addressees who would like to receive a user-friendly email version 
of this newsletter should contact Larissa Stoner at 
stonerla@state.gov.  The e-mail version also contains a calendar of 
upcoming ESTH events in the region. 
 
¶2. Table of Contents 
 
Agriculture 
--(3)Brazil Will Share Expertise in Agriculture with Africa 
 
Health 
--(4)Study on Infants in Peru Sparks Ethics Inquiry 
--(5)AIDS Treatment Advances in Brazil 
--(6)Argentina, Paraguay Sign Health Cooperation Agreement 
--(7)Argentina Launches Latin America's First Biosecurity Lab 
 
Water Issues 
--(8)Brazil Adopts Freshwater Ecoregions in First National 
Freshwater Management Plan 
 
Wildlife 
--(9)Albatross Colony Observed In Southern Chile 
--(10)Peru, Brazil Join Forces Against Biopiracy in the Amazon 
 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
--(11)First U.S. Marine National Monument Established in Hawaii 
--(12)Venezuela: Seeking Adoptive Parents for Turtles 
 
Protected Areas 
--(13)Guyana: Kaieteur National Park Faces Funding Hurdles 
--(14)Ecuador Increases Monitoring of Yasuni National Park 
--(15)Parks and People, Not Parks vs. People 
 
Science & Technology 
--(16)USD3 Billion Bid To Boost Biotech in Brazil 
--(17)Chile, Argentina, Caribbean Lead in Access to New Technologies 
 
--(18)South American Countries Agree on S&T Cooperation 
 
Pollution & Industrialization 
--(19)Court Rules Pulp Mills Construction Can Continue 
--(20)Judicial Ruling Requires Clean-Up of Argentina's 
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin 
--(21)Chile: Paper Mill Fined 
--(22)Codelco Spill Contaminates 17km of Marshland Near Santiago 
 
Energy 
--(23)Chile Announces "Energy Autonomy" in Next Two Years 
 
General 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  002 OF 010 
 
 
--(24)IBD Releases USD 1.9 Million For The Amazon 
--(25)Leaky Pipes, Stingy Aid Slow Peru Gas Project 
--(26)Chile: Environmentalist Sells 4,000 Argentine Hectares to 
Business Group 
--(27)Brazil: Environmentalists Threatened 
 
----------- 
Agriculture 
----------- 
 
¶3. Brazil Will Share Expertise in Agriculture with Africa 
 
JULY 14, 2006 - African nations are set to benefit from Brazilian 
expertise in tropical agriculture thanks to an agreement between 
Brazil and Ghana.  Under the agreement signed 10 July, Ghana will 
host the first African branch of the Brazilian Agricultural Research 
Corporation (Embrapa).  The branch will act as a regional base for 
sharing Brazil's agricultural knowledge with the whole continent, 
and will be located at the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research in Accra.  Two staff will identify local research needs, 
plan studies that can be undertaken in Brazil, and seek 
international partners to cooperate in the agency's initiatives. 
Research will be carried out in Brazil by Embrapa's 38 research 
units, which will send their findings back to Ghana.  The branch was 
decided upon after an increasing number of demands coming from 
Africa for Brazilian agricultural technology.  The move comes as 
part of Brazil's commitment to South-South cooperation. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
------ 
Health 
------ 
 
¶4. Study on Infants in Peru Sparks Ethics Inquiry 
 
JULY 18, 2006 - A legal inquiry was launched to determine whether 
Peruvian babies were given a medicine made from genetically modified 
rice without their parents' informed consent during a clinical 
trial.  The researchers deny any wrongdoing and are backed by 
Peruvian doctors and ethicists, but the claim has prompted Peruvian 
parliamentarian Mercedes Cabanillas to take action.  The clinical 
trial in question was led by Nelly Zavaleta of Peru's Nutrition 
Research Institute and began in August 2004.  It compared three oral 
rehydration solutions for treating infant diarrhea - a major killer 
in developing nations. 
 One solution, made by US company Ventria Bioscience, contained 
proteins found in breast milk that had been produced from rice with 
human genes inserted into its DNA.  Zavaleta and colleagues found 
that this solution significantly cut the severity and duration of 
acute diarrhea.   But critics fear that introducing two human genes 
into plants to produce drugs could threaten people's safety. 
 
Source -  SciDev 
 
¶5. AIDS Treatment Advances in Brazil 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  003 OF 010 
 
 
 
JULY 18, 2006 - Brazilian researchers are giving a large step to 
increase efficiency in AIDS treatment.  Just like the Americans, who 
recently announced a combination of three retroviral medicines in a 
single pill, state company Lafepe (Pernambuco State Pharmaceutical 
Laboratory) is concluding tests to launch three combined medicines. 
The project has been developed over the past eight months by 
scientists and experts from Pernambuco's federal university.  The 
Lafepe laboratory has the capacity to produce 100 million pills 
annually. 
 
Source - Public Affairs US Embassy Brasilia.  Original source Gazeta 
Mercantil. 
 
¶6. Argentina, Paraguay Sign Health Cooperation Agreement 
 
JULY 17, 2006 - The presidents of Argentina and Paraguay signed a 
series of agreements and memorandums of intent to cooperate in 
sanitary vigilance and prevention on the border between the two 
countries.  The agreements also set joint action toward diseases 
such as AIDS, dengue, malaria, Chagas, and basic first aid 
procedures.  Argentina's program for Community Doctors, which 
includes nearly 6,000 doctors throughout the country, will lead the 
first aid training for Paraguay doctors. 
 
Source - Argentina's Ministry of Health 
 
¶7. Argentina Launches Latin America's First Biosecurity Lab 
 
JULY 14, 2006 - The Ministry of Health inaugurated the National 
Administration of Health Laboratories and Institutes (ANLIS), the 
first biosecurity lab built in Latin America.  The Level 2 and 3 
labs will be used for animal and human epidemiological vigilance. 
Nearly 30 million pesos (approximately USD10 million) were spent on 
the new building.  The Minister of Health, Gines Gonzalez Garca, 
also announced plans to double the country's investment in research, 
also improving reference labs throughout Argentina's provinces in 
order to strengthen the network of epidemiological investigation. 
Avian Influenza was pointed out as an example of diseases that can 
be monitored through this new lab. 
 
Source - Argentina's Ministry of Health 
 
------------ 
Water Issues 
------------ 
 
¶8. Brazil Adopts Freshwater Ecoregions in First National Freshwater 
Management Plan 
 
JUNE 06, 2006 - The government of Brazil has approved its first 
national plan for managing its freshwater resources.  A critical 
component of this plan is the adoption of freshwater ecoregions 
defined through scientific studies resulting from a partnership 
between The Nature Conservancy and World Wildlife Fund (WWF).  The 
Freshwater Management Plan assures that aquatic biodiversity is an 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  004 OF 010 
 
 
important aspect of freshwater planning for the entire country. 
Before, the most important considerations for the government were 
hydroelectric potential, navigation and water utilization regimes 
for drinking water, other household uses, industrial uses and 
irrigation.  With the world's largest river basin - the Amazon - and 
the world's largest tropical floodplain - the Pantanal - the 
freshwater biodiversity of Brazil is staggering.  In fact, Brazil 
has more freshwater fish species than any other country on Earth. 
 
Source - The Nature Conservancy 
 
-------- 
Wildlife 
-------- 
 
¶9. Albatross Colony Observed In Southern Chile 
 
JULY 18, 2006 - Research by Chilean scientists revealed the presence 
of black-browed and grey-headed albatrosses in Tierra del Fuego, at 
the southern tip of Chile.  Investigation by the Cuarternario Fuego 
Institute (Ceque), and the Institute of Chilean Antarctic Research 
(Inach) revealed the southern end of the country, only a few 
hundreds kilometers south of Punta Arenas, has become a breeding 
ground for the huge gliders of the sky.  Chile's colonies may help 
scientists study the birds.  In 2004, at their breeding colonies in 
South Georgia, an island in the South Atlantic Ocean near Chile's 
tip, British researchers tagged 47 young gray-headed albatrosses 
with instruments that log daylight levels.  When 35 returned 18 
months later, the team downloaded data from 22 of the instruments 
and read the pattern of daylight lengths.  Twelve birds flew east, 
all the way around the world. Three flew around the globe twice. 
Typical journeys involved flights of as much as 600 miles in a day. 
 
Source - Santiago Times (no link) 
 
¶10. Peru, Brazil Join Forces Against Biopiracy in the Amazon 
 
JUNE 15, 2006 - Peru and Brazil have signed a series of agreements 
to protect the natural resources and traditional knowledge of the 
Amazon.  Experts from both countries met June 6 and 7 in Lima to set 
a strategy for combating biopiracy.  The first step outlined by this 
strategy is to carry out an inventory of resources and have this 
list recognized by intellectual property entities worldwide.  A 
second step would be to get other Amazon countries involved in the 
initiative. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
----------------------------- 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11. First U.S. Marine National Monument Established in Hawaii 
 
JULY 18, 2006 - On June 15, President Bush created the largest 
protected area in U.S. territory, the Northwest Hawaiian Islands 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  005 OF 010 
 
 
(NWHI) Marine National Monument.  The new monument is the largest 
single conservation area in the United States and the largest 
protected marine area in the world.  As a monument, the NWHI covers 
nearly 140,000 square miles - more than 100 times larger than 
Yosemite National Park, larger than 46 of the 50 states, and more 
than seven times larger than all existing National Marine 
Sanctuaries combined.  The NWHI Marine National Monument is an 
entirely new designation, the first area to be created as a National 
Marine Monument.  The existing National Monuments are administered 
by the Department of the Interior, while National Marine Sanctuaries 
are administered by the Department of Commerce's NOAA.  The 
President's proclamation charges NOAA to use its expertise to 
oversee the new marine areas, and the Fish and Wildlife Service to 
apply its skills to the wildlife refuge areas.  As part of the 
proclamation, the Departments of the Interior and Commerce will work 
with the State of Hawaii and the public to develop a plan to manage 
the monument. 
 
Source - NOAA 
 
¶12. Venezuela: Seeking Adoptive Parents for Turtles 
 
JULY 08, 2006 - A program to protect sea turtles of the southern 
Caribbean and the beaches of Venezuela began a new phase with the 
search for "adoptive parents" -- symbolically -- for each of the 
animals sighted by the Center for Research and Conservation of Sea 
Turtles (CICTMAR).   The cost of adopting a turtle of the 
leatherback species (Dermochelys conacea) is 30 dollars, and the 
renewal price is 25 dollars, if it is an individual adoption, and 
140 dollars for a collective adoption.  Whoever adopts a turtle or 
nest receives a certificate, informational material and posters. 
Cictmar, in addition to protecting the nests, marking and studying 
the females, promotes education of the residents of Paria peninsula, 
in far northeastern Venezuela, to prevent harm to the species. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
--------------- 
Protected Areas 
--------------- 
 
¶13. Guyana: Kaieteur National Park Faces Funding Hurdles 
 
JULY 08, 2006 - According to Navin Chandarpal, Presidential Adviser 
on Sustainable Development, the development of the Kaieteur National 
Park (KNP) is hindered by one of its major challenges - funding. 
Chandarpal noted that the lack of financial support from 
international financial institutions has been placing numerous 
hurdles in the development process of KNP and this has been delaying 
the plan for the park.  Meanwhile, initial difficulties in getting 
miners to cease operations in the vicinity of KNP have been largely 
overcome through dialogue. Authorities were able to convince miners 
of the importance of the preservation of the biodiversity of the 
facility.   Kaieteur National Park is situated on the Guiana Shield, 
a plateau that is one of the world's oldest and most remote 
geological formations.  The Park covers 627 square kilometers and 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  006 OF 010 
 
 
242 square miles with approximately 63,000 hectares. It's the first 
National Park in Guyana. 
 
Source - Stabroek News 
 
¶14. Ecuador Increases Monitoring of Yasuni National Park 
 
JUNE 30, 2006 - Ecuador's Minister of the Environment, Ana Alban, 
announced the creation of new forest and wildlife trafficking 
control and prevention posts in the southern part of the Yasuni 
National Park.  This initiative was possible thanks to an agreement 
between the Ministry, Andes Petroleum Company, and Fideicomiso 
Mercantil Vigilancia Verde.  According to the press report, this is 
one of the government's initiatives towards reaching the goals of 
the National System of Forest Control. 
 
Source - La Hora 
 
¶15. Parks and People, Not Parks vs. People 
 
JUNE 15, 2006 - At the World Conservation Congress in Bangkok two 
Novembers ago, a parade of speakers at one session contended that 
the latest scourge of native peoples was not disease, war, alcohol 
or greedy interlopers; it was national parks.  Protecting nature for 
the animals impoverishes millions of indigenous and other rural 
people by preventing them from farming, cutting timber or eating 
those same animals.  Worse yet, protected areas don't even work that 
well because of the local hostility they engender.  Parks are 
promoted by rich American and European conservation organizations 
practicing a new, soft colonialism.  Or so the argument went.  A 
couple of weeks ago on the Xingu River in the Brazilian Amazon, 
around 50 ribeirinhos, or river dwellers, strategized with 
conservationists on how to get their land included in vast areas 
they wanted the federal government to protect.  So, are parks good 
for poor people or bad? And do they protect nature? 
 
Source - SGgate.com 
 
-------------------- 
Science & Technology 
-------------------- 
 
¶16. USD3 Billion Bid To Boost Biotech in Brazil 
 
JULY 14, 2006 - A Brazilian consortium has unveiled a 
multi-billion-dollar strategy aimed at making the country a world 
leader in biotechnology.  The Brazilian Forum of Biotechnology 
Competitiveness, which includes government agencies, the private 
sector and academic institutions, announced the plan on July 4.  It 
identifies research areas that have the potential to boost the 
competitiveness of Brazilian industry, increase Brazil's 
participation in global trade, speed up its economic growth, and 
create jobs.  The overall cost of putting the plan into action will 
be USD3 billion, which will come from the public and private 
sectors.  Of this, more than USD530 million is earmarked for 
health-related biotechnology, including the production of drugs and 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  007 OF 010 
 
 
vaccines for neglected diseases and cutting-edge research in the 
fields of genomics, proteomics, nano-biotechnology and stem-cell 
science.  The plan entails creating new funding mechanisms, 
training, and improving the infrastructure of research institutions. 
 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
¶17. Chile, Argentina, Caribbean Lead in Access to New Technologies 
 
JULY 07, 2006 - Chile, Argentina, Barbados, Jamaica and the Bahamas 
lead the region in terms of access to digital communications 
technology and its use, according to a new index released by the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU).  The index goes from 0 
representing no access to new technologies to 1, which means these 
technologies are fully accessible.  The Bahamas has an index of 
0.58, followed by Chile and Barbados with 0.52. Argentina and 
Jamaica have an index of 0.47.  The Americas region as a whole is 
led by Canada (0.65) and the US (0.62).  Uruguay, Mexico, Venezuela 
and Costa Rica scored 0.43, Brazil 0.42, Peru, Panama and the 
Dominican Republic 0.39, Colombia 0.38, El Salvador 0.37, Ecuador 
0.36, Bolivia, Paraguay and Guatemala 0.30, Cuba 0.27, Honduras 
0.25, Nicaragua 0.24, and Haiti 0.15. 
 
Source - Business News Americas.  Article kindly shared by US 
Embassy Buenos Aires. 
 
¶18. South American Countries Agree on S&T Cooperation 
 
JUNE 07, 2006 - Science and Technology Ministers from nine South 
American countries signed an agreement on May 30 to elaborate an 
integration plan for science, technology, and innovation for 
2006-2010.  The Buenos Aires Declaration was signed by Argentina, 
Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela, Chile, Peru, Colombia, and 
Ecuador.  One of the objectives of the agreement is to optimize 
regional science and technology cooperation. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
----------------------------- 
Pollution & Industrialization 
----------------------------- 
 
¶19. Court Rules Pulp Mills Construction Can Continue 
 
JULY 13, 2006 - The International Court of Justice in The Hague 
rejected Argentina's request to suspend the construction of two pulp 
mills in Uruguay on the grounds that they pose a pollution threat. 
"The circumstances did not require a provisional measure ordering 
the suspension of the mills' construction" said the president of the 
court, Rosalyn Higgins.  The court ruled that the construction of 
the pulp mills posed no serious threat to the environment and could 
continue while the judges evaluate the potential risks of the pulp 
plants once they begin operation. 
 
Source - MercoPress 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  008 OF 010 
 
 
 
¶20. Judicial Ruling Requires Clean-Up of Argentina's 
Matanza-Riachuelo Basin 
 
JULY 08, 2006 - The Matanza-Riachuelo river basin, the most polluted 
in Argentina for more than a century, could begin to see some 
cleaner waters as the result of an innovative ruling by the National 
Supreme Court of Justice -- considered a landmark in the history of 
Latin American environmental law.  In response to a lawsuit by the 
residents affected by the pollution, the Argentine high court this 
month summoned 44 companies to report on the waste they dump into 
the Riachuelo River.  It also urged the government to present a 
management plan and convened a public hearing for all parties 
involved for September 05.  The decision not only made an impact 
amongst those directly involved, but also in the judicial arena.  It 
caused a buzz at a recent Latin American conference on environmental 
law and policy, held in Buenos Aires Jun 20-30, with officials from 
legal systems across the region. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶21. Chile: Paper Mill Fined 
 
JULY 08, 2006 - The company Celulosa Arauco y Constitucion (CELCO), 
located in the 10th Chilean region of Los Lagos, will have to pay a 
fine of about 60,000 dollars for the foul odors emanating from its 
mill in 2004, ruled the Appeals Court, upholding a sentence of the 
health authorities in the city of Valdivia.  The stench was 
perceptible 60 kilometers away, and triggered a range of health 
problems amongst the residents of San Jose de la Mariquina, north of 
Valdivia.   Lucio Cuenca, director of the Latin American 
Environmental Conflict Observatory (OLCA), said in a Tierramerica 
interview that the ruling sets a positive precedent, and activists 
hope for a repeat in other cases before the courts against CELCO, 
because, in his opinion, "there are administrative and environmental 
incidents that justify the closing of the mill." 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶22. Codelco Spill Contaminates 17km of Marshland Near Santiago 
 
JULY 11, 2006 - Over ten thousand liters of liquid mineral waste 
seeped from a Codelco plant into the Caren marsh in April, in the 
Alhue community of the Metropolitan region of Santiago, killing 
flora and fauna and contaminating drinking and irrigation water.  A 
report by the Agriculture and Livestock Service (SAG) confirmed that 
the El Teniente plant owned by state-owned copper giant Codelco was 
the source of the leak, which began the evening of April 15 and 
lasted 12 hours. The contaminants spread over 17 kilometers of 
marshland, killing crops, livestock and countless fish that feed off 
the water.  Codelco immediately informed the community and national 
authorities of the spill and launched a USD2 million recovery plan 
with universities and public services.  Clean-up efforts were 
successful, said Jos Ignacio Gomez, Metropolitan Director of SAG. 
 
Source - Santiago Times (no link) 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  009 OF 010 
 
 
 
------ 
Energy 
------ 
 
¶23. Chile Announces "Energy Autonomy" in Next Two Years 
 
JULY 17, 2006 - Over the next two years, Chile will become energy 
"autonomous", cutting its current Argentine dependency and cooling a 
"national security threat", announced President Michelle Bachelet. 
The plan includes several ambitious projects which will eliminate 
the vulnerability of the Chilean economy and put an end to virtually 
the only bargaining chips neighboring countries such as Argentina 
and Bolivia appeal to in dealings with Santiago.  The plan to cut 
energy dependency on Argentina is based on a re-gasification plant 
of liquid gas being built by British Gas in a port city in the north 
of the country at a cost of 350 million US dollars.  The plant 
should be operational by 2008 and together with other private 
initiatives and the development of gas deposits in Magallanes 
Region, in the extreme south, should help grant the country more 
energy independence. 
 
Source - MercoPress 
 
------- 
General 
------- 
 
¶24. IBD Releases USD 1.9 Million For The Amazon 
 
JULY 14, 2006 - The Inter-American Development Bank approved USD 1,9 
million for the Program of Enforcement of the Joint Regional 
Management for the Amazon.  This information was given by Rosalia 
Arteaga Serrano, Secretary General of the Organization of the Treaty 
for Amazon Cooperation during the first Meeting of Ministers of 
Defense of the Amazon countries in Bogota, Colombia.  According to 
Serrano, one of the objectives is to create a regional policy for 
science and technology directed to the development and 
rationalization of the resources of the world's largest tropical 
forest.   Serrano noted that this is very important in view of the 
"ongoing threat of biopiracy."  Researchers of the Amazon countries 
found that Indian shamans are the major source of information 
regarding herbs, minerals and animals with medicinal properties. 
 
Source - Public Affairs U.S. Embassy Brasilia 
 
¶25. Leaky Pipes, Stingy Aid Slow Peru Gas Project 
 
JULY 17, 2006 - Camisea is backed by an international consortium of 
companies, including Texas-based Hunt Oil, and the US supported 
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).  It's slated to turn Peru 
into a net energy exporter and save USD4.1 billion in energy costs 
from 2004 to 2033, according to the IDB.  It will also create 
government royalties - one Peruvian province has already landed more 
than USD254 million.  But critics want to know why one of the 
project's pipelines has ruptured five times since December 2004, 
 
BRASILIA 00001509  010 OF 010 
 
 
impacting sensitive ecosystems and remote jungle communities.  They 
also complain that benefits have not trickled down to poor Peruvians 
and that the IDB, which put in USD75 million in 2003, has not 
fulfilled its oversight role.  "We are of the view Camisea has not 
been a success.  It could have been better designed," US Treasury 
Assistant Secretary Clay Lowery told a Senate foreign relations 
hearing.  The hearing focused on problems with multilateral banks 
funding pipelines in developing countries. 
 
Source - Christian Science Monitor 
 
¶26. Chile: Environmentalist Sells 4,000 Argentine Hectares to 
Business Group 
 
JULY 18, 2006 - A December 2005 deal by environmentalist Douglas 
Tompkins to sell part of his Argentine land holdings marked the 
first time the American real-estate tycoon has dealt with the 
Angelini Group, the most wealthy business entity in Chile.  Many 
hope the new relationship between the Tompkins and Angelini can 
generate a new dialogue between environmentalists and companies in 
the forest, fishing and energy sectors. Angelini, who already has 
100,000 hectares of pine forest and 113,000 of natural forest in 
Argentina, will use the 4,000 hectares of poplars and willows in the 
Buenos Aires delta for wood pulp production.  While the exact amount 
paid for the land is unknown, Argentine media reported Tompkins sold 
the land for USD6 million. If true, Tompkins would have made a USD5 
million profit. 
 
Source - Santiago Times (no link) 
 
¶27. Brazil: Environmentalists Threatened 
 
JULY 08, 2006 - Vilmar Berna, an environmental journalist who won 
the United Nations Global 500 prize in 1999, lives under a death 
threat issued more than a month ago in Niteroi, a city neighboring 
Rio de Janeiro.  He filed a complaint and requested police 
protection, but the response has been slow in coming.  His situation 
is worrisome because in February 2005 another environmentalist was 
murdered, Dionisio Julio Ribeiro, defender of the Tingu Biological 
Reserve, also located in the Rio metropolitan area.  A hunter 
confessed to the crime but was absolved in May "due to lack of 
evidence".  The violent reaction against activists may come from big 
landowners in the Amazon as well as the artisanal fishermen along 
the beach where he lives -- they fear his presence because they use 
illegal fishing methods, he explained. 
 
Source - Tierramerica