06PHNOMPENH990
Land Disputes Draw More Protesters to Phnom Penh
Thu May 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO6943
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHPF #0990/01 1450527
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 250527Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6739
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1453UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000990 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS AND DRL; GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV CB
SUBJECT:  Land Disputes Draw More Protesters to Phnom Penh 
 
 
¶1.   (SBU)  Summary:  In May, over 300 farmers gathered in 
front of the National Assembly in protest against those 
authorities alleged to be responsible for usurping their 
land.  The protesters called on Prime Minister Hun Sen, the 
National Assembly and civil society to help in resolving 
their claims.  Subsequently, the protesters agreed to leave 
Phnom Penh following assurances their cases would be 
resolved.  Civil society leaders remain concerned that land 
grabbing continues to be the norm across Cambodia and in 
most of the land disputes, the weak and the poor lose their 
land to the rich and the powerful.  In the absence of an 
impartial judiciary and a new Land Dispute Authority that is 
not yet fully active, the court of last resort appears to be 
the Prime Minister himself.  End Summary. 
 
Land Dispute Cases Continue to Plague Cambodia 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  (U)  In one of the most recent land dispute cases, a 
group of 190 protesters from Banteay Meanchey province 
claimed local authorities and police and military commanders 
usurped 1,257 hectares of land in districts of Malay and 
Preah Neath Preah.  The protesters representing over 300 
families arrived May 17 in front of the National Assembly in 
Phnom Penh to publicize their plight and protest against 
those who seized the land they claim to have occupied since 
¶1993.  The protesters say the provincial court as well as 
authorities at the district and provincial levels have not 
resolved the issue since 2004 when they filed complaints 
following the illegal seizure of their land.  The majority 
of the protesters are former refugees who had received the 
land in 1993/1994 following their repatriation from refugee 
camps in Thailand. 
 
¶3.  (U)  On May 17, over 100 land protesters from Kompong 
Cham province joined the Banteay Meanchey group in front of 
the National Assembly.  The protesters complained that 
forest authorities and military commanders grabbed 450 
hectares of their farmland in the Districts of Memot and 
Krochma.  According to the protesters, the authorities and 
military commanders allegedly appropriated the land for a 
development project.  The protesters argued they do not 
believe the justification and refuse to give up the land 
they have farmed since 1980. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  On May 22, authorities in both Kompong Cham and 
Banteay Meanchey convinced the protesters that their cases 
would be resolved if they returned to their respective 
provinces and all have agreed to leave Phnom Penh.  This 
latest protest across from the National Assembly shows, 
however, that land disputes remain a complicated issue 
across Cambodia - and are creating a growing sense of 
injustice.  As local and provincial authorities 
 
National Assembly Site a Haven for Land Protesters 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  (U)  The Kompong Cham and Banteay Meanchey groups have 
been only the latest in a series of land protesters who have 
come to the National Assembly to raise awareness of their 
cases.  In February 2006, the number of land protesters 
swelled to more than 1,000 families whose representatives 
had set up camp across from the National Assembly to gain 
publicity and government attention to their plight.  The 
protesters only agreed to leave Phnom Penh after 
representatives from Prime Minister Hun Sen's office assured 
them that their disputes would be properly adjudicated prior 
to their return home.  NGOs, however, complain that there 
have been no resolutions to most cases and some families are 
still prohibited from returning to the disputed land.  In 
other instances, they are permitted to return and farm 
pending a resolution. 
 
RGC Intention to Resolve Disputes Questioned 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Cambodian Center for Human Rights Director Kem 
Sokha suggests that people do not believe local authorities 
and the government are interested in resolving land disputes 
that have plagued most of Cambodia's provinces.  "Because 
the government is well aware of the disputes and the 
negative consequences of land concessions, the government 
could resolve them successfully if they wanted," argued the 
human rights leader.  "The government looks away because the 
personal interests of government officials and their wealthy 
backers are at stake," said Kem Sokha.  Sokha is not 
confident that the newly established National Authority to 
resolve land disputes will succeed, although members of the 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000990  002 OF 002 
 
 
opposition party are included in the composition of the 
authority. 
 
It All Rests with the Prime Minister 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (U)  So far, the only individual capable of rendering 
assistance to those afflicted by land disputes is Prime 
Minister Hun Sen.  On May 16, Hun Sen ordered authorities of 
Siem Reap Province's Banteay Srei District to return nearly 
3,300 hectares of land seized by local authorities to 
approximately 100 villagers and military personnel who had 
been allocated the land.  On May 21, provincial authorities 
for the village of Kbal Spean in Banteay Meanchey province 
announced that each of the 218 families who protested their 
eviction on March 21, 2005 would receive an 8 by 20 meter 
plot at the order of the Prime Minister, as well as 100 
kilos of rice and 300,000 riels (USD 75).  The governor, the 
families, and the provincial ADHOC coordinator expressed 
satisfaction with the decision.  The families of those 
killed protesting the eviction in Kbal Spean last year are 
continuing to seek justice through the courts. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Land disputes remain a growing, if not explosive, 
problem.  Average Cambodians are concerned that the entire 
country has a price tag, and private as well as public land 
ownership will soon belong to a small, privileged segment of 
society.  Officials outside Phnom Penh are afraid to 
intervene in cases for fear of political repercussions, 
forcing hundreds to come to the capital to seek government 
action.  Those cases that have been successfully resolved 
have required the intervention of the Prime Minister or 
members of his immediate staff, who are sensitive to the 
media attention given to large numbers of protesters in 
front of the National Assembly.  Until the Land Dispute 
Authority begins its work, groups of disgruntled peasants 
will continue to come to Phnom Penh to draw attention to a 
problem that shows no signs of going away. 
 
STORELLA