06PHNOMPENH1445
CORRUPTION IN CAMBODIA'S ANTI-TIP DEPARTMENT
Tue Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO0466
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHPF #1445/01 2270834
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 150834Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7142
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOMUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 001445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS and EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN KJUS CB
SUBJECT: CORRUPTION IN CAMBODIA'S ANTI-TIP DEPARTMENT 
 
REF: 05PHNOM PENH 966 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  On August 8, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court 
initiated corruption proceedings against Touch Ngim, former Deputy 
Director of the MOI's Anti-TIP Department.  Ngim confessed to taking 
bribe money to release brothel owners, but claimed that he was 
acting upon orders of his superior, General Un Sokunthea, who leads 
the MOI's Anti-TIP Unit, and who allegedly received USD 3,000 of the 
USD 9,000 paid.  The case came to light after four of the six 
arrested filed complaints to the courts demanding compensation.  End 
Summary. 
 
Touch Ngim On Trial 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  On August 8, Judge Ke Sakhorn of the Phnom Penh Municipal 
Court opened proceedings concerning a trafficking corruption case 
involving the MOI's Anti-TIP Department.  The prosecutor of the 
Phnom Penh court filed charges in May 2006 against three police 
officers of the Anti-TIP Department (Touch Ngim, Thong Kim Heng and 
Rin Savoeun) for taking bribes from owners of karaoke clubs/brothels 
in Kampong Speu province in exchange for their release.  Ngim was 
arrested in December 2005 and was the only one present in court. 
Kim Heng, who continues working in the Anti-TIP Department as the 
Chief of Anti-TIP Office, was represented by a defense lawyer; Rin 
had no representation.  Presiding Judge Ke Sakhorn has not reached a 
verdict in the case. 
 
¶3.  (U)  In September 2004, Ngim led more than 20 police officers of 
the Anti-TIP Department in a raid against four karaoke parlors 
operating as fronts for prostitution.  Six suspects were arrested 
and detained in the department for one night.  All of them were 
released the next morning after paying a total amount of USD 9,000 
to the police.  Four of them later submitted complaints to court 
against the police demanding repayment of the bribe money. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  During the trial, Touch Ngim acknowledged releasing the 
six suspects of the four raided Karaoke/brothels for USD 9,000.  He 
added that the release was done with the knowledge and approval of 
his superior, General Un Sokunthea, who allegedly took USD 3,000 of 
the total amount.  The Kampong Speu Court Prosecutor, Ou Phat, 
reportedly received USD 3,000.  Ngim received USD 700 and the 
remaining USD 2,300 allegedly was divided among the staff of the 
Anti-TIP Department.  Ngim testified that Kim Heng and Savoeun were 
the ones who negotiated the price with the suspects, and Heng was 
responsible for distributing the USD 2,300 among the Department.  He 
continued that this was the first time he had been involved in any 
wrongdoing.  He said he has worked in the Department since its 
creation, helped Cambodia be promoted from Tier 3 to Tier 2 in 2003, 
and received a medal from the MOI for his outstanding performance. 
 
 
¶5.  (U)  The prosecutor claimed that Ngim lacks evidence to 
implicate Sokunthea and the others.  He said that Ngim was the 
leader of the operation, and the one who made sole decision.  In his 
defense, Ngim said he was in fact the chief of the operation, but as 
a police officer, he has to respect the hierarchy and  his move 
needed to be approved by his superior. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Ngim's lawyer provided evidence of Un Sokunthea's 
involvement in the form of a report dated September 22, 2005.  In 
the report, submitted to General Commissioner of the National Police 
Hok Lundy, Un Sokunthea allegedly acknowledged receiving USD 3,000, 
but clarified that she spent USD 2,600 to construct a building 
inside the ministry.  The remainder of the amount was used on a 
provincial matter and the rest divided among administrative staff. 
The report added that the Kampong Speu Court's prosecutor received 
USD 3,000.  In his concluding remarks, the defense lawyer for Ngim 
stated that all involved in the corruption case, regardless of rank, 
should be held responsible - not just his client.  Defense counsel 
also noted irregularities surrounding his client's arrest; held 
longer than 48 hours in police custody, and held more than 6 months 
in pretrial detention. 
 
¶7.  (U)  During Thong's testimony, he denied any involvement in 
bribe-taking or the negotiating process.  Thong said Ngim and Rin 
handled the case and Ngim ordered him to release the suspects.  He 
acknowledged that he did receive USD 100 after the operation, and he 
was told that the money is an incentive for his hard work.  Thong's 
defense lawyer claimed his client's unwitting involvement, and asked 
that charges against his client be dropped. 
 
¶8.  (U)  The police record of Rin Savoeun's interview noted that Rin 
allegedly received USD 50 from Ngim for his work.  Complaints 
submitted by four of the six arrested brothel owners identified Rin 
as the police officer demanding money and negotiating the price. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Comment:  Reports of corruption in the police force are 
nothing new; criminal proceedings against officers are rare.  The 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001445  002 OF 002 
 
 
government's selective treatment of this case will unlikely act as a 
significant deterrent to other law enforcement officials involved in 
corruption.  We see Ngim and the others as scapegoats in a case that 
came to the public's attention only after the released suspects 
asked for their bribe money to be returned.  So far, Un Sokunthea 
has not been charged with any wrongdoing nor has she commented on 
the alleged report linking her to accepting bribe money. 
 
MUSSOMELLI