07BRASILIA362
UNDER SECRETARY BURNS'S MEETING WITH BRAZILIAN
Thu Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO1821
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0362/01 0601451
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011451Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8242
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5960
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4613
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6763
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 6104
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 6292
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 3936
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 9303
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRASILIA 000362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BTIO ENRG PREL BR
SUBJECT: UNDER SECRETARY BURNS'S MEETING WITH BRAZILIAN 
GOVERNORS 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  U/S Nicholas Burns met in Brasilia with 
six state governors, representing some of the largest and 
most significant states by population and GDP, on February 8 
to discuss areas of potential cooperation.  The governors 
described specific areas where they would welcome technical 
assistance and private sector investment, including biofuels, 
law enforcement, information technology, tourism, health, 
education, petroleum and petrochemicals, and others.  U/S 
Burns told the governors that he and Ambassador Sobel will 
work to enlarge the bilateral relationship through private 
sector and state to state contacts.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  U/S Burns opened the meeting recalling that in his 
meetings with Sao Paulo governor Jose Serra, Civil Household 
Chief Dilma Rousseff, and Foreign Minister Celso Amorim, he 
had had the opportunity to discuss common ground between the 
two countries.  He told the governors we have the opportunity 
to build a stronger U.S.-Brazil relationship, and pointed to 
the good personal relationship between Presidents Lula da 
Silva and Bush.  He said we already have substantial 
cooperation in trade and investment and other areas, but the 
relationship could be stronger.  He said that while this is 
true of the federal to federal government relationship, it is 
also true of the state to state relationships. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  U/S Burns indicated the United States expects a 
big expansion in the biofuels market, and would like to work 
with Brazil to help create a large, global biofuels market. 
He mentioned a number of areas he had discussed with Sao 
Paulo Governor Serra (septel), including crime, drug 
trafficking, judicial reform, police investigative 
techniques, and prison reform.  Japan, China, India, the EU, 
and Brazil are the United States' key regional partners, and 
U/S Burns asked how we can stimulate the U.S.-Brazilian 
relationship. 
 
Rio Grande do Sul: Governor Yeda Crusius 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Governor Crusius said building a state to state 
relationship is a challenge.  Crusius said that the USG has a 
huge capacity to get things done in comparison with the 
government of her state.  One area of need was prisons, which 
she indicated she would raise with Attorney General Alberto 
Gonzales (reported septel).  Crusius said building a stronger 
business relationship could be helped by government to 
government relations, with the welcome intermediation of the 
American Embassy.  She said that there is already substantial 
agricultural trade between her state and the United States, 
and more could be done.  On state to state relationships, 
Governor Crusius said we would have to look for opportunities. 
 
Pernambuco: Governor Eduardo Campos 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Governor Campos said that there has been little 
economic growth in Brazil in the last three decades.  Latin 
America is at a special moment now, and Brazil has an 
important role, at the side of the United States, he opined. 
Campos said ties with the U.S. depend both on Brazilian 
federal and state policies, and it is important for U.S. 
diplomacy to understand the current environment in Brazil. 
His region, the northeast, he said, is poor; people want 
change and want to advance.  They want economic growth and 
development.  Campos said a state government's range of 
action is limited because social demands are heavy, and there 
is no way out of the current situation if the social 
pressures are not addressed.  He stated emphatically that 
there is a "total absence" of a U.S. policy of building a 
closer relationship with the whole of Brazil, and said "we 
need a closer relationship."  He mentioned new ports, 
planning, business infrastructure, biotechnology, and 
biofuels as areas for cooperation.  Campos said he hopes 
education, university exchanges, and health, especially 
tropical disease research, but above all, economic 
development, can also be areas of cooperation.  Campos said 
Pernambuco needs to increase its export production in the 
coastal forest zone ("zona da mata"). 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Referring to himself, Gomes, Cabral, and Wagner, 
Campos said that the governors in the meeting who are allied 
with Lula see that they must make improvements in their 
 
BRASILIA 00000362  002 OF 004 
 
 
relationship with Latin America, and said sometimes they take 
only small steps even when the stakes are high.  Pernambuco 
wants more economic integration with the United States, but 
the U.S. is absent from the local economy.  Noting that 
Pernambuco already has a petrochemical center, he mentioned 
petroleum and petrochemicals, especially refining, as an 
opportunity sector. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Finally, Campos said northeastern states have 
skilled information technology workers.  U.S companies could 
generate 20 to 40 thousand information technology jobs in the 
northeast, and the beneficiaries would mainly be youth who 
are otherwise at risk of becoming involved in crime and 
drugs. 
 
Ceara: Governor Cid Gomes 
------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Governor Gomes said 60 percent of federal 
resources stay in the federal government, 25 percent is 
distributed to states, and 15 percent goes to cities.  With 
that as a backdrop, Ceara has two main challenges, he said. 
First, thirty percent of Ceara's 8,500,000 inhabitants are 
engaged in low-yield, subsistence agriculture in the 
interior.  To illustrate Ceara's low productivity he pointed 
out that it produces only seven percent of Brazil's gross 
domestic product.  Second, a third of Ceara's inhabitants 
live in cities, where there are serious problems.  He said 
the state's cities are "powder kegs," where violence is rife. 
 The situation in the cities is comparable to that of eastern 
Sao Paulo state or the city of Rio de Janeiro.  Yet, he said, 
there are great opportunities for closer relations with the 
United States.  In spite of its small size, Ceara has a lot 
of water resources, and the state has made advances in 
agricultural irrigation, an area in which exchange with the 
U.S. would be useful, Gomes said.  Although there is great 
potential for cooperation, there are some obstacles in the 
tourism sector, which is unfortunate in view of northeastern 
Brazil's good climate and excellent beaches, according to 
Gomes.  Of all the states represented at the table, Ceara is 
geographically closest to the U.S., he said.  He also 
mentioned energy as an area for cooperation, particularly in 
renewable types such as wind energy, ocean wave energy, for 
which Ceara is launching an experimental project, and 
bio-diesel energy, produced in Ceara's semi-arid zone. 
 
Bahia: Governor Jaques Wagner 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Governor Wagner said he believed it was possible 
to intensify the bilateral relationship through states, and 
said that Mercosur did something similar when, at the recent 
January 18-19 summit in Rio de Janeiro, representatives of 
sub-state bodies were invited to participate, including a 
number of governors.  Echoing Campos and Gomes, he said that 
the whole of the northeast is closer to the United States 
than southern Brazil, and he has been asking American 
Airlines to fly to Salvador five times a week.  He also 
pointed out that Bahia, Pernambuco, and Rio de Janeiro have 
the most important carnivals, and make up a "Carnival 
triangle" that is ideal for tourism.  Wagner said it is 
important for people in both countries to get to know each 
other, and for that flights are necessary.  Currently there 
are 40 to 50 flights a week between northeastern Brazil and 
Europe.  From Ceara alone there are five a week.  He said air 
connections are fundamental, and while there already are 
flights from Miami to Salvador on a Brazilian airline, Bahia 
also needs reciprocation by a U.S. carrier.  He also said 
that Bahia, as the state with the largest black population in 
Brazil, is actively promoting "racial tourism" and he hoped 
to tap into the U.S. market.  Another area for cooperation is 
health and education.  Bahia has the 6th largest economy 
among Brazilian states, but is the 6th worst in health and 
education, Wagner said.  Bahia and the World Bank have a 
program in this area, and he said he would welcome the 
involvement of a U.S. company.  On the positive side, Wagner 
said that the Ford Motor Company in Bahia has the highest 
productivity rate of any Ford plant in the world.  Finally, 
he said piracy and drug trafficking are two important 
criminal challenges in his state.  People go into crime to 
survive, and so piracy and drug trafficking are rooted in the 
state's social circumstances. 
 
BRASILIA 00000362  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
Federal District: Governor Jose Roberto Arruda 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  Governor Arruda described the Federal District 
(DF) as a meeting point of all cultures in Brazil.  It has 
three million inhabitants and is a "portrait" of Brazil's 
social problems.  Brasilia proper has the nation's highest 
per capita income, while not far away there are communities 
with the nation's lowest.  The capital therefore deserves 
special treatment, he argued.  First, on energy, he mentioned 
a 40 kilometer mass transit rail project using bio-diesel 
that is under negotiation with the World Bank.  Second, on 
law enforcement, Arruda said police in the DF use 
American-made software, and they are doing good 
counternarcotics work.  Police are well-trained, but they 
need short-term intelligence help, especially in the fight 
against organized crime.  He said the crime rate in the 
periphery around Brasilia is higher than Rio de Janeiro's. 
Third, Arruda praised the high quality of the American School 
of Brasilia and proposed that the USG also build a technical 
school in the DF. 
 
Rio de Janeiro: Governor Sergio Cabral 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  Governor Cabral said the relationship between 
Presidents Bush and Lula has strengthened the bilateral 
relationship.  Rio de Janeiro is committed to creating 
conditions for investment and research, he said, and he would 
like to expand the business relationship between the United 
States and Rio de Janeiro.  He said states cannot deal with 
some problems alone, and for that reason he sought foreign 
partners.  On security, he said he needs a partnership with 
experienced countries.  Cabral said we should work to expand 
investments in public safety.  He mentioned that the federal 
government has given the state 150 million reais for 
investment and infrastructure in preparation for the July 
2007 Pan American Games.  Another large project in the state 
is the construction of a highway ring around the city of Rio 
de Janeiro.  On the environment and energy, Governor Cabral 
said ethanol is important, and the north and northeast of the 
state have historically been sugar cane producing regions. 
Annual production is soon expected to reach 5 million tons a 
year.  He said an oil refinery has been converted to a diesel 
plant for used cooking oil. 
 
U/S Burns and Ambassador Sobel 
------------------------------ 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  U/S Burns said our governments can establish a 
vision for a closer private sector relationship, but the 
sector itself must move it forward.  He said the vision has 
not been high enough up to now and we can do more to amplify 
the bilateral relationship.  He recalled the case of India, 
where the bilateral relationship has grown immensely over the 
last ten years following President Clinton's decision to make 
it a high priority.  U/S said Governor Campos' remarks about 
northeastern Brazil's links with Europe were important, and 
the United States should be in the northeast, too.  He and 
Ambassador Sobel will try to work on this, he said.  Ten 
years from now our relationship should be larger than it is 
now, he concluded.  U/S Burns offered to help governors if 
they travel to the United States.  He said the U.S. is 
becoming "greener" and in the coming years alternative energy 
and climate change will be increasingly a part of the 
national debate.  Biofuels will connect Brazil and the United 
States.  He said Jose Serra asked why we were taxing ethanol 
imports if we were committed to promoting its use, and he had 
taken note of the question.  Ambassador Sobel added that the 
U.S. and Brazil should establish tax and bilateral investment 
treaties, and that pressure from governors could help force 
the process. 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Comment:  The six governors represent some of the 
most economically and politically important states in Brazil. 
 Only Sao Paulo, whose governor met with Burns separately 
(septel), and Minas Gerais, are more important.  (The 
governor of Minas Gerais wanted to attend but bad weather 
grounded his flight.)  Four of the six governors are close to 
President Lula or part of his coalition.  Their interest was 
clear:  Without exception, they were all very interested in 
 
BRASILIA 00000362  004 OF 004 
 
 
expanding cooperation and promoting trade and investment 
opportunities with U.S firms.  They all face, to one degree 
or another, serious law enforcement challenges that present 
opportunities for the private sector as well as official 
assistance and cooperation.  There are important trade and 
cooperation opportunities with these states that, if 
developed, will contribute to the overall expansion of the 
bilateral relationship.  End comment. 
 
Participants 
------------ 
 
¶14.  (U)  U.S.: 
Under Secretary R. Nicholas Burns 
Ambassador Clifford Sobel 
DCM Phillip Chicola 
Political Counselor Dennis Hearne 
USAID Mission Director Jennifer Adams 
Political Officer Dale Prince (notetaker) 
 
Brazilian Governors: 
Yeda Crusius, Rio Grande do Sul 
Jaques Wagner, Bahia 
Eduardo Campos, Pernambuco 
Cid Gomes, Ceara 
Sergio Cabral, Rio de Janeiro 
Jose Roberto Arruda, Federal District 
Sobel