07NEWDELHI1866
DELHI DIARY, APRIL 12-19
Thu Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy New Delhi
VZCZCXRO0248
OO RUEHBI RUEHCI RUEHDBU RUEHLH RUEHPW
DE RUEHNE #1866/01 1090859
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 190859Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4947
INFO RUCNCLS/ALL SOUTH AND CENTRAL ASIA COLLECTIVE
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5993
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3423
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 1969
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 4852
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4459
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 6771
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 NEW DELHI 001866 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/19/2017 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MNUC KUNR ETRD EPET KWMN BR
UZ, IN 
SUBJECT: DELHI DIARY, APRIL 12-19 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Ted Osius for Reasons 1.4 (B,D) 
 
¶1.  (U) Below is a compilation of political highlights from 
Embassy New Delhi for April 12-19, 2007 that did not feature 
in our other reporting, including: 
 
-- Third Phase of the Uttar Pradesh Election Completed 
-- The Saffron Crowd Finding a Home in the BJP Again 
-- Chief of Naval Operations Visit Gets Positive Reviews 
-- Half of India's Children Are Abused 
-- Brazil Positive on Nuke Deal 
-- India Still Backing G-4 UNSC Strategy 
-- "India Is Special" Says Uzbekistan 
-- Civil Servants Required to Report Menstrual Cycles? 
 
Third Phase of the Uttar Pradesh Election Completed 
------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Uttar Pradesh completed the third phase of its 
election on April 18 for 57 of the 403 seats in contention. 
The polling took place in the heavily Muslim Rohilkhand 
region (around the cities of Bareilly, Rampur and Pilibhit). 
Exit polls and election analysis by the pundits confirm that 
the ruling Samajwadi Party (SP) of Chief Minister Mulayam 
Singh Yadav is taking a beating.  In the 2002 election, the 
SP won 26 seats in Rohilkhand.  This time it is expected to 
win 10-14.   Analysts point out that for the SP to hold on, 
it needed a heavy turnout, but only 50 percent of the voters 
showed up.  In addition, the SP had to hold on to its united 
Muslim vote block.  This also did not happen, as the Muslim 
vote was dispersed between a variety of parties.  The BSP of 
former Chief Minister Mayawati continues to do well, with 
exit polls predicting that it will go from nine seats to 
15-19.  Likewise, the BJP is projected to increase from 13 to 
20-24.  Even the much-maligned Congress could increase from 
its current four seats to 4-8.  With the SP doing so poorly, 
there is increasing speculation that it could slip to third 
place after the BJP.  Analysts agree that no party will have 
a clear majority (a "hung assembly").  As the election draws 
to a close, there will be frenetic behind the scenes 
maneuvering to arrange a viable post-poll coalition. 
 
The Saffron Crowd Finding a Home in the BJP Again 
------ 
 
¶3.  (C) Press reports are rife with speculation that Hindutva 
firebrand Uma Bharati is about to wrap-up her less than 
successful political party (the Bhartiya Janshakti Party - 
Indian Peoples' Power Party) and return to the BJP.  The 
reports have been spurred by her early April withdrawal of 
all candidates from the ongoing Uttar Pradesh Legislative 
Assembly elections.  She was running several hundred MLA 
candidates and claimed that she withdrew from the race at the 
behest of the rabidly Hindutva Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP), 
which asked her not to split the "Hindu" vote.  Although BJP 
spokesman Ravi Shankar Prasad claims that "there was no move 
in this direction," political insiders are all but certain 
that Uma will rejoin the BJP fold.  Her imminent reinduction 
and the increasing influence of the VHP portend a BJP return 
to its Hindutva roots.  Uma's reinduction follows on the 
heels of the BJP's release of a controversial anti-Muslim DVD 
(reported septel) and a string of communal incidents in 
recent weeks, seen to be the work of the Sangh Parivar 
(family of Hindu organizations that make up the Hindutva wing 
of the BJP).  Uma quickly moved to emphasize her Hindu 
communalist platform by again pledging to build the Ram 
temple in Ayodhya should the BJP return to power in UP.  We 
will report on the growing power and influence of Hindutva 
extremists within the BJP septel. 
 
Chief of Naval Operations Visit Gets Positive Reviews 
------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) DAO will report separately, but the initial public 
reaction to Chief of Naval Operations (CON) Admiral Mullen's 
visit has been positive.  Noting U.S.-Japan-India cooperation 
in Malabar '07, which concluded earlier in the week, "The 
 
NEW DELHI 00001866  002 OF 003 
 
 
Telegraph" said the CNO's explanation of the "Thousand-Ship 
Navy" was received by an approving Indian Navy whose response 
"was very positive."  Media highlighted recent mil-to-mil 
developments, such as last week's Defense Joint Working 
Group, pointing out that since Indian naval ships escorted an 
American fleet in 2001 during Operation Enduring Freedom, 
India-U.S. naval ties have been on the leading edge of 
bilateral relations.  Adm. Mullen departed New Delhi April 19 
for Mumbai. 
 
Half of India's Children Are Abused 
------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The first National Study on Child Abuse, conducted 
jointly by UNICEF, Save the Children and Prayas was released 
last week by the Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
The sobering results report that 53% of children in India are 
victims of abuse, the majority of which is never reported. 
The survey ) reportedly the largest such survey ever 
conducted in the world - covered 13 states and a sample size 
of 12,446 children, 2,324 young adults and 2,449 stakeholders 
in both rural and urban areas.  Andhra Pradesh had the 
highest percentage of almost all forms of abuse, followed by 
Assam, Bihar and Delhi.  The &unexpected8 finding was that 
boys were as much at risk as girls.   WMCD Minister Renuka 
Chowdhury said that the dismal level of awareness about 
sexual abuse among children necessitates mandatory sex 
education in school.  Her statement came at a time when 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Chattisgarh banned sex 
education in school on the grounds that it is &not 
compatible with Indian culture.8  Chowdhury also said that 
she is working on an Offence Against Children (Prevention) 
Bill, expected to be brought before Parliament during the 
monsoon session. 
 
¶6.  (C) Comment:  This is another step in the right 
direction.  The survey results were widely carried by the 
media, demonstrating India,s increasing comfort in engaging 
in a national discussion about its dirty laundry.  As 
expected, the knee-jerk reaction was to pass legislation. 
And, as expected, effective implementation remains to be 
seen.  Embassy will watch and report on parliamentary 
discussions on this issue as it unfolds.  End comment. 
 
Brazil Positive on Nuke Deal 
------ 
 
¶7.  (U) "We don't feel threatened in any way," regarding the 
Indo-U.S. civil nuclear agreement, Brazilian Foreign Minister 
Celso Amorim reportedly said after the third meeting of the 
India-Brazil Joint Commission April 13.  Amorim, who was 
accompanied by a large, high-level delegation, visited New 
Delhi April 10-13 to co-chair the Joint Commission with 
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) Foreign Minister Pranab 
Mukherjee, and to participate in talks with India, the U.S. 
and the European Union on Doha round negotiations.  Amorim, 
who met the same day with Prime Minister Singh, said Brazil 
is envisaging sending a team from its national nuclear energy 
commission to New Delhi, noting that "having an agreement 
with India on science and technology provided an umbrella to 
start concrete action," according to press reports.  Amorim 
was quoted by the press as saying that "New Delhi was 
committed to non-proliferation," and that Brazil was keeping 
the option of cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
open, though it would have to take place in the framework of 
Brazil's agreement with the International Atomic Energy 
Agency. 
 
India Still Backing G-4 UNSC Strategy 
------ 
 
¶8.  (U) The MEA further stated that the Brazil and India had 
"reaffirmed their commitment to the ongoing G-4 initiatives 
to closely coordinate efforts towards realizing the necessary 
expansion of the UN Security Council in both the permanent 
and non-permanent categories, including developing countries 
as new permanent members."  Regarding efforts to enter the UN 
 
NEW DELHI 00001866  003 OF 003 
 
 
as permanent members of the Security Council, Amorim stated 
to the press that he was, "very confident it will happen." 
 
"India Is Special" Says Uzbekistan 
------ 
 
¶9.  (U) "Let me be frank with you.  We do not allow everybody 
to work with us in our key sectors.  But India is special for 
us and you are welcome," said Uzbek Deputy Prime Minister 
Rustoma Azimov to visiting Indian Minister of State for 
Commerce Jairam Ramesh in Tashkent, according to local news 
reports.  Ramesh and his counterpart co-chaired a session of 
the India-Uzbekistan Joint Commission.  Ramesh stated that 
India was not interested in "exploiting Uzbekistan's natural 
wealth," but would be happy to train Uzbek engineers, 
geologists and(energy experts in Indian institutions to help 
develop the Uzbek oil and gas industry, according to "The 
Hindu."  The newspaper cited diplomatic sources as saying 
that India was ready to assist in the development of 
Uzbekistan's gems and jewelry sector, and was looking for 
opportunities for gas exploration in the Bukhara-Khiva 
region, the Ferghana valley and southwest Uzbekistan.  Indian 
investment in textiles, pharmaceuticals and leather goods 
would reportedly be welcomed by Uzbekistan. 
 
Civil Servants Required to Report Menstrual Cycles? 
------ 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Annual appraisals and health checks are mandatory 
in India,s civil service.  When the 2007 appraisal forms 
were recently issued by the federal Ministry for Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions, several women civil servants 
expressed shock and dismay to discover that the new rules 
required them to reveal details of their menstrual cycles. 
In addition, under a new national requirement, female 
officers were expected to report when they last sought 
maternity leave.  One female civil servant told BBC she was 
&gobsmacked8 and others quickly agreed that the questions 
were uncalled for. 
 
¶11.  (C) Comment:  Thankfully, several women civil servants 
publicly stated that the government has no need for this kind 
of personal information, protesting that the questions 
violated the right to privacy.  The Ministry of Personnel 
decided to delete the controversial part of the form 
following an intervention by the Prime Minister, according to 
the BBC, which reported that the decision to scrap the 
question was made after Communist Party of India (Marxist) 
Member of Parliament and women's activist Brinda Karat led a 
delegation to PM Singh to complain about the matter. 
MULFORD