07RIODEJANEIRO622
FLORIDA STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL TO PETROBRAS:  GET OUT OF
Fri Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
VZCZCXRO3942
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHRI #0622/01 3271357
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 231357Z NOV 07
FM AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4283
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0655
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 5115
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3394C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RIO DE JANEIRO 000622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC 
 
C O R R E C T E D   C O P Y 
 
E.O. 12958: 11/23/2017 
TAGS: EPEC ECON PREL PGOV BR IR
SUBJECT:  FLORIDA STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL TO PETROBRAS:  GET OUT OF 
IRAN 
 
REF(S):  A) RIO DE JANERIO 381, (B) RIO DE JANEIRO 247, 
 
(C) RIO DE JANEIRO 196 
 
Classified By: Charge de Affairs Phil Chicola for reasons 1.4 B AND D. 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: During Florida Governor Charlie Crist's visit to Rio 
on November 7-8, the Governor's Chief of Staff George LeMieux met with 
Samir Awad, Executive Manager for Petrobras' International Assets, on 
November 7.  They discussed Florida's legislation requiring divestiture 
of the state's US$137 billion pension fund from any companies doing 
business in Iran and concerns about Petrobras investing in Iran.  Awad 
reviewed Petrobras' activities there, emphasizing the challenges the 
oil giant faces in carrying out its business commitments there.  Awad 
confirmed, contrary to public assertions by the GOB, that the GOB is 
involved in Petrobras decision-making regarding investment.  End Summar 
 
¶2.  (SBU) LeMieux met with Awad on November 7.  He stated that the 
State of Florida was very concerned about Iran as a source of funding 
for terrorist attacks against the United States and its allies. 
LeMieux explained that Governor Crist fully supported recent 
legislation to divest the state's US$137 billion pension fund from any 
companies doing business in Iran and that, while Florida has no 
investments in Petrobras, he wished that the company would reconsider 
doing business in Iran. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Awad responded that Petrobras must go where the Brazilian 
Government directs it.  However, from an asset manager's perspective, 
he too would like Petrobras to pull out of Iran.  According to Awad, 
the difficulties of operating in Iran, including obtaining parts and 
negotiating contracts, makes operating there next to impossible, and is 
a disincentive to many companies.  Petrobras began drilling for oil in 
Iran in 2002, but has had no major oil discoveries over the last five 
years.  In fact, its first well is eight months behind schedule and 
300% over budget (US$80 million has been spent already), but it should 
be completed in December 2007.  Petrobras has the option to negotiate a 
new contract, but he sees no incentive to do so at this time.  Awad 
admitted that he had already recommended to the Petrobras Board that 
the company exit Iran as soon as possible, and that Petrobras' legal 
department had poured over the contracts looking for any loophole to 
pull out before completing the second well that it had already 
committed to.  Unfortunately, the company is legally bound to finish 
the second well, which Awad believes should be complete by July 2008. 
 
¶4.  (C) LeMieux inquired about media reports about Iranian delegations 
traveling to Brasilia for diplomatic and business meetings.  Awad 
explained the Iranians were using the press to make it appear that 
other governments had confidence in their regime.  He emphasized that, 
politics aside, it made no business sense to stay in Iran, and that 
Petrobras had no directive to remain there.  Regarding  Bolivia, Awad 
stated that due to drought, Brazil did not have the hydroelectric power 
for gas generation, and that worldwide all LNG contracts for the next 
four years have already been sold, so Brazil badly needed BoliviaQs gas 
despite increased prices. 
 
¶5.  (C) Awad also admitted to being surprised by the information the 
Ambassador Sobel provided in April 2007 about the Iran Sanctions Act 
(ILSA) (Ref A).  He noted that companies such as Shell, Repsol and 
Statoil have much larger investments in Iran, with hundreds of millions 
of dollars invested in gas plants, (implying that our focus on 
Petrobras was overstated).  He also speculated that like Libya, Iran 
might one day turn a corner and the U.S. might change its policies 
toward Iran as it did towards Libya  Awad went on to emphasize that 
outside Brazil (where the company reaps 90% of its profits) Petrobras' 
decisions on where to drill are solely based on economics rather than 
politics.  Inside Brazil is a different matter. 
 
¶6.  (U) Awad went on to highlight Petrobras as a global model for a 
state-run oil company.  The firm has heavily invested in Nigeria, 
Angola and the United States.  In the U.S. alone, it plans to invest an 
additional US$5 billion over the next five years in exploration and 
production in the Gulf of Mexico and improvements to the Pasadena 
refinery in Houston, TX in which it has a 50%t stake.  Awad highlighted 
Petrobras' commitment to its investments in the United States despite 
considerable challenges presented by hurricanes, difficult geology and 
little return.  Petrobras is  also exploring opportunities in Pakistan, 
India and China. 
 
¶7.   (SBU) LeMieux concluded by expressing hope that he could one day 
recommend Petrobras to the Florida legislature and to Florida investors 
as a terrific company and a sound investment for Floridians. 
 
¶8. (C) Comment:  The GOB consistently states in public, for example 
regarding investments in the Caspian Sea region, that Petrobras is a 
 
RIO DE JAN 00000622  002 OF 002 
 
 
private sector entity that does not take guidance from the GOB.  AwadQs 
statement that Petrobras goes where the Brazilian government directs 
gives the lie to public GOB statements and confirms that the GOB is 
involved in such decision-making at Petrobras.  This is significant 
both because of where Petrobras is investing and because the GOB feels 
it is necessary not to be up- front about its role in directing these 
investment decisions.  End Comment. 
MARTINEZ