08BRASILIA1160
BRAZIL: Airport Administrator INFRAERO Meeting
Tue Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO3163
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1160 2461222
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021222Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2346
INFO RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 6539
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 2657
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 8396UNCLAS BRASILIA 001160 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: Airport Administrator INFRAERO Meeting 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  In a meeting between Ambassador Sobel and the 
head of INFRAERO, Sergio Guadenzi, Guadenzi provided a brief 
overview of civil aviation administration in Brazil, discussed 
airport profitability and privatization proposals, reviewed cargo 
infrastructure, and noted a decision on Guarulhos airport parking 
fees should not be expected before November.  Guadenzi will be in 
Boston September 21-24 for the world conference of airport 
administrators.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Guadenzi reviewed that INFRAERO is responsible for airport 
infrastructure, including runways, aprons, cargo, and passenger and 
cargo loading/unloading.  ANAC is the regulatory agency responsible 
for airline oversight and slot allocation.  DECEA is responsible for 
air traffic control.  The Secretary of Civil Aviation at the 
Ministry of Defense coordinates the work of these three agencies. 
Guadenzi mentioned that there is occasionally some internal 
discussion that perhaps INFRAERO should shift from Ministry of 
Defense to Ministry of Transportation, given its focus on transport 
infrastructure, but these discussions have resulted in nothing 
concrete. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On airport privatization, Guadenzi indicated that there 
remains a great deal of intra-governmental disagreement on the best 
way to proceed.  Some suggest  creating a state-owned company to 
administer airports, but opening up 40 to 49 percent of shares to 
the private sector.  Other parts of the government believe 
straightforward privatization is optimal.  (NOTE:  Brazil has about 
120 total airports; INFRAERO runs 67 of these.  Most of the 
non-INFRAERO airports are quite small.  Some are administered by 
state governments, five or six operate under concession, and a few 
are (such as one in Bahia attached to a hotel) privately owned). 
Complicating privatization consideration, Guadenzi underlined, is 
the reality that, of the 67 airports INFRAERO administers in Brazil, 
only 12 to 15 are profitable.  Brazil subsidizes operations at the 
loss airports with revenue from the ones that generate profit. 
INFRAERO does not want the profitable ones to find buyers while 
INFRAERO would have to continue to operate the money-losers.  He 
referenced the public calls from the governor of Rio de Janeiro to 
privatize Rio's international airport, which is an unattractive 
option from the federal perspective. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Guadenzi noted that BNDES is studying various 
privatization models for government consideration.  He suspected 
BNDES's final recommendation would depend on Embraer's 
recommendation.  (NOTE:  In a separate meeting with BNDES, the bank 
indicated it had already forwarded preliminary studies six months 
ago to Ministry of Defense and had received no reaction/policy 
direction to date, impeding further BNDES progress on developing 
these proposals.  END NOTE). INFRAERO has looked independently at 
airport administration in other countries, concluding there are four 
basic viable models - federal administration, state/county 
administration, state-owned company administration, and concessions. 
Guadenzi added GOB is unlikely to make any decision this year, or 
indeed have an internal proposal for consideration before the end of 
the year. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Turning to the Guarulhos parking fees proposal, ANAC is 
still evaluating the best way to proceed and no decision is expected 
before November.  Guadenzi commented that Sao Paulo has a planning 
problem more than an infrastructure problem that needs to be 
addressed.  Further complicating INFRAERO attempts to make 
infrastructure improvements, the Federal Accounting Court (TCU) just 
stopped work on four airports that had been approved by the PAC 
board.  Using reference prices non-specific to runway specifications 
(eg, for cement), TCU declared contract prices too high and issued a 
work suspension.  INFRAERO developed and sent TCU a month ago 
airport-specification reference prices (using US and EU price 
comparisons), but TCU has not approved yet. Meanwhile, work can not 
proceed. 
 
¶6. (U) On cargo, Guadenzi noted the largest cargo terminals are 
Campinas, Guarulhos, and either Rio or Manuas.  In response to the 
Ambassador's question, Guadenzi acknowledged that Brasilia has the 
space to take more cargo (with two runways, good equipment, and a 
light flight schedule 11 am to 5 pm and none at night), but the lack 
of business located in Brasilia leaves these resources fallow. 
 
¶7.  COMMENT:  The Ambassador was interested in exploring expanding 
cargo operations in Brasilia further and suggested INFRAERO may want 
to reach out to companies such as DHL, Federal Express, UPS and 
others to discuss the potential for hub operations.  Guadenzi noted 
ANAC, who assigns slots, would need to be part of any conversation. 
The meeting also confirmed that final proposals on airport parking 
fees and on possible airport privatization are not imminent. END 
COMMENT. 
 
SOBEL