08BRASILIA1660
BRAZIL: RESPONSE TO CIVIL NUCLEAR WORKING GROUP REQUEST FOR
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
R 240950Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3168
INFO USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
AMCONSUL RECIFEUNCLAS BRASILIA 001660 
 
 
 
DOC PASS MAS/ITA/USDOC Sarah Lopp 
DOC PASS MAC/ITA/USDOC MCameron ADriscoll 
STATE FOR T Marc Humphrey 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG TRGY BEXP BTIO
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: RESPONSE TO CIVIL NUCLEAR WORKING GROUP REQUEST FOR 
PLANS TO EXPAND NUCLEAR ENERGY 
 
REF: STATE 127468 
 
¶1.  THIS IS A RESPONSE TO ACTION REQUEST:  Please see para 3. 
 
¶2.  SUMMARY. Due to its overwhelming dependence on hydro power and 
growing electricity demand, Brazil is looking to diversify its 
energy matrix and increase capacity with plans that include 
expansion of its civil nuclear program.  The program anticipates 
completing construction of its third nuclear reactor - Angra III as 
well as building 4-6 more in the next twenty years.   Scope of 
opportunities for U.S. companies will depend upon Brazil's strategy 
for building and maintaining its portfolio of nuclear reactors. 
There will be fewer opportunities if Brazil decides to build on its 
two latest with German technology (now jointly owned by French 
company, Areva) based reactors.  Self-sufficiency continues to be of 
great concern to Brazil.  This view will impact Brazil's selection 
of a partner for its new reactors.  Partners willing to transfer 
technology, train a wholly Brazilian work force, and provide other 
incentives like fuel enrichment and efficient uranium mining 
technology, would have a competitive edge.  Financing options and 
job creation will also be important factors.  France portends to be 
the biggest competitive threat at this point. END SUMMARY 
 
¶3.  RESPONSES TO CIVIL NUCLEAR SECTOR REPORTING REQUESTS. 
 
Overview of Civil Nuclear Power Program 
--------------------------------------- 
 
-- Are there any plans to expand your country's civil nuclear power 
program (including any associated activities such as uranium mining, 
fuel supply, reactor construction, and spent fuel management)? 
 
Yes - the Government of Brazil (GoB) is expanding its nuclear power 
program in the areas of nuclear reactors, uranium mining, fuel 
supply, and spent fuel management. 
 
Nuclear reactors:  Brazil reportedly plans to build 4-6 reactors by 
2030 with first units expected to begin operations in the 2017-2018 
timeframe. Currently, Brazil has two reactors - Angra I (built by 
Westinghouse of the U.S.) and Angra II (built by Siemens/KWU of 
Germany); they provide about 2.5% of the country's electricity. 
Construction is expected to restart on the third reactor, Angra III, 
with a completion date (recently postponed by one year due to 
licensing issues) of 2015. 
 
Uranium mining:  Brazil fully controls its uranium industry through 
state-owned Industrias Nucleares do Brasil (INB). With the world's 
sixth largest uranium reserve of 500,000 tons, Brazil has enough to 
run 6 reactors for 250 years. Brazil expects to export surplus 
uranium.  Its first priority, however, is to secure enough supplies 
for domestic use.  Brazil plans to double its mining production by 
¶2012.  There are opportunities for U.S. business to provide services 
and technology for more efficient mining. 
 
Fuel supply: Today, Brazil relies partly on foreign companies like 
Urenco (headquartered in the U.K.) to enrich uranium for its civil 
nuclear reactors. Brazil's Resende nuclear fuel facility in the 
State of Rio de Janeiro is expected to produce 20-30 tons of 
enriched uranium per year, or 60% of the country's needs. Resende is 
expected to fulfill all of Brazil's enriched uranium needs once the 
facility is fully operational. 
 
Spent fuel management: Spent fuel is currently stored in multiple 
temporary sites.  As part of Brazil's long term strategy for waste 
storage, Brazil's National Commission on Nuclear Energy (CNEN) will 
launch a new company to handle waste management and plans to begin 
construction of a medium- and low-level waste reprocessing facility 
in 2014.  An above ground repository is expected to be built by 
¶2026. 
 
 
-- For expanding nuclear power programs, describe your country's 
underlying motivations (e.g., current or anticipated power 
shortages, energy security, or other industrial uses, such as 
desalination). 
 
Brazil's current energy matrix is dominated by hydro power which 
generates 84% of the country's electricity.  A growing economy and 
an inability to meet future demand from hydro power has prompted 
Brazil's plan to significantly increase its electricity generation 
capabilities.  Due to Brazil's large supply of uranium, the 
Government of Brazil views nuclear energy as a viable alternative 
energy source for the country's energy matrix. 
 
 
-- If there are plans to expand nuclear power, describe the 
government's role in the financing of its civil nuclear sector.  For 
example, does the government provide subsidies, tax breaks, loan 
guarantees, or other financial incentives?  Are some or all nuclear 
power plants state-owned and operated? Would they seek financing 
from international investment banks and organizations or consortium 
arrangements? 
 
State-owned Eletronuclear currently operates Angra I and Angra II 
plants and will be responsible for Angra III as well.  Financing of 
Angra III is estimated at USD 1.8 billion, and the Brazilian 
government is still seeking a strategic partner to assist in 
financing the reactor. BNDES, Brazil's development bank, is expected 
to play a significant role. 
 
 
-- Describe your country's nuclear regulatory authority.  Is it 
independent of the agency promoting nuclear power and/or operating 
nuclear power plants?  What are its inspection/enforcement powers? 
How large is it (i.e., how many people does it employ)?  Are there 
plans to expand it? 
 
CNEN currently plays the joint role of regulator and promoter.  It 
is independent of nuclear power plant operations which are run by 
the state-owned Eletronuclear.  CNEN has the authority to pass 
regulations, approve licenses, inspect nuclear installations, and to 
enforce its policies. 
 
CNEN President Odair Dias Gongalves has confirmed that the GoB has 
decided to create a separate regulatory agency.  All 400 of CNEN's 
regulatory personnel will be transferred to the new agency which 
will report directly to the Ministry of Science and Technology. 
CNEN will maintain the rest of its 2,300 staff, and will continue to 
oversee the state-owned companies which handle uranium mining and 
enrichment and nuclear power generation.  Additionally, Brazil plans 
to create two additional state-owned companies under CNEN which will 
focus on nuclear and radioactive waste management as well as 
radio-pharmacy. 
 
 
-- Does your country have a domestic nuclear liability law?  If so, 
please summarize its major elements.  In particular, is there a 
minimum level of liability coverage required for operators?  If your 
country is not party to an international liability regime, is there 
any consideration being given to joining one?  If so, which 
international liability regime (Vienna Convention, Paris Convention, 
Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage) is 
being considered. 
 
Brazil has been a signatory of the Convention on Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damage (Vienna Convention) since 1993. 
 
 
-- Is the manufacturing base in your country (including high-tech 
components and heavy industry) involved in nuclear-related products 
or services?  Does it seem likely that any components or contracting 
services for new plants could be sourced locally, or would the 
majority of these need to be imported? 
 
Through technology transfer from previous nuclear plant 
constructions and a home-grown knowledge base, Brazil has some 
capability to manufacture certain components and assemble fuel 
elements.  Angra III (under construction) follows the German model- 
mainly because Brazil purchased the reactor parts in the 1970s and 
have had them sitting in storage for over 30 years. Brazil appears 
to have the domestic manufacturing base and knowledge to finish 
construction of Angra III. For the new plants, however, it is not 
clear what model Brazil will follow and or whether they will require 
an update of their manufacturing/knowledge base including technology 
transfer and foreign sourcing. 
 
 
Brazil's Energy Minister and Deputy Ministers have expressed their 
interest on multiple occasions in sourcing from the United States - 
noting Westinghouse's involvement with the first of the two plants 
currently in service.  Responding to Brazilian government interest, 
DOE has invited Brazil to form a civilian nuclear working group to 
discuss opportunities for future cooperation - a very promising area 
both in policy terms and commercially. 
 
 
-- How extensive is your country's nuclear-trained workforce? Does 
your country have a significant engineering, technician, and 
construction base that could be readily converted into a nuclear 
workforce (e.g., engineers, high precision manufacturing, high 
 
 
quality construction, robust quality assurance programs)?  Will an 
expansion of civil nuclear power require a significant foreign 
workforce? Are programs in place, or being developed, for training 
of domestic personnel (e.g., in skilled trades and nuclear 
regulation)? 
 
Brazil has decades of experience with civil nuclear power - its 
first nuclear power reactor became operational in 1985.  GoB has 
historically pushed for self-reliance in building and running its 
civil nuclear program.  Brazil has made headway towards 
self-sufficiency in operating its two nuclear reactors and the 
construction of the third (Angra III). 
 
If Brazil chooses to continue with its current technology, as 
showcased by Angra II and III, for its additional plants, the need 
for foreign assistance for goods and services would be lower 
compared to a different, more modern technology offering. 
Currently, Brazil is looking at Westinghouse, Atomenergoprom 
(Russia), and Areva (ex-Siemens, now a French company) as potential 
suppliers for its future projects. 
 
 
Opportunities for U.S. Industry 
------------------------------- 
 
-- Does your country have any current or anticipated nuclear-related 
tenders?  If so, please describe the tender/selection process for 
new contracts, its timing, and indicate any U.S. firms considering 
bidding. 
 
Yes, the aforementioned 4-6 reactors plus possible development of 
uranium export industry.  As yet, timing is uncertain. 
Westinghouse is expected to bid.  General Electric (GE) may bid if 
bid specifications do not preclude GE's Boiling Water Reactor (BWR) 
technology.  Brazil's current nuclear reactors are all Pressurized 
Water Reactors (PWR). 
 
Bid selection process is not always transparent in Brazil.  Once 
authorized, Eletronuclear would send the international tender 
announcement for dissemination.  By law, the Brazilian Government 
may not make a distinction between domestic and foreign-owned 
companies. However, in case of a tie in the tendering process, the 
law's implementation regulations give preference to goods and 
services supplied by Brazilian firms. 
 
Brazil is not a signatory of the WTO multilateral Agreement on 
Government Procurement, and therefore, does not necessarily use the 
same procedures as other signatories.  Most government procurement 
processes are open to international competition, either through 
direct bidding, consortia, or imports. However, many of the larger 
bids can become very political and could lead to unilateral single 
source procurement decisions. 
 
 
-- What nuclear sector opportunities do you foresee for U.S. 
industry (e.g., feasibility studies or other consulting services, 
plant construction management, reactor sales, fuel cycle service 
provision, plant operations, waste management, or logistics)? 
 
All of the above. 
 
-- What are the primary companies (domestic and foreign) involved in 
(or considering involvement in) your country's civil nuclear sector? 
 Please include utilities, plant operators, fuel cycle service 
providers, technology vendors, and major construction or consulting 
firms 
 
Westinghouse (U.S.), Atomenergoprom (Russia), and Areva (France) are 
the primary companies expected to bid as technology vendors and 
consultants. 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreign Competitors 
------------------- 
 
-- Are there other nuclear supplier countries engaging your country 
on its civil nuclear power program?  Please provide details wherever 
possible, including on any formal or potential agreements such as 
MOUs, legal frameworks on nuclear commerce, or information exchange 
agreements. 
 
Brazil and France are expected to sign a co-operation agreement on 
nuclear defense and energy on December 23 2008.  France may to be 
 
 
the single biggest competitor to U.S. nuclear commercial interests 
in this area. 
 
In March 2008, Brazil and Argentina announced the formation of a 
bilateral Nuclear Energy Commission (COBEN), and stated their 
intention to create a joint state company (EBEN) that will develop 
compact nuclear reactors and enrich uranium. 
 
In May 1996, Brazil and Canada signed a nuclear cooperation 
agreement.  The Agreement scope includes the supply of information, 
including technology; the supply of nuclear material and equipment; 
technical training; rendering of technical assistance and services; 
and the exploration for and development of uranium resources. 
 
Russia and Brazil are drawing closer on the issue of civilian 
nuclear power technology transfer, especially in the exploration and 
production of uranium. 
 
 
-- Are there any political considerations your country may take into 
account when choosing to cooperate with competing nuclear supplier 
states? 
 
As demonstrated by recent rhetoric by Brazil asserting its political 
autonomy from the United States, Brazil may lean towards non-U.S. 
technology as a show of independence.  However, more pragmatic 
aspects like technology transfer, financing, long term 
self-sufficiency and job creation are expected to take precedence. 
 
 
KUBISKE 
 
 
NNNN