08PARIS501
LATIN AMERICA: FRENCH SHARE SENSE OF POSITIVE
Tue Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO7732
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHFR #0501/01 0780843
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 180843Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2296
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 0488
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0547
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 0495
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0048C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/08/2018 
TAGS: PREL PTER PHUM FR CO EC BR CU
SUBJECT: LATIN AMERICA: FRENCH SHARE SENSE OF POSITIVE 
TRENDS, RETAIN SINGULAR FOCUS ON COLOMBIA-VENEZUELA HOSTAGE 
SITUATION 
 
Classified By: POL/MC Josiah Rosenblatt for Reasons 14.(B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY. PDAS Craig Kelly reviewed Latin American 
priorities with MFA PDAS for Latin America Jean-Marc Laforet 
and DAS for Central America Jose Gomez on March 6.  They 
concurred with Kelly,s assessment that the democratic 
governance and regional cooperation were improving across 
the region despite a negative press focus on the challenges 
posed by actors such as Venezuelan President Chavez.  Laforet 
described French policy in Latin America as built around 
"strategic partnerships," as with Brazil, while noting the 
disproportionate role played by the Ingrid Betancourt hostage 
issue in Colombia.  He described Chavez as the one who can 
win Betancourt,s freedom and asserted a French view that 
Venezuela remains a democracy, despite Chavez,s heavy-handed 
tactics.  Laforet cited the referendum failure as the best 
example of this.  On Cuba, Laforet noted France supports a 
democratic transition, but considered this unlikely before 
Fidel Castro leaves the political arena.  Kelly outlined 
Chavez,s anti-democratic actions in Venezuela and urged 
France to support a democratic transition in Cuba.  Comment: 
This dialogue on Latin America revealed an understanding of 
views on broad regional trends while sharpening some 
differences regarding Venezuela and Cuba.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  (C)  On March 6, PDAS Kelly reviewed the positive trends 
in Latin America of the past two decades with  Jean-Marc 
Laforet, MFA PDAS-equivalent for Latin American, and Jose 
Gomez, DAS-equivalent for Central America.  PDAS Kelly noted 
the U.S. is optimistic about the future for the region, 
despite a press focus on the challenges posed by Venezuelan 
President Chavez.  Most countries in the region are taking 
steps to open up their economies and strengthen democratic 
institutions to improve the lives of real people.  These 
developments don't make headlines but ultimately they 
constitute the most important story in the region.  Kelly 
explained U.S. thinking on Cuba transition, Colombia, and 
Venezuela.  Laforet expressed general agreement noting France 
has observed political and economic improvements over the 
last 20 years.  In contrast to the 1980,s, today France is 
not greatly concerned about the stability of Latin America. 
To underscore the point that security issues no longer 
dominate the regional agenda, Laforet said France will focus 
on energy, climate change, and the socio-economic situation 
as priorities during the May EU-Latin America Summit. 
Laforet described French policy in Latin America as anchored 
by "strategic partnerships" such as the one recently advanced 
with Brazil by President Sarkozy, while asserting that the 
Ingrid Betancourt hostage situation disproportionately 
dominates French policy in the region. 
 
 
CHAVEZ 
------ 
¶3.  (C) The French view Venezuela as a democracy despite the 
Chavez,s heavy handed tactics.  Citing his high-profile 
failure to win last fall,s referendum as an example of 
democracy's resilience in Venezuela, Laforet and Gomez 
portrayed Chavez as a "Bonapartist" leader who rejects checks 
and balances that hinder his direct dialogue with the people. 
 Laforet cast some blame for the radicalization of Venezuela 
on the opposition's decision to boycott elections, leaving 
Chavez a clear field.  On bilateral U.S.-Venezuelan 
relations, Laforet expressed concern that Chavez,s 
anti-American rhetoric was gaining unhelpful resonance in 
Latin America.  Finally, Laforet noted that in a private 
conversation with President Sarkozy, Chavez 
indicated he was amenable to improving relations with the 
United States.  Chavez then went public with explosive and 
counter-productive remarks. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Laforet lauded Chavez's mediation efforts on 
hostages and said France believes Chavez is the one to secure 
Betancourt,s release.  He expressed frustration with Uribe's 
decision to end Chavez's role in hostage negotiations and 
noted Uribe treated Chavez badly by announcing the end of 
mediation to the press before notifying Chavez.  Drawing 
parallels between the two leaders, Laforet observed both 
Chavez and Uribe enjoyed strong connections to their 
electorates. 
 
¶5.  (C)  PDAS Kelly observed that Chavez's authoritarian and 
anti-democratic actions have eroded Venezuelans, freedoms. 
While the United States has refrained from getting into a 
shouting match with Chavez, we have made clear our concern 
for the restrictions on democratic space in Venezuela. 
Clearly, concern is rising within Venezuela, as the 
 
PARIS 00000501  002 OF 002 
 
 
referendum made clear.  Meanwhile,  President Uribe in 
Colombia enjoys 80 percent approval ratings, in large part 
because he has brought about dramatic improvements in 
security, prosperity and human rights through his campaign 
against FARC terrorism and all forms of political violence. 
 
THE FARC 
-------- 
¶6.  (C)  Laforet explained French willingness to consider a 
wide range of options to obtain the release of Betancourt as 
the result of the extreme pressure coming directly from 
President Sarkozy.  Laforet described Chavez' suggestion that 
the FARC be taken off the terrorist list as "clumsy." 
Suggesting that some political status could be helpful in 
moving negotiations forward.  Larforet said France is looking 
to some sort of compromise to acknowledge the FARC without 
giving it international recognition. 
 
¶7.  (C) Kelly noted U.S. policy placed the blame for the 
hostage-taking squarely on the FARC,s shoulders.  We have 
great sympathy for all hostages, and want to prevent future 
hostage taking.  Meanwhile we strongly support Uribe,s 
campaign against the FARC.  Noting that the FARC had abused 
the peace efforts of previous Colombian presidents, Kelly 
pointed out that Uribe's tough stance has achieved dramatic 
improvements in the security situation - as Secretary Rice's 
recent trip to Medellin with a congressional delegation made 
clear.  As a result, the economy is growing and Colombia 
enjoys growing integration in global trade.  We want to 
encourage these trends.  That is why we are pressing for 
congressional ratification of our Free Trade Agreement with 
Colombia.  Laforet acknowledged Colombia's progress and said 
the French government supports Uribe,s security policy. 
 
 
CUBA-French Support Release of Prisoners and Democratic Change 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
¶8.  (C)  PDAS Kelly stated this was a historic opportunity 
for Cubans to determine the future of their country; now is 
the time for democracies around the world to support the 
Cuban people in their desire for real change.  Cuba's future 
is for the Cubans, not outsiders, to determine, but the 
people need the freedom to exercise choices.  Kelly pressed 
France to support the liberation of political prisoners and 
the movement toward democratic institutions.  Laforet agreed 
the democracies should strive to halt the 
regime's human rights abuses, but Laforet lamented that 
direct pressure does not seem to work.  The international 
community should consider "appropriate tactics" to attain our 
objectives.  Laforet noted that Raul Castro might be an 
engine for some change in Cuba, but a real transition  was 
not possible until Fidel left the scene. 
 
 
BRAZIL 
------ 
¶9.  (C)  On the broader French policy towards Latin America, 
Laforet said France is building its policy in the region 
around "strategic partnerships" such as the one advanced by 
President Sarkozy's February 12 meeting with Brazilian 
President Lula da Silva.  He added Brazilian support is 
important to address many international challenges and that 
France supports according Brazil its "appropriate place" in 
international institutions such as an expanded G8 and UN 
Security Council.  Laforet added that Brazil is well placed 
to mediate between Colombia and Venezuela.  Citing the U.S.'s 
good relations with Brazil, 
PDAS Kelly agreed that Brazilian President Lula is playing a 
constructive role in various regional crises.  This is good 
for the hemisphere.  The United States has made a major 
commitment to upgrade its relationship with Brazil in many 
concrete areas, including the economy, biofuels, culture and 
education. 
 
¶10.  (U)  PDAS Kelly cleared this message. 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
 
STAPLETON