08PHNOMPENH96
CAMBODIA:  MARCH IN HONOR OF SLAIN UNION LEADER PROGRESSES
Wed Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO8358
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0096/01 0230119
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 230119Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9295
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000096 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, DRL, DRL/ILCSR--MITTELHAUSER 
LABOR FOR LI 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM ELAB CB
 
SUBJECT:  CAMBODIA:  MARCH IN HONOR OF SLAIN UNION LEADER PROGRESSES 
SMOOTHLY 
 
REF:  A.  Phnom Penh 91 (Chinese Threats Scuttle Darfur Ceremony) 
 
 ¶B.  07 Phnom Penh 586 (Guilty Verdict Upheld in Controversial Labor 
Leader Murder Trial) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  On January 22, about 100 union leaders, rights 
activists, workers and teachers marched in honor of the fourth 
anniversary of the assassination of union leader Chea Vichea.  In 
speeches at the event, union leaders, opposition politicians, and 
human rights activists urged the release of the two men convicted of 
the crime, who are widely believed to be innocent.  They also called 
on the King to bestow the title "national hero" on the slain union 
leader.  After denying permission for anniversary marches in the 
three previous years, this year the Phnom Penh Municipality 
authorized the march and local police even directed traffic to 
facilitate it.  When contrasted with this weekend's showdown over 
the Darfur rally, the picture of political space in Cambodia is a 
complex one, with some highly critical events allowed to go forward 
while others encounter substantial government opposition.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) On January 22, 2004, FTUWKC president Chea Vichea, who 
pushed for better working conditions for Cambodian garment workers, 
including payment of a living wage, was shot dead while reading a 
newspaper at a roadside newsstand in Phnom Penh.  The Embassy and 
other international organizations condemned the killing and urged 
the Cambodian government to bring the assassins to justice.  Two 
men, Born Samnang and Sok Sam Oeun, were arrested days after the 
shooting, convicted, and sentenced to 20 years in prison.  Both the 
criminal investigation and the court hearings were denounced by the 
international community as lacking any credibility. In April 2007, 
the Appeals Court upheld the guilty verdicts, ignoring pleas from 
the international community and revered former King Sihanouk to 
release the two men and find the real killers. 
 
March Proceeds Peacefully, Leaders Appeal for Release of Convicted 
Killers 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  (U) To mark the fourth anniversary of Chea Vichea's 
assassination, about 100 people marched from the headquarters of the 
Free Trade Union of Workers of the Kingdom of Cambodia (FTUWKC) to 
the newsstand where the union leader was killed.  Marchers laid 
flowers at the site of the killing and made speeches, while police 
directed traffic to allow the march to proceed.  Chea Mony, FTUWKC 
president and brother of Chea Vichea, urged the release of two men 
convicted of his brother's death, saying that they were wrongly 
convicted and demanding that the true perpetrators be brought to 
justice.  Parents of the two men also appealed for their sons' 
release. 
 
¶4.  (U) Chea Mony also called on the King to bestow the title 
"national hero" on the slain union leader, citing his work in 
serving workers and fighting for democracy and social justice. 
Opposition leader Sam Rainsy also urged the King to grant the title, 
contrasting Vichea's genuine contributions with the illusory ones of 
the country's current leaders.  (Note:  Rainsy is referring to Prime 
Minister Hun Sen, National Assembly President Chea Sim, and Senate 
Chairman Chea Sim, who received new honorific titles from the King 
in October 2007.  End Note.) 
 
March Authorized by City:  Fourth Time's a Charm? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5.  (U) Despite having banned three previous anniversary marches, 
this year the Phnom Penh Municipality not only approved the march, 
but assigned police officers to direct traffic around the 
procession.  In previous years, the city had denied permission for 
the march, but demonstrators went ahead with the event anyway. 
Prior marches always proceeded peacefully, with embassy observers 
and human rights organizations on hand to monitor events, though in 
2006 FTUWKC leaders were summoned to City Hall and chastised for 
their actions.  Just as organizers defied previous orders from the 
city not to march, this year they ignored the Municipality's written 
admonishment not to allow speeches during the event. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment:  Gauging political openness and space for 
political freedom is increasingly tricky in Cambodia.  While this 
weekend's confrontation with police over the Darfur rally showed the 
Cambodian government unwilling to allow one form of politically 
motivated, peaceful assembly, this march just two days later showed 
marked improvement in the government's handling of the anniversary 
over past years.  The difference has little to do with the overt 
sensitivity of the event--after all, highlighting two men wrongly 
convicted of a very public crime while the real killers go free 
would seem to be far more sensitive than honoring the memories of 
genocide victims--and everything to do with outside pressures 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000096  002 OF 002 
 
 
brought to bear on the government.  While the RGC may buckle to 
pressure from China, as it did in the Darfur event, when left to its 
own devices it can also make the courageous choice to allow free 
assembly.  End Comment. 
 
MUSSOMELI