08PHNOMPENH95
U.S.-CAMBODIA BILATERAL DIALOGUE STRENGTHENS TIES,
Tue Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO7615
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0095/01 0221053
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221053Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/USCINCPAC HONOLULU HI//JC/J3/J4/J45/J5/FPA// PRIORITY
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 2263
RHHMUNS/COMSOCPAC HONOLULU HI//SOJ32 PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 PHNOM PENH 000095 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR D, P, EAP/MLS, DRL, S/WCI, AND DRL/ILCSR -- 
MITTELHAUSER, EEB/TPP/ABT -- CLEMENTS, EEB/IFD/OIA, 
EEP/TPP/BTA, EEB/TPP/MTA, EEB/TPP/IPE, EEB/ESC/IEC -- KOPP, 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR -- FOR BISBEE AND WEISEL, AND 
USAID 
BANGKOK FOR USAID -- KISSINGER, FCS -- BACHER 
HANOI FOR FCS -- NAY 
HO CHI MINH CITY FOR FCS -- MARCHAK AND LE 
GENEVA FOR USTR -- PALLGEIER 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/OTEXA -- D'ANDREA, ITA/MAC -- MIKALIS 
LABOR FOR ILAB -- LI 
USAID FOR ANE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PGOV KJUS PHUM PTER KWMN PREL BM CB
SUBJECT: U.S.-CAMBODIA BILATERAL DIALOGUE STRENGTHENS TIES, 
BROADENS RELATIONSHIP 
 
REF: A. PHNOM PENH 41 SCENESETTER FOR DAS MARCIEL VISIT 
     ¶B. 07 PHNOM PENH 1421 CAMBODIA: TIP INTERIM 
        ASSESSMENT REPORT 
     ¶C. 07 PHNOM PENH 422 ECCC AND OSJI 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Deputy Assistant Secretary Scot Marciel 
led U.S. participation in a successful senior-level 
U.S.-Cambodia bilateral dialogue hosted by the Royal 
Government of Cambodia Ministry of Foreign Affairs January 
¶17.  Both sides opened with statements of enthusiasm for 
strengthening ties between the governments and citizens of 
our two countries, and for broadening the bilateral 
relationship to cover new areas of cooperation and 
collaboration, such as Cambodia's status as a candidate 
country with the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC).  The 
Ambassador, Deputy Chief of Mission, USAID Mission Director 
and Defense Attache also represented the U.S. side of the 
dialogue.  Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs Ouch Borith 
headed the Cambodian delegation made up of approximately 25 
Secretaries of State and Office Directors from the Ministries 
 
SIPDIS 
of Foreign Affairs, Defense, Interior, Commerce, Economy and 
Finance, and from the National Election Committee, Human 
Rights Committee, National Petroleum Authority, and the 
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC).  The 
topics discussed included Cambodia's prospects for meeting 
MCC threshold goals; the Khmer Rouge Tribunal; human rights 
issues, elections, trafficking in persons; mil-to-mil 
relations and counter-terrorism cooperation; ASEAN and Burma; 
and economic and trade issues, along with management of oil 
and gas revenues. End Summary. 
 
A Positive Stage Set for Bilateral Dialogue 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On January 17, Deputy Assistant Secretary Scot 
Marciel led U.S. participation in a successful senior-level 
U.S.-Cambodia bilateral dialogue.  In a short pre-meeting in 
advance of the bilateral dialogue, Acting Minister of Foreign 
Affairs Ouch Borith previewed major themes and his opening 
remarks.  Ouch Borith conveyed the best wishes of Foreign 
Minister Hor Namhong, who was in Japan and therefore could 
not chair the bilat.  He noted such visits by U.S. officials, 
and especially this first bilat, reflected the increasingly 
good relationship between the U.S. and Cambodia.  He extended 
thanks from the people of Cambodia for the U.S.'s invaluable 
bilateral assistance and looked forward to further 
cooperation.  Ouch Borith noted that approximately 25 
Cambodian officials would participate in the bilat, which was 
a sign of how the Cambodian side sees this as an important 
opportunity for engagement.  Ouch Borith referred to the 
government's strategic plans and emphasized the importance 
placed by the RGC on fighting corruption and reforming public 
administration.  Ouch Borith noted that the organic law 
creating new bodies at the provincial and district levels has 
just been passed.  Marciel also noted increased 
U.S.-Cambodian cooperation and shared interests.  He noted 
that there was a sense of positive momentum in Cambodia which 
had an impact on how Cambodia is viewed, including by the 
business community. 
 
Cambodia Shows Interest in the MCC 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs Ouch Borith 
stated that Cambodia is "very interested" in the MCC.  He 
stated that MCC eligibility requirements are consistent with 
the RGC National Development Strategy, a plan outlining 
policies and strategies for development including growth, 
employment, equity, and efficiency that will lead to 
reductions in poverty, economic development, transfer of 
power from the central government to the grassroots level, 
improvements in health to reduce child and maternal mortality 
rates, and combat disease.  Marciel stated that this year 
Cambodia met four out of 17 policy indicators needed to make 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000095  002 OF 007 
 
 
Cambodia MCC-eligible. The Ambassador added that most of 
Cambodia's scores for the remaining unmet indicators are 
close to meeting MCC criteria and that, with focused effort, 
Cambodia has the potential to achieve MCC goals over the 
course of the next several years. 
 
Integrity of KRT Shapes U.S., World View of Cambodia 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) ECCC Director of Administration Sean Visoth 
detailed the many successes of the ECCC to date including the 
adoption of the Court's Internal Rules, and arrests, 
detention and ongoing prosecution of five Khmer Rouge 
leaders.  He stated that the ECCC is small compared to other 
tribunals with 200 national staff and 100 international staff 
and that the Cambodian side of the budget is low -- around 
USD 20 million per year.  However, the Cambodian side of the 
ECCC will run out of funds at the end of March 2008.  Sean 
Visoth acknowledged there have been allegations of corruption 
through salary kickbacks that have damaged the public image 
of the ECCC (Ref C).  He stated that no kind of corruption or 
extortion will be allowed at the ECCC and that he will take 
action against those who engage in corrupt activities at the 
Court.  Marciel reiterated previous embassy statements that 
the U.S. has a significant interest in the conduct of the KRT 
and believes that the KRT is important for Cambodia.  For the 
next several years, world views of Cambodia will be shaped by 
the KRT.  Marciel stated that the ability of the U.S. to 
support the ECCC -- through U.S. congressional appropriation 
-- would depend on the independence of the Court and whether 
the Court can meet international standards of justice.  Both 
Marciel and the Ambassador reiterated U.S. support for the 
UNSYG appointment of a special advisor to the ECCC.  Sean 
Visoth responded that Deputy Prime Minister Sok An had 
received, via the MFA, a letter from the UN regarding the 
Special Advisor.  Talks are taking place in New York and in 
Phnom Penh, the results of which the RGC will share with the 
U.S.  The Ambassador suggested that, given the timing, it 
might be helpful for the RGC to invite a senior official from 
the UN to Phnom Penh to facilitate direct communication. 
Sean Visoth replied that the RGC wanted such a visit to be 
fruitful. 
 
Human Rights: Mob Violence Down But What About Labor 
Killings, Land, and Tim Sakhorn? 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Director General of the Cambodian Human Rights 
Committee Om Yin Tieng stated that there are four government 
human rights institutions including the human rights 
committees of the National Assembly, the Senate, and the RGC 
Human Rights Committee, of which he is director general, and 
an institution made up of 50 human rights NGOs that advise 
the government (Note: It is not clear if Om Yin Tieng was 
referring to the Cambodian Human Rights Action Committee, an 
NGO umbrella organization made up of 22 human rights NGOs, or 
to a planned national human rights committee that has not yet 
been established. End note.)  Om Yin Tieng claimed RGC 
success in decreasing the incidence of mob killings and 
vigilante justice over the past two years:  five cases in 
2006 and four in 2007 (Note: NGOs reported to the embassy six 
cases in 2006 and five in 2007.  End note.)  Marciel stated 
that NGOs in Washington have raised concerns about unsolved 
killings of labor activists (Note: FTUWKC leader Hy Vuthy in 
February 2007, and FTUWKC leader Chea Vichea and FTU leader 
Ros Sovannareth in 2004.  End note.), Cambodians being forced 
off their land, sometimes violently, and the recent 
deportation of Khmer Kampuchea Krom monk Tim Sakhorn.  Om Yin 
Tieng stated that RGC investigations into the labor killings 
indicated that they were not political killings, and that he 
would provide to the embassy complete reports on the RGC 
investigations.  On land disputes, he stated that of all 
eviction cases in which persons were not renters and were 
therefore "eligible for compensation", the RGC had provided 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000095  003 OF 007 
 
 
"resolution or compensation" to the persons removed from land 
in the form of cash compensation or resettlement site 
relocation. He stated that if the embassy has specific 
questions on particular cases, he will provide detailed 
information on those cases.  He also stated willingness to 
provide the results of a government investigation into the 
disappearance and deportation of Tim Sakhorn.  Marciel 
encouraged the RGC to make progress on Cambodia's human 
rights issues, and the rule of law as it relates to human 
rights; such efforts would help the U.S. fully expand 
cooperation with Cambodia. 
 
Peaceful, Well-Organized Elections 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Secretary General of the National Election 
Committee (NEC) Tep Nytha provided general statistics on the 
April 2007 commune council election, October 2007 voter 
registration, and the voter deletion lists (form 1025) in the 
runup to the 2008 national election.  He also sought funds 
for the NEC budget (Ref A).  On the voter deletion lists, Tep 
Nytha said the current NEC list included 580,000 names.  He 
said the NEC seeks to strengthen cooperation with the RGC to 
ensure social order that will provide favorable conditions 
for all parties to participate in the election process; to 
gain participation by party agents, NGOs, and IOs to monitor 
the election process for transparency; to increase public 
education and awareness of the election process; to 
strengthen the capacity of election authorities; and to 
improve the technical capability of the NEC.  Marciel 
congratulated Cambodia on its peaceful, well-organized 
commune council elections last April while expressing concern 
that legitimate voters are not disenfranchised through NEC's 
"clean up" process. 
 
Strong RGC Commitment on TIP 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Speaking on behalf of Ministry of Interior Deputy 
Commissioner General Neth Savoeun, Director for International 
Relations of the Ministry of Interior (MOI) Police General 
Por Phak described recent RGC efforts demonstrating an 
increased commitment to combat TIP.  He provided statistics 
on TIP arrests, and information about the structure of the 
National Task Force (Ref B). Por Phak made note of the recent 
National Assembly passage of a comprehensive TIP law, 
acknowledging the next challenge -- for which the RGC is 
already making preparations -- is dissemination of the law. 
The Ambassador stated that Cambodia has made commendable 
progress since it was on Tier 3 in 2005, and that the U.S. 
will continue to watch Cambodia's TIP progress closely.  He 
applauded the fact that, unlike some other countries, 
Cambodia has never denied that it has a TIP problem.  Ouch 
Borith reiterated the RGC's strong commitment to tackle TIP 
and thanked the U.S. for assistance to combat TIP through 
activities such as the USAID-funded C-TIP (Counter 
Trafficking in Persons) program. 
 
RGC Welcomes U.S. Military Presence 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Marciel took the lead on the mil-to-mil topic, 
noting that he had been struck by the number of important 
military-linked visits.  He named PACOM Admiral Keating, 
PACOM Admiral Willard, and Acting PM A/S Mull, as well as the 
very successful November visit by the USS Essex.  He said the 
U.S. was pleased with the developing relationship, which was 
important.  He mentioned Cambodia's contribution to demining 
in Sudan and its offer to volunteer elsewhere.  He welcomed 
Cambodia's signing up to GPOI and DRMS.  He extended an 
invitation for Cambodia to participate in CARAT as an 
observer.  Ministry of Defense Secretary of State Neang Phat 
agreed that the relationship has improved in the last few 
years, and specifically noted military/humanitarian 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000095  004 OF 007 
 
 
coopration.  He recalled the 2006 PACOM assessment as being 
the first step in the evolving relationship.  He said the 
ship visits prove to the Cambodian people, as well as the 
RGC, that cooperation is strong.  He also noted Cambodia's 
contribution to peacekeeping and the U.S.-Cambodia work on 
building up a counter-terrorism unit. 
 
Cambodia Urges Greater U.S. Involvement in ASEAN 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) MFA Secretary of State Kao Kim Hourn opened 
discussion on ASEAN by referring to Cambodia's eagerness for 
a U.S.-ASEAN summit, and stated that Cambodia looks forward 
to participation in the next U.S.-ASEAN dialogue to be held 
in Singapore in May.  Kao Kim Hourn reiterated support for a 
U.S. Ambassador for ASEAN Affairs, noting Cambodia's own 
growing role in ASEAN, exemplified by the fact it would soon 
ratify the ASEAN Charter.  He requested U.S. consideration to 
accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast 
Asia.  He noted Cambodia supported ASEAN's request that the 
U.S. and other P-5 nations accede to the Southeast Asian 
Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (SEANWFZ) treaty, stating that 
China was positively considering accession.  He praised U.S. 
participation in the Asean Regional Forum (ARF) -- the only 
security forum in the Asia region -- noting Cambodia's 
support for continued U.S. involvement.  Marciel commended 
Cambodia's growing role in ASEAN.  He noted U.S. pleasure 
with our enhanced partnership with ASEAN through the funding 
of its secretariat, training opportunities, and promotion of 
ASEAN economic integration.  He reaffirmed the U.S. desire 
for a U.S.-ASEAN summit but explained that it is hard 
currently to imagine an acceptable formula. 
 
Cambodia's Position on Burma 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Kao Kim Hourn confirmed that the topic of Burma 
dominated the recent ASEAN summit in Singapore and stated 
that ASEAN leaders have reiterated that there is a need for 
Burma to continue working with the "good offices" of the UN 
to open a dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and for the regime 
to lift restrictions on ASSK; work for national 
reconciliation; and transition to democracy.  The RGC 
believes the UN should play a humanitarian role in Burma. He 
repeated Cambodia's position that sanctions will only serve 
to hurt the people of Burma and that the Burmese government 
"has resources" enabling the regime not to be hurt by 
sanctions.  Kao Kim Hourn stated that Cambodia supports the 
designation of only one UN special envoy to Burma, not the 
proposed appointment of a second East Asia summit special 
envoy.  Finally, he stated that the RGC would be open to a 
visit to Cambodia by Senior General Than Shwe if the RGC 
"thinks it will help".  Marciel expressed appreciation for 
Cambodia's efforts on the Burma situation.  He also expressed 
disappointment that the Burmese government has failed to make 
positive developments over the past few months and that the 
regime continues to drive downward the economy, and health 
and education standards.  Marciel reiterated U.S. support for 
UN Special Envoy Gambari's initiatives. 
 
U.S.-Cambodia Ties Exemplified By Solid Trade Relationship 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Ministry of Commerce Director General Sok Sopeak 
highlighted growth in the bilateral trade relationship: the 
volume of U.S.-Cambodia trade has increased steadily over the 
past 15 years from USD 16 million in 1993 to USD 857 million 
in 2000 to USD 2.2 billion in 2006.  (Comment: Due to 
differences in measurement techniques, these statistics may 
differ from U.S. figures, nonetheless, U.S. investment seems 
to be on the rise.  End comment.)  U.S. investment in 
Cambodia has increased from USD 333 million in 2004 to USD 
830 million in 2005 to USD 4.341 billion in 2006.  While 
U.S.-Cambodia trade remains solid, Sok Sopeak compared 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000095  005 OF 007 
 
 
Cambodian export growth -- mostly exports of garments -- of 
20 percent from 2005 to 2006 to a slowed 10 percent from 2006 
to 2007.  Cambodia worries about a continued slowdown due to 
the impending expiration of U.S. safeguards on Chinese 
textiles, and Vietnam's increasing competitiveness since 
becoming a WTO member last year. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Sok Sopeak repeated past RGC requests that the 
U.S. decrease duties on Cambodian exports to the U.S. and 
specifically urged passage of pending legislation (New 
Partnership for Development Act in the House and the TRADE 
Act in the Senate) that would do so.  Cambodian exports make 
up only 0.1 percent of total U.S. imports but duties levied 
total approximately USD 150 million to 180 million per year 
-- similar to what is paid by the French on a much larger 
volume of goods, Sok Sopeak said.  In response to 
encouragement from Marciel to diversify its exports, Sok 
Sopeak stated that Cambodia is trying to find ways to 
diversify its industrial base beyond the garment sector. 
However, that will take time and for now garments remain 
critical for Cambodia's economy. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Sok Sopeak continued with his message of trade 
cooperation hailing the U.S.-Cambodia Trade and Investment 
Framework Agreement (TIFA) signed in July 2006 as a milestone 
for Cambodia.  Sok Sopeak noted Cambodia's accomplishments 
since the TIFA signing: passage and implementation of 
legislation required under Cambodia's WTO accession 
agreement; drafting of 12 laws and 10 regulations or 
subdecrees to liberalize and facilitate trade; training for 
trade and investment capacity building; and working to 
harmonize donor assistance via a mechanism called the Trade 
SWAp (Sector Wide Approach).  Sok Sopeak encouraged USAID to 
support its efforts via the Trade SWAp and highlighted 
specifically the need to develop Cambodia's human resources. 
Sok Sopeak also highlighted continuing Cambodian engagement 
on the Doha round negotiations saying that Commerce Minister 
Cham Prasidh would lead a Cambodian delegation to next 
month's WTO meeting in Lesotho and, at the encouragement of 
USTR, would urge LDCs to support efforts to break the 
deadlock currently stalling the round. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Marciel congratulated Cambodia on its ambitious 
trade program stating that this is why Cambodia's economy has 
been growing.  He restated U.S. delight with the proceedings 
at the two TIFA rounds in Cambodia last year, and expressed 
appreciation for the RGC's seriousness and openness on 
matters of trade and investment.  He stated that Cambodia's 
economy may continue to build its own momentum, and that more 
exports to the U.S. may come with increasing growth.  Marciel 
emphasized that U.S. companies will invest where environments 
are stable.  Cambodia's progress in the areas of economic 
growth, elections, the KRT, and anti-corruption would add to 
positive perceptions of Cambodia and may eventually attract 
the interest of more investors. 
 
Expectations for Future Oil and Gas Production 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Reiterating Marciel's bilateral dialogue opening 
statement, Cambodian National Petroleum Authority Director 
General Te Doung Dara stated his impression that the U.S. 
wants to see a successful and strong Cambodia, and that 
perhaps this is the right time for the U.S. to provide more 
assistance to Cambodia.  On oil and gas, he stated that if 
everything is agreed upon regarding the fiscal terms of 
extracting oil and gas, petroleum revenues are expected to 
come online in 2010 or 2011.  In the meantime, Cambodia needs 
to tackle legal, technical, financial and transparency 
issues.  He acknowledged that the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative is one tool in approaching the issue 
of resource and revenue management and that, to address the 
issue, Cambodia will choose the best mode for Cambodians. 
Cambodia is still working out the commercial terms of 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000095  006 OF 007 
 
 
agreements with CNPA and Chevron through the Ministry of 
Economy and Finance.  He reiterated RGC awareness that oil 
and gas commercial agreements require a "win-win" framework 
permitting both business viability and a "good government 
take".  Te Doung Dara stated that some of the RGC targets for 
the oil and gas industry are: efficiency in oil and gas 
production; boosting economic growth; domestic energy 
security; and environmental protection.  Investing in its 
people is a high Cambodian priority, he said, quipping that 
Cambodia wanted to turn the "black gold into the gold of 
human resource."  Marciel praised Cambodia for giving thought 
to both the positives -- revenues -- that oil production will 
bring Cambodia and the negatives -- difficulties in managing 
the revenues.  He restated that U.S. interest lies in 
ensuring that Cambodia gains resources from oil and uses it 
effectively to help the Cambodian people. 
 
Economic Roundup 
---------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Ministry of Economy and Finance Secretary General 
Hang Chuon Naron provided an update on Cambodia's economic 
position stating that the current figure of 9.6 percent for 
Cambodia's 2007 growth is expected to be revised upwards. 
Cambodia estimates the country's 2007 GDP at USD 8.4 billion 
and per capita GDP at USD 586.  The RGC expects its per 
capita GDP to reach USD 1,000 by 2015, possibly higher 
depending on oil and gas revenues.  Hang Chuon Naron quoted a 
recent World Bank statistic that Cambodia's poverty rate had 
decreased from 35 percent in 2004 to 31 percent in 2007.  He 
stated that in 2007 several sectors of the economy 
experienced growth: agriculture by 4 percent, tourism by 10 
percent, garments by 10 percent, the financial sector by 22 
percent, and construction by 4 percent (but slowing).  He 
stated that government revenue increased by 1.5 percent of 
the GDP due to implementing public financial management. The 
2007 government budget increased by 3.1 percent of GDP, while 
the overall budget deficit decreased by 1.5 percent of GDP. 
He quoted Prime Minister Hun Sen's recent remarks that the 
cash in the RGC coffers is 200 times larger in 2008 than it 
was prior to 2003 (both election years).  Private sector 
credit increased by 51.6 percent to about USD 1 billion. 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  Hang Chuon Naron stated that one of the RGC's 
economic objectives has been to stabilize its exchange rate 
at a time of increased investment and capital inflow.  In 
2007 the National Bank of Cambodia accumulated international 
reserves of about USD 600 million reaching a total of USD 1.8 
billion, increased from USD 100 million in 1994 and USD 1 
billion in 2006.  Inflation was relatively low at 6 percent 
despite increases in fuel prices over the year.  Hang Chuon 
Naron stated the country's economic health is partially a 
response to improved economic management due to a public 
finance management project piloted last year which will be 
implemented gradually.  The RGC is also looking to 
computerize its budget by 2010.  The RGC began tax reforms in 
2007 that resulted in a widened tax base and increased tax 
receipts of 45 percent. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) On oil and gas revenues, Hang Chuon Naron stated 
that it would be problematic if the public sees an increase 
in Cambodia's revenues but expenditures do not solve equity 
issues.  There was a need for improved social expenditures in 
rural and poor areas, on programs that address poverty 
problems, and investments in infrastructure.  He stated that 
the National Assembly had recently adopted a Law on Customs 
and that the Customs Department is working on drafting 
implementing regulations for the law.  He stated that the 
MOEF issued two of the implementing regulations in December, 
with the final regulations already submitted to the MOEF. 
The RGC has been working with the World Bank on customs 
automation and they are currently finalizing a system 
prototype that they plan to deploy in Sihanoukville as a 
pilot site starting April 1. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000095  007 OF 007 
 
 
 
Comment: Bilateral Dialogue Results 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶17.  (SBU) Marciel initiated closing remarks for the 
bilateral dialogue stating that he is pleased that the U.S. 
and Cambodia are able to exchange views and find common 
ground that will contribute to closer ties between our 
countries and people.  Cambodia has been an enthusiastic 
partner on most of the topics of discussion, and leaves the 
door open to explore more issues and areas of cooperation in 
the future.  The bilateral dialogue was successful in 
engaging Cambodia on our most important bilateral issues. 
MUSSOMELI