08SAOPAULO468
BLUE LANTERN POST-SHIPMENT CHECK ON LICENSE 050073566
Thu Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO5594
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #0468/01 2481700
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041700Z SEP 08
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8494
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 9631
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 4180
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8833
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 1690
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 3159
RHEHNSC/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SAO PAULO 000468 
 
FOR PM/DTCC-BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC CO BR
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN POST-SHIPMENT CHECK ON LICENSE 050073566 
 
REF: STATE 58722 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  In response to reftel, Econoff conducted three 
separate site visits and was able to confirm receipt of the parts by 
Foreign Consignee Embraer.  Site visits revealed that Embraer's 
license application contained erroneous information about consignee 
Darrigo & Valente Transportes, Ltda., including incorrect company 
name and address.  The site visits conducted on the basis of the 
request were insufficient to assess the operations and on-site 
security of Transportes Darrigo Ltda, the company that actually 
receives and transports USML items for Embraer.  Following the site 
visits, Embraer provided proof that parts were received.  Post 
recommends that PM/DTCC meet with Embraer's Senior Legal Counsel, 
Werner Buff Neto, during the upcoming visit to Brazil on September 
24, and conduct follow-up site visits to the locations where 
Transportes Darrigo Ltda actually operates from.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On August 28, 2008 Econoff conducted a site visit to 
Darrigo E Valente Transportes, Ltda. (located at Rua Dublin, 98, 
Vila Letonia, Sao Jose dos Campos; alias Darrigo & Valente 
Transportes) and spoke with the company Director, Rafael Darrigo 
Valente.  Econoff conducted a subsequent site visit to DEX Logistica 
(located at Rua Oslo, 187, Vila Letonia, Sao Jose dos Campos, which 
is the address listed on the license application), but the Manager, 
Carlos Sergio Martins, was not available.  Econoff subsequently 
visited foreign consignee Embraer where she spoke with the company's 
Senior Legal Counsel, Werner Buff Neto, about the discrepancies in 
the license request. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
SITE VISIT: DARRIGO E VALENTE TRANSPORTES 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Darrigo E Valente Transportes, Ltda. (Rua Dublin, 98, Vila 
Letonia) claimed to have received no packages from the United States 
nor delivered any packages to Embraer in 2008.  According to 
Director Rafael Darrigo Valente, the company has been at the address 
Rua Dublin, 98 since June 2004.  Valente produced and provided 
copies of contracts to back this claim.  Valente rents the property 
from Portuguese citizen Manuel Fernando Duarte Pereira for 
R$750/month (equivalent to $470 USD). 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The facility has no identifying external sign, website or 
otherwise easily accessible contact information, and the Director's 
business card does not include an address.  Regarding security, the 
facility does not have an electronic security system or 
well-organized files.  The company has one old computer, three 
administrative staff, and a few additional employees.  Econoff did 
not observe any boxes or other material germane to a transportation 
company, save two small vans.  Valente does not speak English. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Valente claims to have worked as an outsourced contractor 
of Fedex since 1990 for the city of Sao Jose dos Campos and 
surrounding municipalities.  This relationship changed in 2002 when 
Fedex consolidated contracts from twenty-two companies to three. 
The company that won the contract for the South-Southeast of Brazil 
(where Sao Jose dos Campos is located) was Transportadora Americana. 
 At that time, Darrigo E Valente Transportes was contracted via 
Transportadora Americana to continue providing services for Fedex. 
Valente claimed that during this time his company was co-located at 
Transportadora Americana's facilities.  (Note:  Later, Valente said 
his company was located at Rua Oslo, 187 until 2004.  End Note)  In 
November 2007, this relationship was terminated at Transportadora 
Americana's request.  Valente explained that it was a cost-saving 
measure. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Valente told Econoff that since November 2007, the company 
works as an "Advance Fedex Shipping Center".  Valente explained that 
this means that clients who do not have a corporate account with 
Fedex can send and receive packages utilizing Darrigo E Valente 
Transportes' account.  Econoff observed a folder containing Fedex 
shipping slips from 2008 and there appeared to be no more than a 
couple dozen such slips.  The FedEx website lists Darrigo & Valente 
Transportes Ltda. as an authorized shipper. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Throughout the 60 minute conversation with Econoff, 
Valente appeared nervous, defensive, eager to control conversation, 
but cooperative.  After speaking with Econoff for over an hour and 
insisting that his company has done no work for Embraer in the past 
year, Valente told Econoff that he has a 'branch office' at 
Guarulhos International Airport in Sao Paulo.  The branch office is 
named "Transportes Darrigo Ltda." and they work exclusively with 
Embraer.  (Comment:  Econoff was surprised that it took over an hour 
for this information to surface.  Econoff was clear from the 
 
SAO PAULO 00000468  002 OF 002 
 
 
beginning that the shipment was for Embraer.  Valente had already 
told Econoff on several occasions that his company does not work for 
Embraer.  Embraer later told Econoff that the company works for them 
out of Viracopos airport in Campinas.  End comment) 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Subsequent on-line research revealed that both Transportes 
Darrigo Ltda. and Darrigo & Valente Transportes are listed at the 
city's chamber of commerce as located at the following address: Rua 
Talim, 55. Jd. Aeroporto.  At no time did Valente indicate to 
Econoff that he had another facility in the neighborhood nor does 
this address appear in any of the rental contracts Valente produced. 
 In a post-visit phone call, Valente told Econoff that Darrigo & 
Valente Transportes no longer is located at the Rua Talim address. 
 
------------------------- 
SITE VISIT: DEX LOGISTICA 
------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Valente accompanied Econoff to DEX Logistica, a shipping 
company located at Rua Oslo, 187, Vila Letonia, Sao Jose dos Campos, 
which is the address listed on the license application.  Valente 
produced a rental contract for this facility, indicating that in 
2004 he rented the facility to Porto Uniao Representacoes E Comercio 
Ltda., a food distribution company.  In 2007, the facility was 
rented to DEX Transportes E Logistica, Ltda., a logistics and 
shipping company.  Monthly rental is R$ 2500 ($1,560 USD).  The 
facility appeared bona fide, with forklifts, electronic security, 
website, and other material germane to a shipping company.  Valente 
claims that relationship between Darrigo & Valente Transportes and 
DEX is strictly a rental relationship.  (Note:  Econoff did not have 
an opportunity to speak with the manager therefore this information 
was not confirmed.  End Note.) 
 
------------------------ 
EMBRAER LEGAL DEPARTMENT 
------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Following the site visit, Econoff met with Embraer's 
Senior Legal Counsel and person responsible for export controls, 
Werner Buff Neto.  Econoff indicated her concern about the lack of 
clarity with regards to both the company and address listed on the 
license application.  Buff showed Econoff a copy of the purchase 
order and license application, together with Embraer's contract with 
Transportes Darrigo Ltda.  Following the visit, Buff furnished 
documents confirming receipt of parts.  Buff told Econoff that 
Embraer has an extensive relationship with Transportes Darrigo Ltda. 
and that the company has been a reliable partner as an Embraer 
freight forwarder, transporting goods between Embraer sites.  Buff 
provided Econoff a copy of the service contract, signed in April 
¶2005.  The company's listed address in the contract is Rua Talim, 55 
and the contract was signed by Luiz Guilherme Darrigo, who is listed 
as the Director and President of the company.  Transportes Darrigo 
Ltda's 1992 by-laws lists the following people as owners:  Luiz 
Guilherme Darrigo and Maria Auxiliadora do Prado Darrigo.  Nowhere 
in the dozens of pages of legal documents about the company is there 
mention of Darrigo E Valente Transportes, Ltda., Rafael Darrigo 
Valente, the Rua Dublin address, or the Rua Oslo address. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Following the visit, Buff offered to look at the issue in 
more detail and indicated concern that their license application 
contained erroneous information.  Following Buff's investigation 
into the matter, he explained to Econoff that according to Embraer's 
files, Darrigo E Valente Transportes is part of Transportes Darrigo 
Ltda and does occasional work for Transportes Darrigo Ltda as a 
subcontractor. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) COMMENT:  In light of Brazil's onerous and complicated 
tax system, it is not unusual to find companies entangled in complex 
legal arrangements designed to avoid a heavy tax burden.  The 
obscure relationship between Darrigo E Valente Transportes and 
Transportes Darrigo Ltda may be more of an indication of the 
difficulty of doing business in Brazil than that the company is 
engaged in wrongdoing.  The visit by PM/DTCC on September 24 for 
Blue Lantern training and outreach will give post an additional 
opportunity to look into this case while also explaining to the 
business community the exigencies of US export controls related to 
USML items.  END COMMENT. 
 
White