08SAOPAULO590
GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS HITS BRAZIL'S ENERGY SECTOR
Mon Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO1814
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #0590/01 3081228
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031228Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8672
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 9833
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 4232
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8906
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 3306
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 3553
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 2797
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 2553
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 3961
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 3192
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SAO PAULO 000590 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS USTR FOR KDUCKWORTH 
STATE PASS EXIMBANK 
STATE PASS OPIC FOR DMORONSE, NRIVERA, CMERVENNE 
DEPT OF TREASURY FOR JHOEK, BONEILL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV ETRD BR
SUBJECT: GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS HITS BRAZIL'S ENERGY SECTOR 
 
REF: A. 07 SAO PAULO 0953; B. RIO DE JANEIRO 0302 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED--PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: The lack of credit worldwide has hit Brazil's 
energy sector.  Despite the recent discoveries of billions of 
barrels of oil reserves below Brazil's seafloor, Brazil faces an 
increasingly uphill battle to turn the government's energy rhetoric 
into reality.  Estimates range that it will cost USD 300 to 600 
billion to commercialize the country's offshore reserves of oil and 
gas, money that Petrobras does not have.  Industry analysts estimate 
that Petrobras would need to tap financial markets for up to USD 30 
billion over the next few years.  At a minimum, delays to the 
initial six year timeline are expected.  In addition, the credit 
crunch has hit the ethanol and sugar industry.  The shortage of 
short-term financing has delayed capital goods improvements and 
construction of new sugar mills, causing potentially 40 to 50 
million tons of sugarcane to remain unused this harvest.  Finally, a 
lack of infrastructure financing might delay big energy projects 
down the line.  Given the wealth of natural resources and diversity 
of its energy supply, Brazil will probably fare better than many 
emerging market peers over the medium-term.  The goal of becoming 
more energy self-sufficient, however, could face more delays. 
Brazil may take longer to reduce its dependence on Bolivia for 
natural gas.  End Summary. 
 
Pre-Salt Woes 
------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) President Lula has touted the discovery of billions of 
barrels of oil and gas reserves in the so-called pre-salt layer 185 
miles off Brazil's coastline as "a gift from God" and has pledged to 
use resulting revenues to end poverty and narrow the country's 
income gap.  But before rhetoric becomes reality, Brazil must first 
get to the underwater reserves, located more than a mile below the 
ocean's surface and under another 2.5 miles of earth and corrosive 
salt.  The cost of drilling and gathering the oil is high, largely 
because salt beds can break loose and fracture pipes, making it one 
of the toughest substances to drill.  Similarly, the logistics of 
getting the oil and gas to shore for domestic use require the 
construction of an extensive network of new infrastructure projects 
and massive investments. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The pre-salt oil fields will be the most complicated and 
costly projects that Petrobras has ever carried out.  Analysts 
currently estimate they will cost between USD 300 to 600 billion 
over the next 30 years, and from USD 25 to 80 per barrel.  Most, 
however, concede that future costs cannot be defined with certainty 
in the current economic environment.  The more companies that drill 
test wells in the pre-salt area, the less expensive the exploration 
process will be as they learn more about how to drill through the 
salt layer.  (Note: Sao Paulo State Federation of Industries (FIESP) 
energy experts told Econoff that they estimated the costs somewhere 
between USD 70 to 80 per barrel.  Petrobras officials told Rio 
Econoff that pre-salt extraction costs are approximately USD 25 to 
28 per barrel; however, none of Rio Econoff's other energy contacts 
believe the Petrobras estimates.  They say they are too low.  End 
Note.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The global financial crisis has dampened the prospects for 
the potential windfall below Brazil's seafloor.  The falling world 
oil price and global credit crunch will likely extend the investment 
horizon for many of those fields.  Credit Suisse estimated that 
Petrobras would have to invest USD 50 billion to exploit the 
pre-salt oil fields, build new refineries, and cover additional 
costs from 2008 to 2012.  Even if Petrobras can sell oil at USD 80 
per barrel, Credit Suisse projected that Petrobras' cash flow would 
not be enough to meet the investment required and would need extra 
funding of at least USD 30 billion. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Former Valor Economico senior editor Carlos Eduardo Lins 
da Silva told the Consul General he believed the worldwide credit 
crunch probably would extend the pre-salt production timeline.  He 
estimated that the Tupi field, for example, would take some 20 years 
to develop given financing constraints of Petrobras' suppliers and 
 
SAO PAULO 00000590  002 OF 003 
 
 
delays to energy infrastructure.  (Note: When Petrobras first 
announced Tupi in November 2007, the production timeline was closer 
to five to six years.  See Ref A for more on that discovery.  End 
Note.)  Petrobras put off announcing its new investment plan to 
analyze the influence of the international financial crisis and has 
also signaled it could postpone the deadline for proposals for 
exploration of the pre-salt oil (Ref B). 
 
Ethanol Industry Suffering 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Senior Technology and Development Vice President at 
Dedini Jose Luiz Oliverio, the world leader in sugar mill equipment, 
told Econoff that the sector was in a terrible crisis.  He noted 
that the Brazilian National Development Bank (BNDES) had been late 
in delivering financing for project expansion which many customers 
had planned to use to purchase Dedini products.  As a result, 
Oliverio said Dedini's best customers had fallen behind on payments 
and many customers had already started delaying orders for new 
equipment and upgrades. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Brazilian Sugarcane Industry Association (UNICA) 
President Marcos Jank underscored that sugar and ethanol prices had 
been low over the last few years and were now expected to climb due 
to market demand in an interview with Folha de Sao Paulo.  He 
pointed to the credit crunch as their biggest concern because many 
mills are heavily leveraged.  Jank was in Brasilia October 30 
lobbying the GOB for a loan package of R$14 billion to support the 
industry.  UNICA's Public Relations Manager Carolina Costa told 
Econoff that the sector was in limbo, waiting to see how much the 
crisis would affect the ethanol and sugar industries.  She noted 
that many members had delayed longer-term project plans due to the 
lack of credit; however, short and medium term projects had for the 
most part already locked-in financing and she said UNICA did not 
believe they would be affected. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) As the Brazilian sugarcane harvest comes to a close (April 
to November), post notes that some 40 to 50 million tons of 
sugarcane would be left in the field if the rainy season started in 
November (per normal weather patterns).  Last April and May were 
very wet months and many mills had delayed the planting cycle.  In 
addition, sugarcane farmers had anticipated that a number of new 
mills would come online to crush the additional sugarcane, but many 
have been delayed because of financing constraints and due to 
backlogs in capital goods production.  Post ATO expects the impact 
from the credit crunch to filter through the sugar and ethanol 
industries quicker than most because of the strong fundamentals for 
the sector. 
 
Infrastructure Delays 
--------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) According to the Brazilian Association for Infrastructure 
and Structural Industries (ABDIB), Brazil has 324 large 
infrastructure projects already under construction or approved that 
are in serious risk of delays because of the lack of available 
financing.  Of the R$ 90 billion still unfinanced, R$ 82 billion 
(approximately USD 39 billion) would go to infrastructure projects 
in the energy sector.  Electrobras, a state-run electricity 
producer, in October suspended a USD 400 million international bond 
emission that it needed to finance the group's investments, 
including the construction of the two Rio Madeira generation 
projects and the third nuclear power plant at Angra.  The GOB 
announced on October 21 that it was delaying the auction for 
building the USD 3.5 billion Rio Madeira high-tension power line 
stretching from the Amazon Basin to the outskirts of Sao Paulo. 
Though not specifically citing the crisis as the reason in that 
case, many economists have pointed to its potential impact on 
infrastructure investments.  Despite the GOB's explicit claims of 
protecting the Growth Acceleration Program (PAC), Brazil has 
historically cut infrastructure project financing in economic 
downturns. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
SAO PAULO 00000590  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The short-term implications of the credit crunch for 
Brazil's energy sector have already started eating into the bottom 
line.  Over the medium-term, however, Brazil will probably fare 
better than most emerging markets.  With a wealth of technology in 
deep-sea drilling and the cheapest feedstock in the world for 
ethanol distillation, Brazil will remain an important bioenergy 
player.  Delays in development of the large natural gas reserves in 
the pre-salt layer, however, will leave Brazil dependent on imports 
of Bolivian natural gas in the short-term.  Likewise, ethanol 
producers probably will delay retrofits to increase efficiency for 
additional bioelectricity production, given current financing 
constraints.  With the promise of great oil finds off the Brazilian 
coast, President Lula had begun discussing, and many Brazilians had 
begun to expect, great investments in education and social equality. 
 These dreams may have to be put on hold given the effects of the 
current global economic slowdown.  End Comment. 
 
¶11.  (U) This cable was coordinated/cleared by Embassy Brasilia and 
by the ATO in Sao Paulo. 
 
WHITE