08SAOPAULO499
Sao Paulo Consultations Related to the Joint Action Plan to
Tue Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO9489
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #0499/01 2671111
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231111Z SEP 08
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8537
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 9670
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 4200
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8859
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 3256
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 3503
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 2779
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 2503
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 3916UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SAO PAULO 000499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO BSC FOR BVASQUEZ 
STATE FOR DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO BR
SUBJECT: Sao Paulo Consultations Related to the Joint Action Plan to 
Eliminate Racism (JAPER) 
 
REF: 
¶1.  Summary: USG officials held consultations in Sao Paulo with 
members of civil society on September 10 at Unipalmares, Brazil's 
first and only university tailored to the needs of Afro-Brazilians. 
The consultation followed technical meetings for the U.S.-Brazil 
Joint Action Plan to Eliminate Racial and Ethnic Discrimination and 
Promote Equality (JAPER) held in Brasilia (septel).  Representatives 
from the Afro-Brazilian community said their chief challenge was the 
"invisibility" of both their group and its concerns about racism. 
Brazil sees itself as a multi-racial democracy, even though problems 
such as exclusion from the job market, negative and stereotyped 
media portrayals, and systematic educational inequality remain 
serious problems for Afro-Brazilians.  Participants embraced the 
idea of the JAPER.  Afro-Brazilians are aware of racial challenges 
in U.S., but are also impressed with what they see as the United 
States' greater honesty in addressing race issues.  Unipalmares' 
founder and Rector, Jose Vicente, summed up the meeting by noting 
that "five year's ago this discussion could never have taken place," 
since neither Unipalmares nor the JAPER even existed.  End Summary. 
 
U.S. Reps Consult on JAPER 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  The first civil society consultation related to the U.S.-Brazil 
Joint Action Plan to Eliminate Racism (JAPER) took place on 
September 10 at Unipalmares (the Zumbi dos Palmares University, 
Brazil's first and only university tailored to the needs of 
Afro-Brazilians).  U.S. representatives met with Brazilian academics 
as well as representatives of both civil society and the private 
sector to learn about racial discrimination issues in Brazil, ask 
for views regarding potential areas of focus for the Action Plan, 
and to begin a dialogue regarding measures to gauge success.  Among 
the U.S. representatives were:  Inter-American Foundation (IAF) 
President Ambassador Larry Palmer, IAF staffer Judith Morrison, BSC 
Director Milton Drucker, WHA/PDA desk officer Blakeney Vasquez and 
WHA Brazil desk officer Ben Chiang.  USG participants were joined 
during part of the day-long session by WHA PDAS Ambassador Craig 
Kelly and Under Secretary Giovanni Harvey of Brazil's Secretariat to 
Promote Racial Equality (SEPPIR).  Various members of the Brazilian 
academic community and Afro-Brazilian communities also took part, 
including Unipalmares Rector Jose Vicente.  Private sector banks 
that both support Unipalmares and that engage in affirmative action 
also sent representatives. 
 
¶3.  U.S. representatives Milton Drucker and Ambassador Larry Palmer 
led off the meeting by presenting the overall concept of the 
U.S.-Brazil JAPER.  Drucker was careful to explain that the U.S. 
representatives had come to listen and exchange ideas as to how both 
societies could learn from each other in the fight against racism, 
racial discrimination and social exclusion.  Ambassador Palmer asked 
the audience to describe the problems Afro-Brazilians face and to 
determine yardsticks for the success of the JAPER. 
 
Defining the Dimensions of the Problem 
 
¶4.  The Brazilian audience, composed mostly of academics and 
representatives from Afro-Brazilian NGOs, responded 
enthusiastically.  Among the key points made were: 
 
-Afro-Brazilian "Invisibility."  The myth of "multi-racial 
democracy" in Brazil has suppressed a real discussion of continuing 
problems of exclusion and racism for Afro-Brazilians.  As a result, 
it is difficult for Afro-Brazilians to put burning issues - 
inequality, exclusion, continued underrepresentation in government, 
poor and even distorted representation in the media - on the 
government's and on society's agenda as a priority problem to be 
addressed. 
 
-The Law Doesn't Apply.  Even when the GOB has taken legislative 
action, mandating a greater presence for Afro-Brazilians in the 
media, requiring the teaching of Afro-Brazilian history in school, 
and pushing affirmative action type programs, these statutes are 
often not applied.  Seven years after an educational mandate to 
teach Afro-Brazilian history, the subject is still not in the 
curriculum of many public schools, for example. 
 
-The Media Images Do Damage.  Afro-Brazilians are either barely 
portrayed in the media (in violation of laws requiring greater 
Afro-Brazilian representation in public advertising) or are 
portrayed poorly, in terms of negative stereotypes.  As well, 
Afro-Brazilians are underrepresented among journalists and media 
creators.  Even official government publications do not present 
 
SAO PAULO 00000499  002 OF 003 
 
¶1.  Summary: USG officials held consultations in Sao Paulo with 
members of civil society on September 10 at Unipalmares, Brazil's 
first and only university tailored to the needs of Afro-Brazilians. 
The consultation followed technical meetings for the U.S.-Brazil 
Joint Action Plan to Eliminate Racial and Ethnic Discrimination and 
Promote Equality (JAPER) held in Brasilia (septel).  Representatives 
from the Afro-Brazilian community said their chief challenge was the 
"invisibility" of both their group and its concerns about racism. 
Brazil sees itself as a multi-racial democracy, even though problems 
such as exclusion from the job market, negative and stereotyped 
media portrayals, and systematic educational inequality remain 
serious problems for Afro-Brazilians.  Participants embraced the 
idea of the JAPER.  Afro-Brazilians are aware of racial challenges 
in U.S., but are also impressed with what they see as the United 
States' greater honesty in addressing race issues.  Unipalmares' 
founder and Rector, Jose Vicente, summed up the meeting by noting 
that "five year's ago this discussion could never have taken place," 
since neither Unipalmares nor the JAPER even existed.  End Summary. 
 
Afro-Brazilians in proportion to their real numbers in Brazilian 
society (around half the population). 
 
-Education is Required, But Fails.  Participants emphasized that 
education would be critical to Afro-Brazilian success.  Nonetheless, 
Afro-Brazilians overwhelmingly depend on Brazil's underfunded and 
problematic public school system for primary and secondary 
instruction.  And even within that system, inequality abounds. 
Teachers treat Afro-Brazilian students differently, sometimes 
refusing to hug a student, allegedly for fear of getting lice. 
Teachers refuse to teach Afro-Brazilian history because they argue 
that it would be divisive to do so, despite laws requiring such 
classes.  Afro-Brazilian parents are so accustomed to discrimination 
that they often do not complain even when their children suffer from 
blatantly unequal treatment.  Students at Unipalmares University, 
often face high levels of stress, since they are frequently pioneers 
in higher education from their families and so they feel they cannot 
fail. 
 
Actions and Measures Going Forward 
 
¶5.  The group then discussed the goals for the JAPR initiative as 
well as ways to measure its success.  Among the points made were: 
 
-"Affirmative Action Has to Become Vertically Integrated."  It is 
not enough for a university or business to admit/hire a few 
Afro-Brazilians.  Real opportunity paths have to be created that 
lead to leadership positions, if change is to occur.  Unipalmares 
faculty noted that, for the school's graduates, "a college degree is 
not enough."  There has to be follow-up with jobs so that 
Afro-Brazilians can gain real footholds in institutions and 
businesses (like the major media) where they are now woefully 
underrepresented. 
 
-More Research Needed.  Right now, there are too few studies of 
Afro-Brazilians and the barriers they face.  One participant, a 
trained nurse and public health educator who works at Unipalmares, 
described how Brazil's myth of multi-racial democracy suppresses 
research.  Several years ago, when she suggested doing a study of 
Afro-Brazilian health issues, she was told that such a project would 
be divisive, unnecessary and even racist. 
 
--English Studies.  Getting more Afro-Brazilians into 
English-immersion programs was identified by the vast majority of 
participants in as a key goal and potential measure of the JAPR's 
effectiveness.  English has become a critical tool in the Brazilian 
labor market, and it is a natural area where the U.S. can 
contribute. 
 
--More Media Presence.  Participants agreed that it would be good to 
sponsor a conference on Afro-Brazilians and the media to discuss 
both Afro-Brazilian media images and Afro-Brazilian presence among 
the ranks of journalists. 
 
Private Sector Participation 
 
¶6.  Representatives from one of Brazil's biggest banks, Bradesco, 
and from Citibank described the efforts their institutions have 
undertaken to provide more opportunities for Afro Brazilians. 
Bradesco's representative talked about the bank's long history of 
inclusion, beginning with the employment of Japanese Brazilians 
during the 1940s.  Both banks have recruitment and internship 
 
SAO PAULO 00000499  003 OF 003 
 
¶1.  Summary: USG officials held consultations in Sao Paulo with 
members of civil society on September 10 at Unipalmares, Brazil's 
first and only university tailored to the needs of Afro-Brazilians. 
The consultation followed technical meetings for the U.S.-Brazil 
Joint Action Plan to Eliminate Racial and Ethnic Discrimination and 
Promote Equality (JAPER) held in Brasilia (septel).  Representatives 
from the Afro-Brazilian community said their chief challenge was the 
"invisibility" of both their group and its concerns about racism. 
Brazil sees itself as a multi-racial democracy, even though problems 
such as exclusion from the job market, negative and stereotyped 
media portrayals, and systematic educational inequality remain 
serious problems for Afro-Brazilians.  Participants embraced the 
idea of the JAPER.  Afro-Brazilians are aware of racial challenges 
in U.S., but are also impressed with what they see as the United 
States' greater honesty in addressing race issues.  Unipalmares' 
founder and Rector, Jose Vicente, summed up the meeting by noting 
that "five year's ago this discussion could never have taken place," 
since neither Unipalmares nor the JAPER even existed.  End Summary. 
 
programs and support Unipalmares University.  The representatives 
stressed that, for the business sector, diversity is not only a 
moral imperative, but also a source of value-added, as more 
businesses become aware of the need to reach out to Afro-Brazilian 
consumers.  (Note: Brazil's Minister for Racial Integration, Edson 
Santos, has told us that the banking sector has been one of the most 
willing to engage in affirmative action programs.  According to 
banking representatives, the fact that Unipalmares works closely 
with them to ensure that its educational program provides the skills 
needed by the banks is an important factor in the success of their 
affirmative action programs, a factor that is missing from even the 
largest universities in Brazil.  End note.) 
 
Comment: Afro-Brazilians Respond/Unipalmares a Natural Ally 
 
¶7.  The meeting at Unipalmares clearly struck a strong and 
responsive chord among Afro-Brazilian participants.  Despite its 
faults, the United States looms large in the Afro-Brazilians' 
consciousness as a country that - according to the sentiments 
expressed at this meeting - has dealt more openly with issues of 
racism and inclusion than their own.  Civil Society representatives 
appreciated the eagerness of USG participants to listen.  The nature 
of many of the programs suggested, including more exchanges and 
greater English language immersion, suggested a pragmatic 
orientation on the part of the Brazilian participants. 
 
¶8.  Unipalmares itself was a fitting site for this first discussion. 
 The institution does not yet rank with the most elite Brazilian 
universities.  Nonetheless, its faculty and supporters are suffused 
with a sense of mission in bringing access to higher education to 
more Afro-Brazilians.  Consequently, the symbolism, and sense of 
progress, that the JAPER discussions created was quite powerful.  As 
Unipalmares' Rector remarked, "Five years ago, we could not have had 
this discussion."  At that time, neither the university nor the JAPR 
existed.  We are off to a good start. 
 
¶9.  This cable was coordinated/cleared by Embassy Brasilia. 
 
STORY