09BRASILIA1476
Brazil approves Venezuela's entry into Mercosul
Wed Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0319
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #1476/01 3502143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 162142Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0154
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS BRASILIA 001476 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT PASS NSC LROSSELLO 
DEPT PASS USTR - KKALUTKIEWICZ 
COMMERCE FOR LFUSSEL 
TREASURY FOR LINDQUIST 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ECIN EINT BR PA VE PREL
SUBJECT: Brazil approves Venezuela's entry into Mercosul 
 
REF: SAO PAULO 0222; 08 SAO PAULO 497; BRASILIA 1271; BRASILIA 1254 
 
¶1.   (U) SUMMARY:  On December 15, the Brazilian Senate approved 
the Protocol to admit Venezuela as a member to the Southern Cone 
trade bloc Mercosul (Mercosur).  The issue now moves to Paraguay 
for ratification by its Congress.  In Brazil, there was some debate 
and political maneuvering to delay the vote, but in the end, the 
measure passed by a comfortable margin (35-27).  GOB interest and 
business support was a major factor in the passage. 
 
THE PROCEDURE 
 
¶2.  (U) The proposal to admit Venezuela as a member to the trade 
bloc Mercosul (Mercosur) was approved by the Brazilian Senate on 
December 15 after a long (but standard) period of procedural 
maneuvering, and after the parliaments of Venezuela, Argentina and 
Uruguay had already voted to approve it.   Venezuela requested 
membership in December 2005 and the protocol was officially signed 
on July 4, 2006 by the Presidents of Mercosul member countries and 
Venezuela.   In Brazil, the agreement was first submitted to the 
Chamber of Deputies in October 2007.  In December 2008, the Chamber 
approved the protocol by a vote of 265 to 61, with 6 abstentions, 
and sent the Legislative Decree bill to the Senate.  The proposal 
was discussed intensely in the Senate, with four public hearings 
and various procedural delays by opposition Senators.  The bill was 
first approved by Senate Committees on Mercosul (in March) and 
Foreign Affairs (in October).  After a year of procedural delays, 
committee consideration, and public hearings, the issue finally 
came to a vote, with President Lula's support, just before Congress 
is due to close for recess.  The final floor vote was 35 versus 27. 
The agreement still needs to be approved by the Paraguayan 
Congress, where there are concerns that the opposition might turn 
it down.  If admitted, Venezuela will be subject to the 1998 
Declaration of Ushuaia, which requires a commitment to democratic 
principles.  Mercosul-third parties agreements, such as the Free 
Trade Framework Agreement with Israel and other tariff preferential 
agreements, will not be binding on Venezuela; instead, there will 
be an option for them to accede on a case-by-case basis. 
 
ARGUMENTS FOR  . . . . 
 
¶3.  (U) In the justification to the President requesting approval 
of the Protocol, Minister of External Relations Celso Amorim 
asserted that the integration of Venezuela into Mercosul was 
important because the increased trade flow should result in 
development of the transportation and telecommunications 
infrastructure in the northern part of South America, and deepen 
the region's economic and trade relations.  Currently, Brazil 
imports oil, oil derivatives, and coal from Venezuela and exports 
food such as beef, chicken, and sugar to that country. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Many senators seemed to focus on the argument given by 
Senator Alo????sio Mercadante, government party (PT) leader in the 
Senate, who asserted that the isolation of Venezuela would be worse 
for Mercosul member nations than its accession.  According to 
Mercadante, while governments come and go, trade, political and 
cultural integration have a lasting impact.   Even stalwart 
opposition Senator Francisco Dornelles, told Econoff and Poloff 
that this was the determining factor in his support for the 
protocol. 
 
. . . . .AND AGAINST 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The main argument used by the opposition to Venezuela's 
accession to Mercosul was that Mercosul should not accept as a 
member any country run by a government with non-democratic 
practices, such as limitations to press freedom and attempts to 
consolidate power in the office of the Presidency in an 
unconstitutional manner.   In addition, the opposition argued, the 
volume of trade does not justify including Venezuela in the bloc. 
Moreover, according to Senator Eduardo Azeredo, the Chairman of the 
Foreign Affairs Committee, based on testimony at the four public 
hearings it appears that Venezuela falls short of meeting the 
 
technical requirements (such as prepared lists of exceptions to the 
common tariffs) to join Mercosul but a majority of the Senate was 
willing to overlook these deficiencies to approve Venezuela's 
admission.  The opposition congressmen fear that the admission of 
Venezuela could bring more instability to a union already 
beleaguered by conflicts, such as the numerous disputes between 
Brazil and Argentina and the go-it-alone approach often followed by 
Uruguay. 
 
 THE POLITICS 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The vote broke down along governing coalition versus 
opposition lines; the only senator in the governing coalition to 
vote against the proposal was former President Fernando Collor 
(PTB).  President of the Senate Jose Sarney had previously 
indicated his opposition but did not vote, per Senate tradition. 
Many Senators were absent, traveling to participate in Climate 
Change Negotiations in Copenhagen.  Based on stated positions and 
party affiliation, some project that a full Senate would likely 
have provided a wider margin of victory, approximately 48-33. 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The vast majority of Senators from the government 
coalition partner PMDB and the right-center small parties (PP, PTB, 
PR), had long been well-disposed to support the government's 
proposal for Venezuela's accession, thanks to strong support from 
the business community.  The vote along coalition lines masked the 
fact that many senators did not see this vote in black-and-white 
terms.  Poloff, speaking to a number of members including 
influential Senator Arthur Virgilio, leader of the opposition PSDB, 
was told that several opposition senators were not vehemently 
opposed to Venezuela's accession, but would ultimately vote as a 
bloc against.  On the other hand, many coalition senators, such as 
Senator Sergio Zambiasi of the PTB, voted in favor but privately 
admitted to Poloff to having reservations. 
 
 
 
BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Tomaz Zannoto of the Sao Paulo Federation of Industries 
(FIESP) told Sao Paulo Econoff that over the last three years, 
FIESP's position has been consistent: it does not have any 
objection to Venezuela joining Mercosul, as long as Venezuela 
abides by all technical and legal requirements.  FIESP suspects 
that Venezuela is not abiding by these requirements at this time 
and assesses that Venezuela still has many issues to resolve - both 
internally and amongst Mercosul members.  He noted that FIESP 
recognizes the importance of Venezuela and its potential as a 
trading partner. 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U) According to the newspaper FOLHA de SAO PAULO, the 
accession of Venezuela to Mercosul is commercially promising.  In 
their report the day after the vote, Folha noted that, with a low 
level of Venezuelan imports to Brazil, the potential for increased 
Brazilian exports could lead to a projected USD 4.6 Billion trade 
surplus for Brazil.  Growth is particularly likely in exports of 
food (Venezuela imports 75% of food consumed) and industrial 
durable goods.  There is also potential for increased economic 
growth along the underdeveloped northern Brazil border with 
Venezuela due to increased trade. 
 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) COMMENT:  While there was some dissention and some 
controversy, in the end a majority of Brazilian Senators sided with 
the Lula administration in extending this opening to Venezuela. 
There has been some concern about giving Chavez a platform, but 
many seemed to believe that it was better to be inclusive and try 
to influence his behavior in a democratically-based, trade oriented 
regional group.  Others no doubt felt less threatened by how Chavez 
might use or impede Mercosul given the perspective held by some 
that Mercosul is a largely ineffectual bloc kept together primarily 
 
for the sake of regional unity.  Business interests and the support 
of the Lula government were also influential in Senate passage of 
the protocol.  While regional integration for economic purposes is 
broadly supported in Congress, government and opposition coalitions 
essentially voted along party lines, taking the opportunity to 
emphasize the differences between them on foreign policy in Latin 
America.  However, as noted earlier, even the opposition was not 
strongly opposed.  Support for Venezuela's accession to Mercosul is 
in keeping with the GOB's overall approach to foreign policy of 
prioritizing positive constructive relations with its neighbors and 
attempts to bring divisive actors, such as Chavez and Morales, into 
the fold via engagement rather than isolation. 
KUBISKE