09PHNOMPENH664
CAMBODIA'S MINISTER OF DEFENSE PREPARES FOR
Thu Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0664/01 2461023
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031023Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1153
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHHJJPI/PACOM IDHS HONOLULU HI PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000664 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS KTIA CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA'S MINISTER OF DEFENSE PREPARES FOR 
WASHINGTON 
 
REF: PHNOM PENH 638 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: In a September 3 call on Deputy Prime 
Minister and Minister of National Defense Tea Banh, the 
Ambassador previewed the Minister's upcoming travel to 
Washington where he will meet Secretary of Defense Gates, 
congratulated the Minister on Cambodia's diplomacy with 
respect to the dispute over Preah Vihear, highlighted the 
continued strengthening of military-to-military relations, 
and introduced the new U.S. Embassy Defense Attache.  Tea 
Banh expressed his commitment to reduce troops and help 
settle the Preah Vihear dispute peacefully.  He also stressed 
the importance of Cambodia's upcoming Capstone training event 
and detailed peacekeeping operations planned for Chad and the 
Central African Republic.  The Minister rounded out the 
meeting by outlining areas of defense reform and continued 
engagement.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Tensions Subside in Preah Vihear 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In preparation for his upcoming Washington visit, 
which will include a meeting with Secretary of Defense Gates, 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of National Defense Tea 
Banh provided an overview of areas of mutual interest, 
specifically noting the calmed situation in Preah Vihear. 
Tea Banh detailed the history of the dispute over Preah 
Vihear and recent troop reductions in the border area (Ref 
A).  He stated that both the Thai and Cambodian sides have 
drawn back in order to decrease the potential of further 
tension.  Declaring that "there is no longer a worry of 
conflict," Teah Banh said that some troops would remain to 
stand guard and maintain the area as normal, but that a large 
number of troops is no longer necessary.  He indicated that 
he is optimistic about further troop reductions and 
redeployments away from Preah Vihear in the future.  However, 
Tea Banh said that the lower levels within the Thai and 
Cambodian armed forces still need to meet in order to avoid 
small flare-ups. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Decreased tensions with Thailand have resulted in 
small numbers of tourists returning to the Preah Vihear 
temple.  The Ambassador congratulated the Minister on the 
restraint and diplomacy required to get to this point, and 
noted the need to fully resolve the military and border 
situation in order for Cambodia to take full advantage of the 
World Heritage site designation and to increase tourism and 
development in a very poor area.  Tea Banh responded that 
both he and the Thai Minister of Defense will meet to discuss 
and find solutions to the border issues in order to create an 
open area in Preah Vihear for development, trade and 
business.  He said that Cambodians are already beginning to 
move and build houses along a better-understood border, and 
he is optimistic that there will soon be a defined border 
with Thailand. 
 
Increased Military-to-Military Relations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Both the Ambassador and the Minister praised the 
strong and growing military-to-military relations between 
Cambodia and the United States.  Tea Banh specifically 
expressed his appreciation of U.S. assistance with the Global 
Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI).  He stated that his 
office is working closely with the Embassy's Defense Attache 
office in order to prepare for the July 2010 multilateral 
Capstone training exercise, which will showcase Cambodia's 
increased capacity and expertise.  Tea Banh also detailed 
current and future peacekeeping assistance, stating that 
Cambodia's PKO work in Sudan has received positive reports. 
When asked about publicized future operations in Chad and the 
Central African Republic, Tea Banh indicated that there are 
some issues to be worked out before Cambodian peacekeepers 
can be deployed.  He said that thus far, 40 members of the 
Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF) have been trained and are 
prepared for deployment.  However, an RCAF observer went to 
Chad and based on his report, it was determined that the 
total number of required peacekeepers should be increased 
from the originally agreed upon 100 to 200.  In order for 
this to happen, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs must initiate 
a new MOU for the increased numbers. 
 
The Road Ahead 
-------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The upcoming meeting between Minister of National 
Defense Tea Banh and Secretary of Defense Gates marks an 
 
important step forward for both countries.  As further 
evidence of the improved and growing military-to-military 
relations, the Ambassador introduced the Embassy's new 
Defense Attache, Col. Mark Gillette, noting that the two 
countries have an exchange of attaches for the first time in 
some decades.  Col. Gillette will escort Tea Banh to 
Washington, and both will participate in a portion of the 
Defense Strategic Review, supported by DoD, prior to meeting 
with Secretary Gates.  The Minister stated that based on a 
recent bilateral defense dialog held in Hawaii, specific 
areas for defense reform and continued U.S. engagement 
include maritime security, border security, humanitarian 
disaster response, and counterterrorism - an area where the 
two countries already have close cooperation.  Tea Banh 
stated he is proud of what the two countries have 
accomplished thus far, and said there remains much work to be 
done, with reform a key priority. 
 
RODLEY