09SAOPAULO260
Media Reaction SAO PAULO Doha-Ahmadinejad-H1N1 Flu and
Mon May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXYZ0014
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSO #0260/01 1241604
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041604Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9150
INFO RHEHNSC/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY 0302
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO PRIORITY 9133UNCLAS SAO PAULO 000260 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE INR/R/MR; IIP/R/MR; WHA/PD 
 
DEPT PASS USTR 
 
USDOC 4322/MAC/OLAC/JAFEE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR OPRC OIIP XM XR XF BR
SUBJECT: Media Reaction SAO PAULO Doha-Ahmadinejad-H1N1 Flu and 
Obama 100 Days May 1-3, 2009 
 
Friday, May 1st 
 
Title- Doha, a matter of security 
 
Editorial in center-right O Estado de S. Paulo (5-1) states:  "The 
temptation of creating barriers to trade has become stronger with 
the global recession... Nevertheless, more than ever we must 
preserve and extend conditions for freedom in the global 
marketplace....More than ever it is vital to work for the conclusion 
of the Doha Round Trade talks....The new U.S President and any other 
new leader that is elected from now on [must know that] its 
contribution consists in resuming Doha Talks, restarting at the 
point reached by negotiators prior to its last interruption, without 
forcing talks back to its starting point.  If this happens, we will 
need to face new and complicated discussions and the enormous 
benefits of extended trade liberalization will be delayed for many 
years, with great harm for all, but especially for developing 
economies." 
 
Title- The visitor 
 
Op-Ed in liberal Folha de S. Paulo (5-1) by Fernando Gabeira states: 
"In one of the most politically delicate international visits of the 
year, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad arrives in Brazil....For us, the visit 
will be an essential test in a world where Brazil's role as a 
pacifier will be always subject to passionate reactions." 
 
Friday, May 2nd 
 
Title- Less boldness 
 
Op-ed in center-right O Estado de S. Paulo (5-2) by Sergio Fausto, 
coordinator of studies and debates at iFHC (Fernando Henrique 
Cardoso Institute) and member of USP's Gacint states: "....less 
tactical boldness and greater concern in regards to values that we 
care for.  That is what we need to enjoy more and better 
opportunities are arising for Brazil's interests and image in the 
world." 
 
Title- Correa and the Chavism 
 
Editorial in center-right O Estado de S. Paulo (5-2) notes: 
"....Despite his fussy moves, Correa keeps his image at a preventive 
distance from the most extreme moves of Chavism...." 
 
Sunday, May 3rd 
 
Title- Ahmadinejad 
 
Op-Ed in liberal Folha de S. Paulo (5-3) by Eliane Catanhede notes: 
"Washington treats Teheran as the enemy.  Caracas treats it as a 
great friend.  And Brazil does not want either of these things.  It 
wants to ratify its foreign policy independently from major powers - 
(read here the U.S.) - and against isolationism.  To isolate is to 
instigate the worst in people and countries.  To include is to 
neutralize impetus and adventures.  Like Brazil does with 
Venezuela.....Ahmadinejad's visit does not change anything overnight 
but may reinforce [the role of] protagonists that Lula and Brazil 
aim for and may open room for Iran's insertion into the world.  Iran 
needs credit and the world needs peace...." 
 
Title- What has changed in 100 Days 
 
Editorial in center-right O Estado de S. Paulo (5-3) states: 
"....The parallelism between the project of rupture with the past in 
the domestic and external fronts is evident.... [Barack Obama's] 
audacious program was launched in these 100 days. He will have in 
front of him, from now on, bigger challenges than the ones he has 
already faced." 
 
Title- A new plot 
 
Op-ed in center-right O Estado de S. Paulo (5-3) by former President 
Fernando Henrique Cardoso says: ".... [President] Obama, in his 
first 100 days, has managed to re-draw the picture.  He has not made 
miracles with the economy, because this does not exist.  But he had 
the wisdom to show the signs that were hoped for, presenting a moral 
leadership to the world.   To establish his steps he began by 
accomplishing his promises.  The initial signs were auspicious.  But 
more is needed...." 
 
Title- Old and New Ills 
 
Editorial in liberal Folha de S. Paulo (5-2) notes: "....Brazil 
 
looks more akin with Mexico than with the U.S. with regards to 
readiness to face public health challenges .....the country still 
lives together with old diseases like tuberculosis and Hansen's 
....In Brazil, infectious diseases have lost their importance among 
causes of death....Nevertheless, their persistence....indicates that 
the country has not yet reached a minimally acceptable level of 
development in this crucial area." 
WHITE