09USUNNEWYORK1120
UNGA: NO SURPRISES IN FOURTH ROUND OF
Mon Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #1120/01 3481941
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141941Z DEC 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7803
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN IMMEDIATE 1136
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA IMMEDIATE 0021
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA IMMEDIATE 1215
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD IMMEDIATE 2631
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE 6443
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI IMMEDIATE 2934
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME IMMEDIATE 1180
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL IMMEDIATE 1235UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 001120 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR USUN/W AND IO/UNP; NSC FOR POWER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KUNR UNGA UNSC GE JA BR IN
SUBJECT: UNGA: NO SURPRISES IN FOURTH ROUND OF 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL NEGOTIATIONS ON UNSC REFORM 
 
REF: A. USUN NEW YORK 1055 
     ¶B. USUN NEW YORK 827 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The informal plenary of the General 
Assembly met on December 7 and 8 for the first meeting of the 
fourth round of intergovernmental negotiations (IGN) on 
Security Council reform.  52 delegations spoke on "all the 
positions and proposals by Member States."  Most of the 
discussion was repeated from previous rounds and from the 
plenary session on November 12-13.  The Group of Four (G4) 
and African Group reiterated previous positions and called 
for a negotiating text from the Chair while the Uniting for 
Consensus (UFC) bloc re-circulated their previous proposal 
from April and urged others to circulate papers.  The 
Philippines Perm Rep circulated several draft resolutions 
which drew no substantive comments.  The Chair's concluding 
comments inviting new proposals clearly implied that he 
continues to have no plans to table his own negotiating text. 
 The Japanese and Dutch Perm Reps acknowledged in their own 
remarks that next steps would have to be member state-driven. 
 The second meeting of the fourth round is expected in 
mid-January on areas of convergence.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The informal plenary of the General Assembly met on 
December 7 and 8 for its first meeting of the fourth round of 
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform. 
As set forth in the Chair's November 16 letter to the 
membership, the session focused on "all the positions and 
proposals by Member States."  52 member states took the floor 
during the seven hours of meetings and Italy was alone in 
making a second statement during the interactive portion of 
the discussion. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Most delegations reiterated their positions from 
previous rounds (ref B) and the November 12-13 plenary 
discussion (ref A).  Italy, Colombia, Slovenia, and the 
Philippines reiterated and/or re-circulated their earlier 
proposals.  Denmark and Greece took the floor for the first 
time.  Denmark called for enlargement in both categories but 
with no extension of the veto to new members.  On the 
intermediate option, Denmark voiced support but said there 
must be a review clause.  Greece advocated expansion in both 
categories of membership, permanent and non-permanent, with 
greater representation for African, Asia, and small and 
developing states, but did state that they are open to an 
interim solution. 
 
Group of Four 
------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Brazilian Perm Rep took the floor first and 
reiterated Group of Four (G4) support for an expansion in 
both categories and said that the intermediate model lacks 
clarity.  She also said that negotiations could not move any 
further forward in the absence of a negotiating text and 
called for one from the Chair since he enjoys the confidence 
of the room.  The Indian Perm Rep called on those who are not 
in favor of an expansion in both categories "to reflect on 
their position and acknowledge that the interest of the 
membership at large, and that of the organization itself, is 
best served by supporting the views that the vast majority 
espouses."  (Comment: The Indian Perm Rep assumes that the 
"vast majority" favors his position, but he has never put it 
to a formal test with a vote in the plenary.  End comment.) 
He, too, called for a negotiating text from the Chair. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Japanese Perm Rep argued that the current 
composition of the Council could not be left unchanged since 
that could lead to the erosion of the Council's legitimacy. 
(Comment: USUN has argued in negotiations that the Council's 
legitimacy is based on the Charter, not its composition. 
Perhaps, the Japanese Perm Rep meant to refer to the 
Council's credibility.  End comment.)  The Japanese Perm Rep 
also called for a concise paper of the different positions 
and proposals of member states and groups, but he suggested 
that if the Chair was not forthcoming with such a paper, it 
should be "Member State-driven."  The new German Perm Rep 
took the floor and noted that little had changed in the 
debate since he was last in New York 20 years ago.  He called 
for a negotiation text from the Chair and suggested that 
 
 
straw polls be used to identify options on which to 
concentrate.  Unlike the other members of the G4, he 
professed a readiness to discuss the intermediate solution as 
a way ahead, though not if the seats would be limited to 3-5 
year terms since such members would not be "true peers for 
permanent members."  Again, he proposed longer-term seats of 
15 years followed by a review conference to determine if 
those seats should become permanent. 
 
Uniting for Consensus 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Uniting for Consensus (UFC) bloc members 
reiterated their opposition to any expansion of permanent 
members and voiced continued support for the 
Colombian/Italian proposal introduced in April.  The 
Colombian delegation re-circulated the proposal and asked 
that it be considered a conference document.  (Note: Document 
e-mailed to IO/UNP.  End note.)  The Italian Perm Rep 
emphasized that, as a proposal, it is open for discussion and 
is not a take-it-or-leave-it proposal.  Most UFC states 
called on other states to put forward new compromise 
proposals.  The Argentine Perm Rep responded to G4 calls that 
the intermediate option lacks clarity and said that member 
states should be discussing and clarifying the intermediate 
option together, not alone. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) In response to the Indian statement that the "vast 
majority" supports expansion in both categories and the 
German proposal for straw polling, the Italian representative 
reminded both, during the interactive portion, that they 
could go to a formal plenary meeting at any time to count the 
actual support they have.  Apart from that, there are no 
other mechanisms in the informal plenary to count support for 
one option over another. 
 
African Group 
------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Nine African states spoke, led by the Sierra Leone 
Perm Rep, who chairs the African Group in New York.  All 
espoused the Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration which 
call for two permanent seats for Africa with full veto rights 
and a total of five non-permanent seats in an expanded 
Council of 26.  A number reiterated that the African Union 
would determine which African states would sit in those 
seats.  Most African states joined the G4 in calling for a 
paper from the Chair outlining the proposals from all member 
states.  The Nigerian representative did acknowledge that 
there remain questions on the size of the Council and varying 
calls for an increase between 20 and 26 seats.  The South 
African Perm Rep questioned the intermediate option's 
viability saying he doubted that the Charter could be amended 
and ratified twice.  The Egyptian Perm Rep, always trying to 
check forward movement on this issue, noted that if certain 
groups receive more permanent seats (i.e., Europe) then 
Africa reserves the right to ask for another permanent seat 
(beyond the two it currently requests).  He also suggested 
limiting the use of the veto so that it cannot be used for 
the election of the Secretary-General, war crimes, crimes 
against humanity, and genocide. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Libyan Deputy Perm Rep, after espousing the 
common African position, reiterated the Libyan proposal to 
replace current Council permanent members with regional seats 
filled by the African Union, ASEAN, the European Union, the 
Russian Federation, the United States, and the League of Arab 
States with all or none holding the veto.  (Note: He did not 
mention a Latin American regional organization or China.  End 
note.)  He also suggested, without providing additional 
details, that providing Africa immediately with a permanent 
seat would "help the success of the negotiations."  (Note: We 
understand that the Libyan delegation has unsuccessfully 
tried to convince the African Group to put forward a 
resolution that would only add one permanent seat for Africa 
to the Council.  We understand there is currently no 
consensus in the group to deviate from the Ezulwini Consensus 
and Sirte Declaration.  End note.) 
 
P-5 
 
 
--- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The UK and the France reiterated their support for 
permanent membership for Brazil, India, Germany, Japan, and 
an African state and pressed for greater focus on the 
intermediate option which could lead to permanent seats after 
a review.  The French Perm Rep also called for a permanent 
seat for an Arab state.  Both said they would welcome a 
negotiating text from the Chair.  The Russian Perm Rep gave a 
long statement reiterating the Russian position on all of the 
five key issues and endorsing the Chair's approach of finding 
convergence.  He, too, suggested a closer look at the 
intermediate option.  On the veto, he cautioned against 
changing any of the current permanent member's prerogatives, 
but said it is possible to look at options for new members 
but only after determining the membership of an enlarged 
Council which should number in the low 20s.  The Chinese 
representative called for an expanded Council with greater 
representation for developing states. 
 
Effect of Lisbon Treaty 
----------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) There were several references during the meeting 
about what impact the recent entry into force of the Lisbon 
Treaty might have on the reform process.  The Italian 
representative suggested that it is time to seriously 
consider such a major development.  The Portuguese Perm Rep, 
a G4 supporter, also referred to the treaty: "The Lisbon 
Treaty brings the Members of the European Union further 
closer (sic) and established mechanisms providing for a 
better external representation of the Union.  Somehow, these 
new realities will have to translate in the manner the 
European Union interacts with the Security Council."  The 
Dutch Perm Rep suggested that the concept of regional seats 
in the Council be explored at a review, especially whether 
such seats should be permanent and which regions should be 
represented. 
 
Other states 
------------ 
 
¶12.  (SBU) As he did last spring, the Philippines Perm Rep 
circulated a number of proposals in the form of draft 
resolutions on restricting the veto, affirming the full 
plenary jurisdiction of the General Assembly vis a vis the 
Security Council, Council working methods, Council rules of 
procedure, and categories of membership.  (Note: Proposals 
e-mailed to IO/UNP.  End note.)  Similar to last spring, no 
delegations commented on the specifics of the proposals aside 
from the fact that they had been presented by the 
Philippines.  The Palau representative called the Security 
Council "archaic and untenable" and called for a modernized 
Council that can react to the sea level rise threatening his 
state and other island states. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) The Dutch Perm Rep called for a "mixed" 
intermediate option of 8-10 year seats with a review after 
two terms.  He called for permanent members to voluntarily 
commit to certain restrictions on the use of the veto.  He 
said all member states should be able to submit their views 
in writing to the Council.  (Note: All member states can 
already do so by writing a letter to the Security Council 
President and asking that the letter be circulated to the 
rest of the Council.  End note.)  Lastly, he urged member 
states to draft the negotiating text, saying, "no paper, no 
progress." 
 
Next meeting 
------------ 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  At the end of the meeting, the Chair, Afghan Perm 
Rep Tanin, reminded delegations that he is always ready to 
receive proposals in writing, especially from "innovative 
coalitions."  He announced that the next meeting would be in 
mid-January on "areas of convergence." 
RICE