10BRASILIA7
BRAZIL: FOREIGN MINISTRY EAGER TO LAUNCH NEXT PHASE OF
Mon Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0007/01 0111158
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 111157Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0282
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY 0001
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0001C O N F I D E N T I A L BRASILIA 000007 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR S, D, P, E, WHA, WHA/BSC 
NSC FOR RESTREPO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/01/11 
TAGS: PREL BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: FOREIGN MINISTRY EAGER TO LAUNCH NEXT PHASE OF 
US-BRAZIL RELATIONSHIP 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Thomas A. Shannon, Ambassador, State, Embassy 
Brasilia; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: Foreign Minister Celso Amorim broke with normal 
protocol and practice and met with Ambassador Shannon January 8, 
only hours after the Ambassador had arrived in country.  Amorim 
welcomed the Ambassador's arrival, lamented the drawn out 
confirmation process, and said he was eager to begin at once on the 
next stage in US-Brazil relations.  He agreed that the 
opportunities for a deeper engagement were many and stressed the 
importance of "intense dialogue."   Globally, Amorim raised 
economic cooperation, climate change, Iran and the Middle East. 
Regionally, he spoke of Honduras and the aftermath of the 
US-Colombia Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA).   He expressed 
hope that Secretary Clinton could visit soon and said he looked 
forward to Under Secretary Burns' upcoming trip.  Lower level 
Foreign Ministry officials echoed his thoughts, adding UN Security 
Council priorities and peacekeeping to the list of front-burner 
issues to discuss.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
AMORIM GETS DOWN TO BUSINESS AT ONCE 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (C) Foreign Minister Celso Amorim broke with normal protocol and 
practice to meet with incoming Ambassador Thomas Shannon January 8. 
The Ambassador had earlier presented copies of his credentials to 
the Foreign Ministry.  He will present his credentials officially 
to President Lula on February 4. 
 
 
 
¶3. (C) Amorim welcomed the Ambassador's arrival, calling it an 
important and necessary step in deepening the bilateral 
relationship and Brazil's dialogue with the Obama Administration. 
He noted with frustration the several month delay in the 
confirmation process, asserting that both countries had "lost 
precious time."  He affirmed his commitment to working to build a 
more extensive and more strategic dialogue that would capture the 
increasingly global nature of our relationship.  He expressed hope 
that Secretary Clinton could visit soon, and welcomed the upcoming 
visit of Under Secretary Burns. 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) Amorim said areas of convergence in our relationship far 
outweighed the differences.  He noted that the differences were 
"manageable," but said they would be exploited by the press and the 
political opposition to create the impression of a more serious 
divide.  He urged the Ambassador to help fashion an "intense and 
robust" process of consultation that would promote transparency and 
understanding as both countries addressed pressing global concerns. 
 
 
 
¶5. (C) The Ambassador welcomed Amorim's call for deeper dialogue. 
He noted the overarching importance of transnational issues and 
indicated that the future of the US-Brazil relationship was 
"global."  The Ambassador highlighted the extensive nature of our 
existing structure of dialogues, and asserted his and the Embassy's 
commitment to working with all interested agencies to support their 
success.  At the same time, the Ambassador recognized the need for 
a deeper and more strategic dialogue between the US and Brazil.  He 
said that such a dialogue, especially in anticipation of Brazil's 
upcoming presidential elections could serve two useful purposes: 
first, to manage differences and protect our relationship during a 
 
 
time of intense political activity in Brazil, and second, to act as 
a source of continuity and ensure the longevity and success of 
existing initiatives. 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Amorim then shared his views on global and regional issues. 
Regarding economic cooperation, he said it was important to broaden 
the umbrella of bilateral issues, moving past the Free Trade 
Agreements (FTAs) model and instead focusing on concrete measures 
to promote increased economic cooperation and technology exchange. 
He said the GOB was pleased that a good compromise was reached on 
climate change in Copenhagen, praising the role of the President 
and Secretary.  He lamented that the press had misrepresented the 
agreement, calling the compromiQ "the best possible outcome; it 
kept the talks alive." 
 
 
 
¶7. (C) Amorim offered that a visit by the Secretary would be a good 
opportunity to discuss Iran and the Middle East. Brazil can 
contribute and be a positive voice on issues in the Middle East and 
with Iran, he said. Amorim had spoken with Iranian President 
Ahmadinejad during the trip to Brazil in November and had raised 
human rights and the need to abide by international agreements.  He 
had also urged the Iranians to delay work on new processing 
installations in order to open a space for negotiations. The 
government in Iran "is repressive but not totalitarian and they 
want to negotiate."  Amorim urged caution in dealing with Iran, 
saying that trying to "hurry up" Iran would produce a domestic 
backlash and stiffen its resolve. 
 
 
 
¶8. (C) Speaking of regional issues, Amorim downplayed the 
U.S.-Colombia DCA and the political crisis in Honduras as bilateral 
problems, but said they still rankled in South America.  Amorim 
said that the U.S. use of military bases in Colombia will cause the 
region some discomfort. He wished there had been greater 
consultations with the region on the DCA and commented that 
countries in the region would watch very closely how the bases are 
used, and make further evaluations based on what they see.  He 
commented that more intensive dialogue must be undertaken on the 
issue because it is a political, not technical, one.  On Honduras, 
Amorim said Brazil was not yet ready to consider the recent 
elections legitimate; however, Brazil is done harping on this point 
and recognizes the elections as a fact it must accommodate.  He 
said Brazil's priority is now securing an honorable exit for 
Zelaya. 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
OTHER FOREIGN MINISTRY OFFICIALS ALSO WELCOME THE OPPORTUNITY TO 
DEEPEN RELATIONS 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
¶9. (C) Prior to the Amorim meeting, the Ambassador presented to 
Itamaraty's head of Protocol Division Minister Counselor Jose Amir 
da Costa Dornelles the papers needed to confirm his meeting with 
President Lula on February 4 to formally present his credentials. 
He also met with Minister Carlos Sergio Duarte, Director for 
International Organizations, who was filling in for the vacationing 
 
 
Under Secretary for Political Affairs Vera Machado. 
 
 
 
¶10. (C) The Ambassador and Duarte agreed that this is an important 
time for Brazil and the United States because there are many new 
opportunities to discuss and move forward on the bilateral and 
multilateral realm.   Duarte emphasized that this is a time for 
creative thinking especially in the international arena and that 
even though the United States and Brazil do not always share the 
same position, the nature of the bilateral discourse is always 
mature and beneficial. 
 
 
 
¶11. (C) Duarte went through Brazil's priorities in the UN Security 
Council, first listing Haiti, which he noted appeared to be an 
issue of great interest to the United States as well. Brazil has 
been in Haiti for five or six years and is interested in gradually 
reconfiguring the mission to Haiti's changing needs. The mission in 
Haiti has done well but now there is a need for investments to 
capitalize on the country's human capital. Brazil is working to 
mobilize business interests to invest in Haiti. Duarte continued to 
explain that while Haiti is the main regional concern, Brazil is 
also looking to work on Guinea Bissau. On larger issues to address 
in the Security Council, Duarte noted Brazil wants to discuss the 
nature of peacekeeping operations in conflict zones, such as Congo. 
The Ambassador noted that the United States had done an extensive 
review of our Haiti policy, and that we were ready for a larger 
discussion with partners like Brazil on Haiti. 
 
 
 
---------------- 
 
COMMENT 
 
---------------- 
 
¶12.  (C) This wasn't the usual welcome given to a new ambassador. 
It is clear that the Foreign Ministry is eager to launch the next 
phase of US-Brazilian relations.  From a Brazilian perspective, 
dialogue across not just regional, but global issues, will be 
important, and the Foreign Ministry looks forward to doing this 
both with the US Ambassador and his team, and, hopefully, with 
Under Secretary Burns and the Secretary. 
 
 
 
¶13.  (U) The Ambassador approved this cable. 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
KUBISKE