10BRASILIA204
Brazil: March HRC
Sat Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0204 0582159
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 272157Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0583
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS BRASILIA 000204 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM UN BR GV IR BM CG IS
SUBJECT: Brazil: March HRC 
 
REF: STATE 016231 
 
¶1.  On February 24, poloff delivered the points reftel to Nathanael 
de Souza e Silva and Bruna Vieira de Paula of the Division of Human 
Rights, Ministry of External Relations (MRE). 
 
Religious and racial intolerance 
 
¶2.  Poloff handed Silva and de Paula a copy of the U.S.-proposed 
Action Plan to Combat Racial and Religious Discrimination and 
Intolerance, which they had already reviewed.  De Paula said that 
there was no difference between the U.S. view and the Brazilian 
view on defamation of religion.  For the GOB the concept violates 
international law and Brazilian domestic law.  Brazil believes that 
Articles 19 and 20 of the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights adequately address the legitimate concerns of OIC 
and African Group countries.  She said that Brazil could support 
the U.S. plan of action, though she questioned whether it was "too 
ambitious." 
 
¶3.  Poloff asked why Brazil has abstained on defamation resolutions 
if the GOB in fact opposes the concept on which they are based.  De 
Paula responded that Brazil abstains and will continue to do so in 
recognition of the problem of persistent discrimination and hate 
crimes against religious minorities.  These issues, she said, must 
be addressed somehow, and she reiterated that Brazil liked the U.S. 
proposal. 
 
Guinea and DRC 
 
¶4.  Silva said Brazil will almost always support human rights 
technical assistance in cases where the governments of the affected 
countries desire such assistance.  As long as the governments of 
Guinea and DRC wish to be assisted, and especially if there is the 
support of the Africa Group, Brazil will support assistance to the 
two countries. 
 
Goldstone Report 
 
¶5.  Silva said he saw no reason for Goldstone-related resolutions 
to be brought up in the March HRC.  Brazil supports the HRC's 
acting on its own competence with respect to the report but opposes 
the HRC's instructing the UNGA or any other UN organ to act on 
Goldstone.  Silva said Brazil agreed that the HRC should not take 
any additional action until Israeli and Palestinian domestic 
investigations have run their course.  (Note:  Silva described the 
Goldstone Report as "impeccable from the legal and academic 
standpoint" but added that Goldstone, a judge, had not adequately 
taken into account political realities.  End note.) 
 
¶6.  Silva agreed that there was a systemic bias in the HRC against 
Israel but noted that Brazil has tried to counter such a bias.  He 
said that the Israeli representative in Geneva called his Brazilian 
counterpart on more than one occasion to thank him for Brazil's 
principled position against Israel-bashing.  Silva said, however, 
that Israel was in part responsible for its weak position in the 
HRC because it had taken on the role of "persistent objector" and 
had not fulfilled its legal commitments. 
 
Iran, DPRK and Burma 
 
¶7.  Silva said that Brazil was open to all U.S. ideas on how to 
strengthen human rights monitoring and assistance functions, but 
disagreed with the USG about the utility of country-specific 
resolutions to "condemn" governments for their human rights 
records.  Although Brazil in the past occasionally supported such 
resolutions, Silva said that the policy now is to abstain both in 
the HRC and the UNGA except in the most extraordinary 
circumstances.  When poloff probed as to the reason for this change 
in Brazilian practice, Silva said it was a "question of coherence." 
Brazil recognized, for example, that Iran's human rights record and 
its record of non-cooperation with legitimate human rights monitors 
was far worse than Burma's record, yet Iran's importance to Brazil 
from a broader foreign policy standpoint made it impolitic for 
Brazil to vote against Iran in the HRC.  Silva asked rhetorically, 
"How can we then support a resolution against Burma but not one 
against Iran?"  The Brazilian solution is to abstain on ALL 
country-specific resolutions.  In response to poloff's further 
questioning, Silva said that Brazil nevertheless will evaluate each 
country's human rights situation. 
SHANNON