10BRASILIA180
BRAZIL: S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSALS
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0180/01 0501249
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191217Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0505
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS BRASILIA 000180 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/GWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PREL KPAO PHUM AID CDC COM TRSY
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSALS 
 
REF: 10 STATE 12531 
 
¶1.  Brazil is pleased to submit proposals to the S/GWI Small Grants 
Initiative. We as a Mission believe these proposals will assist in 
the advancement of U.S. objectives, primarily in supporting our 
joint effort to provide education to support social advancement in 
local communities and assistance to victims of gender-based 
violence (GBV) which is an important focus in Brazil. 
 
 
 
¶2.  The proposals are ranked as follows: First - Geledes and second 
- INDICA.  Post strongly supports both proposals as not only 
meeting the submission criteria but also addressing priority issues 
facing women in Brazil.  Each proposal covers an 18-month period 
and has met the requirements to qualify for grant application. 
They additionally address GBV and contain multiplier components 
that will enable them to continue beyond the initial program. Our 
submissions are for local organizations that have references from 
partners they have successfully worked with on similar projects. 
Geledes has supplied accountability reports from joint projects 
with the Ford Foundation and Global Partners for Justice.  INDICA 
has received a favorable report from the Inter-American Foundation 
and OI Futuro which have partnered with INDICA on previous 
projects. 
 
 
 
PROPOSAL #1 - Geledes 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
Geledes   is an Afro-Brazilian women's 
organization that works to end violence and discrimination against 
women and empower them to change themselves and their communities. 
Geledes is a solid Consulate contact (several of their members are 
former IVs) and experienced in grants management.  They have 
partnered with such institutions as the Ford Foundation, Unifem, 
MacArthur Foundation, Levis Strauss, Kodak and the Angela Borba 
Foundation. 
 
 
 
Focusing on citizenship and justice, Geledes runs a program 
training women to be Community Legal Advocates (promotoras legais 
populares).  Since 1997 they have trained over 400 women.  Geledes 
selects women from marginalized areas, usually Brazilian slums 
(known as favelas), and puts them through an 18-month course that 
instructs them in their basic rights and how they can access the 
legal system.  These women then serve as reference in their 
communities, people to whom women can go for information on basic 
civics, accessing social services, and reporting domestic, ethnic 
and gender violence.  Although there are similar projects in Sao 
Paulo and other cities, Geledes is the only one to focus on issues 
particular to Afro-Brazilian women and it is the only one to give 
classes within the communities. 
 
 
 
The Community Legal Advocates (CLA) program combines the issues of 
gender and race.  While the CLA Project has other funding, this 
grant would enable them to amplify their project's impact by: 
 
 
 
¶1.  Doubling the amount of women in the course from 25 to 50 to 
include at least two women from outside east Sao Paulo.  After 
completing the course, these women will take the training to their 
respective cities and organizations. 
 
¶2.  Creating for the first time a formalized institutional 
curriculum and instruction material for participants that can be 
used other NGOs and local governments. 
 
¶3.   Include a new segment on entrepreneurship and small business 
mentoring through a partnership with Elas por Elas, an NGO focused 
on women in business and politics.  Elas por Elas is the local 
representative of the Vital Voices Global Partnership.  The NGO was 
created in 1999 after several women, supported by post's Public 
Affairs Section, attended the 1998 Vital Voices Summit in 
Montevideo, Uruguay. 
 
We as a mission strongly believe the CLA meets U.S. goals to build 
women's leadership, increase economic opportunities, promote equal 
access to justice and provide capacity-building for a women's 
organization in developing countries. 
 
 
 
Project Purpose 
 
 
 
To create and support community leaders by giving them the basic 
tools to counter ethnic and gender discrimination, spread 
citizenship and increase access to the justice system.  The 18 
month-training program empowers 50 women aged 17-60 from east Sao 
Paulo (an area with concentrated pockets of poverty and violence) 
to serve their communities as key persons with knowledge about a 
wide range of topics regarding citizenship. This will increase 
access to social services and create a network able to protect 
women's basic rights and to combat multiple forms of violence. 
Courses are given by judges, lawyers, policewomen, women 
politicians, psychologist, sociologists, NGOs, health professionals 
and others.  Increased funding would amplify the program's impact 
by training more women and creating training materials that can be 
exported to other cities and states. 
 
 
 
Goals 
 
 
 
¶1.  To create new and strengthen existing women community leaders 
through courses on human rights with an emphasis on women's rights. 
 
¶2.  To act as an information multiplier on issues such as 
citizenship and legal access by teaching women who will go out and 
inform others as well as creating specific training materials that 
can be used in other cities and countries. 
 
¶3.  To build a network to combat all forms of violence, including 
racial, gender, domestic and sexual violence. 
 
¶4.  To develop and support grassroots community projects and 
organizations. 
 
 
 
Project Structure & Associated Activities 
 
 
 
Classes and site visits covering the following topics will be held: 
 
 
 
¶I.       Human Rights and the Organization of the State: 
International Declaration of Human Rights, Human Rights in 
Brazilian law, the Brazilian Constitution, State structure and the 
division of power in the executive, legislative and judiciary 
branches. Site visits to the Legislative Assembly, Municipal 
Chamber, Courts and Women's Police Station. 
 
 
 
II.     Women's Rights as Human Rights: Laws, conventions and 
treaties dealing with women's issues. Women and Family: family 
relationships, family law, nutrition, legal separation, divorce, 
dissolution of common-law marriage, child custody, paternity tests, 
Statute for Children and Adolescents. Women at Risk: legal 
assistance for victims of domestic violence, social services for 
women at risk, gender/sexual violence, ethnic and racial 
discrimination, infant mortality, and women's health. 
 
 
 
III.    Labor Rights: labor law with emphasis on equality in the 
work force. 
 
 
 
IV.     Social Security: social security payments, pensions and 
other benefits in case of illness and/or accident. 
 
¶V.       Self-Esteem Workshops: self knowledge, self esteem 
conversations on the joys and problems of womanhood. 
 
 
 
VI.     Work and Income Generating Projects: Entrepreneurship, 
business mentoring and information technology. 
 
 
 
VII.    Consumer Rights: Consumer law, the Code for Consumer 
Defense. 
 
 
 
VIII.  Cultural Activities: Theatre, conferences, seminars etc. 
 
 
 
Proposed Project Budget 
 
 
 
Item 
 
Description 
 
Cost/m 
 
Months 
 
Total 
 
Transportation 
 
Transport of course coordinators, speakers and students 
 
R$ 1.000 
 
18 
 
R$ 18.000 
 
Professional Trainer Costs 
 
Partnership with Elas por Elas 
 
R$ 555 
 
18 
 
R$ 15.000 
 
Supplies 
 
Notebooks, pens, program t-shirt, weekly snacks for meetings 
 
R$ 333 
 
18 
 
R$ 6.000 
 
Didactic material 
 
Copies of codes, conventions and laws. DVDs, workbooks, books, Cds. 
 
R$ 1166 
 
18 
 
R$ 15.000 
 
Site Visits 
 
Courthouse, Municipal Chamber,  Assembly House, Women's Police 
Stations, small businesses 
 
R$ 111 
 
18 
 
R$ 4.000 
 
Cultural Events 
 
Theatre, Films, Music, Roundtables, Conferences, Workshops 
 
R$ 166 
 
18 
 
R$ 3.000 
 
Community Legal Advocate Training Publication 
 
Creation of training materials including DVD for CLA course to be 
used by Geledes and other NGOs and local governments in order to 
replicate the program 
 
R$ 2222 
 
18 
 
R$ 40.000 
 
Train the Trainer 
 
Bring at least two women from outside of Sao Paulo to attend the 
CLA course in order to return to their home cities and replicate 
it. 
 
R$ 555 
 
18 
 
R$ 10.000 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
fax, post office,  internet,  laundry, pharmacy, temporary help 
for events, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
R$ 3.000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total in Local Currency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R$ 113.000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approximate Total in USD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USD$ 63,000 
 
PROPOSAL #2 - INDICA: Meninos e Meninas Nao Brigam 
 
(Provisional name) 
 
 
 
The Institute for the Rights of Children and Adolescents (INDICA) 
is a non-profit organization from Bras????lia, Brazil, founded in 
March 2002 by Agop Kayayan, a former UNICEF representative to 
Brazil. The main objective of INDICA is to promote the welfare and 
citizenship of children and teenagers through programs in health 
care, environment, professional education, culture, media, and 
income generation, led by a highly qualified staff. INDICA meets 
this objective through organizing workshops, publishing books, 
movies, and educational materials, and participating in the 
development, monitoring and evaluation of public policies related 
to children's rights. INDICA has previously partnered with the 
Inter-American Foundation and OI Futuro, both of which have 
provided us with favorable feedback on INDICA's ability to manage 
their projects and funding. 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
 
INDICA will partner with the Civil Police of the Federal District 
of Brazil (PCDF) to create and reproduce an illustrated children's 
book and accompanying DVD aimed at informing and educating public 
school children in the Federal District between the ages of 10 and 
12 about domestic violence. These didactic materials will be 
distributed by INDICA over a period of 18 months. 
 
 
 
The book and DVD will be created by children's authors in 
partnership with INDICA as well as with local authorities (PCDF) 
who specialize in responding to domestic violence. An "educational 
coordination" team, consisting of an educator and a child 
psychologist, will consult with both parties to ensure that the 
language used by adults and professionals to describe domestic 
violence will be adapted into appropriate, usable, and compelling 
language for children and young adolescents. 
 
 
 
PCDF will provide a valuable source of information for INDICA 
during the design phase of the program. PCDF recently inaugurated 
its "Safe Women" (Mulheres Seguras) Project, part of a series of 
steps that focus on educating the local community about violence 
against women. Among several other accomplishments, the Safe Women 
Project has opened special police stations for women (Delegacias 
Especializadas de Atendimento ???? Mulher, or DEAM); incorporated 
sensitivity training and appropriate investigatory methods into the 
local police academy curriculum; and has begun to provide emergency 
kits (known as "crisis bags") filled with clean clothing and 
personal hygiene products to victims of rape or other violence. 
PCDF's focus on domestic violence is representative of broader 
recent efforts by Brazil to confront this endemic problem. INDICA's 
project will build on this progress in an effort to "close the 
circle" as it were, by focusing on children and young adolescents - 
a huge demographic that is deeply affected by gendered violence, 
but not often the focus of efforts to eradicate it. 
 
 
 
INDICA will produce 1,500 copies of the educational DVD and 15,000 
copies of the children's book. After an initial 6-month period of 
design and production, INDICA will spend the next 12 months 
implementing the project by visiting local public schools to 
initiate substantive discussions about domestic violence and ways 
to prevent and address it. The leaders of the discussions, who will 
include local allied professionals, will provide emergency contacts 
and guidance for children who find themselves in violent situations 
at home. The DVD will be used as a lead-in to these discussions, 
and the books will be distributed at the end to the students to 
take home. 
 
 
 
This project carries strong potential for expansion and replication 
across Brazil, and possibly across Latin America, beyond the 
 
18-month pilot. The media that is produced could be easily 
disseminated over the Internet, and could be translated into 
Spanish, English, and other languages as well as adapted for other 
audiences. The ease of reproducing the original media will ensure 
broad replication outside of the Federal District. 
 
 
 
PROJECT PURPOSE 
 
 
 
Domestic violence is a recognized, widespread problem in Brazil. A 
study carried out between 2000 and 2001 by the World Health 
Organization found that an astounding 33%, or one-third, of 
Brazilian women between 15 and 49 had experienced at least one 
episode of physical and/or sexual violence by an intimate partner 
in their lifetimes. 46% had experienced some type of psychological 
violence by an intimate partner, including insults, threats, 
humiliation, and intimidation. 
 
 
 
INDICA has observed an urgent need to develop steps to reach those 
children who may be, or may become, affected by domestic violence. 
With this project, the organization will target an audience that is 
not commonly engaged by efforts to stymie the problem but which is 
subject to its wide-ranging and long-term effects nonetheless. 
INDICA seeks to use this educational program to confront the issue 
of violence against women and to try to break the cycle of violence 
between one generation and the next. INDICA believes that it is 
vital to educate children for a future without gender 
discrimination and violence. 
 
 
 
GOALS 
 
 
 
The goal of this project is to inform, educate, and empower 
children and adolescents to prevent domestic violence in their 
homes and communities. 
 
 
 
The expected outcome is the effective empowerment of children and 
young adolescents to understand that domestic violence is always 
wrong; to choose nonviolent means to resolve conflicts; and to 
recognize their rights to be treated with respect. The program will 
emphasize RIGHTS and RECOURSES. 
 
 
 
ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES 
 
 
 
Planned activities for achieving the project goals include 
after-school sessions and special events held during school hours, 
during which members of INDICA staff, joined by local professionals 
who are knowledgeable about domestic violence, will present the DVD 
to the assembled students, give an educational lecture, and lead a 
substantive discussion about domestic violence against women. Books 
will be distributed to the students. 
 
 
 
To develop a program such as this for addressing and preventing 
domestic violence requires coordination among the several agencies 
that respond to victims of domestic violence and their families, 
such as legal services, criminal justice professionals, police 
departments, social services, women's councils, schools, and many 
other kinds of allied professionals, all of them necessary to build 
an efficient referral network. INDICA is an experienced liaison 
among such agencies. In the past, the organization has used those 
networks to implement similar programs targeting children and 
adolescents in fulfillment of its mission statement. One such 
program managed by INDICA is Projeto Bem-Me-Quer, which aims to 
promote peaceful environments for children and teenagers, free of 
prejudice and discrimination, through the use of diverse forms of 
media, including Web sites, video, 3D toy art, books, and teaching 
manuals. The project targets six areas: race and ethnicity, 
regionalism, gender, sexual orientation, disabilities and special 
needs, and socioeconomic class. 
 
PROPOSED BUDGET 
 
15,000 products will be reproduced at an average cost of $4.85 per 
unit. 
 
53,000 products could be reproduced at an average cost of $1.87 per 
unit. 
 
Items 
 
Number of people contracted 
 
Description of Services 
 
Values 
 
GRAPHIC DESIGN 
 
1 business 
 
Creating, editing, and formatting the book design. 
 
US$              5,406 
 
REVIEWER 
 
1 person 
 
Language revision for the book and DVD cover. 
 
US$                325 
 
SCRIPT 
 
1 person 
 
Creation of the storyboard for the animated DVD. 
 
US$              1,217 
 
DVD SOUNDTRACK 
 
1 business 
 
Creation of audio and sound effects for the DVD. 
 
US$              1,352 
 
ILLUSTRATOR 
 
1 business 
 
Drawings for the book. 
 
US$              2,500 
 
WRITER 
 
1 person 
 
Creating the children's story for the book. 
 
US$              1,622 
 
DUBBING 
 
3 people 
 
Creation of the characters voices for the DVD. 
 
US$                 811 
 
DVD PRODUCTION 
 
1 business 
 
Production of 1500 units. 
 
US$              2,433 
 
PRINTING OF DVD COVER 
 
1 business 
 
Printing of the DVD cover. 
 
US$              2,163 
 
BOOK PRINTING 
 
1 business 
 
Production of 15,000 units. 
 
US$            28,000 
 
DVD ANIMATION 
 
1 business 
 
Production of animation for the DVD, and studio rental. 
 
US$            16,217 
 
EDUCATIONAL COORDINATION 
 
CONTENT ADAPTATION 
 
3 people 
 
Adapt content of the book and DVD to the target audience:  Ages 
10-12. 
 
US$              4,055 
 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
 
1 business (INDICA) 
 
Coordination & management of all individuals and businesses 
involved. 
 
US$              5,183 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES & TAXES 
 
N/A 
 
Taxes, contract fees, legal, copyrights. 
 
US$              2,163 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS 
 
N/A 
 
Transportation, telephone, Internet, and office supplies. 
 
US$              4,000 
 
ACCOUNTANT 
 
1 person 
 
Outsourced accounting for the project: prepare all payments to 
service providers. 
 
US$              1,622 
 
ISBN 
 
N/A 
 
Registration of the book and DVD. 
 
US$                 271 
 
TOTAL 
 
 
 
 
 
US$           79,015 
 
 
 
NOTES ON THE BUDGET: 
 
Content Adaptation & Educational Coordination: An expert in 
 
domestic violence will work with the INDICA Educational 
Coordination team (an educator and a child psychologist) to adapt 
the formal sociological language used to discuss domestic violence 
into language appropriate for 10- to 12-year-old children. 
 
Accounting: In Brazil, non-profit organizations generally do not 
conduct internal accounting and auditing procedures due to the high 
cost of retaining accounting staff. Therefore such work is 
contracted for by an outside source. 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE OF IMPLEMENTATION OF PROPOSED ACTIVITIES 
 
 
 
Description of Activities 
 
Months 
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 
5 
 
6 
 
7-18 
 
Recruitment of companies and professionals 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
Content adaptation 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Story creation 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Booklet layout 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creation of digital animation 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Book printing & DVD production 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
Delivery of products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Implementation & Accountability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
SHANNON