05TUNIS1093
Media IV Program Positively Effects Tunisian
Wed May 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TUNIS 001093 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ECA/PE/V/R/N (KOTOB/MOODY); NEA/PPD (GLAZIER); 
NEA/MAG (LAWRENCE) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL TS
SUBJECT: Media IV Program Positively Effects Tunisian 
Journalist 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Abderraouf Mkadmi, an editor at the most 
widely-read and anti-American Tunisian daily newspaper, 
returned from the March "Role of the Media" program with 
profound respect for the American people.  Mkadmi noted 
that, upon his return to Tunisia, he was struck at the 
negative ramifications that his paper's angry 
denouncement of U.S. policy could have on both the 
American and Tunisian societies, and he expressed a 
determination to use his newspaper to help distinguish 
between U.S. foreign policy and American society.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  ACTIVITY:  FY-05 RP "Role of the Media in the U.S."; 
EVDB Project number 2005-0007. 
 
¶3.  DATES: March 14 - April 1, 2005 
 
¶4.  OBJECTIVE: To give participants a better 
understanding of the special role that the media plays in 
the United States.  In the case of Mr. Mkadmi, our goal 
was two-fold: to provide him insight into the importance 
of a free and responsible media and to bring him face-to- 
face with citizens of a country that is daily vilified in 
his newspaper. 
 
¶5.  MPP GOAL: Democracy and Mutual Understanding. 
 
¶6.  IMPACT: Outstanding.  As mentioned, Mr. Mkadmi is an 
editor at the most widely-read and anti-American daily in 
Tunisia.  His overwhelmingly positive experience in 
getting to know the American people and the opportunity 
to better understand the way that a responsible and free 
press can serve a government and its people profoundly 
affected his view of the U.S. and is shaping his work at 
his newspaper.  He noted that, after this tour, he was 
almost embarrassed to acknowledge the sad state of the 
press in his country. Mr. Mkadmi was most impressed with 
the kindness and warmth of the American people.  He 
recounted with emotion their attendance of a rodeo in 
Texas, during which the Americans present applauded and 
cheered when it was announced that there were Arab 
journalists present.  Mr. Mkadmi also was deeply moved by 
the "humility" of all of the American people with whom 
they met.  He noted that, regardless of the rank and 
stature of the interlocutor, all of the American 
officials or individuals with whom he met exhibited 
modesty and humility, and a genuine interest in learning 
about the Arab journalists's point of view. 
 
¶7.  CONSTRUCTIVE FEEDBACK: Mr. Mkadmi complimented the 
program organization. He enjoyed the home hospitality. He 
experienced no airport delays, and said that he completed 
entry formalities at Dulles in 15 minutes. 
 
¶8.  BRINGING LESSONS BACK HOME: Mr. Mkadmi shared his 
experiences with the over 80,000 Tunisian readers of his 
newspaper in a four-part series on his experience.  While 
constrained by the anti-American editorial line of his 
paper, Mkadmi made a point of underlining positive 
aspects of American society such as the power of 
capitalism, the strength of American science and 
research, and the willingness of American people to 
engage with the Arab world.  His determination to improve 
Tunisian views of the American people was exemplified in 
a recent editorial written in connection with the 
allegations of desecration of a Koran in Guantanamo. 
While other articles severely criticized the U.S., 
Mkadmi's article noted that it was important to remember 
that an Arab-American museum just opened in Michigan and 
argued that any decision to disrespect Islam was not 
reflective of the entire American society. 
 
¶9. QUALITY OF ECA AND PROGRAM AGENCY SUPPORT: Excellent. 
 
HUDSON