06TUNIS569
MEPI OPPORTUNITIES PRESENTED TO 120 JUNIOR CHAMBER
Mon Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0035
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0569/01 0721306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131306Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0051UNCLAS TUNIS 000569 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG (LAWRENCE), NEA/FI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KDEM KMPI PREL TS
SUBJECT: MEPI OPPORTUNITIES PRESENTED TO 120 JUNIOR CHAMBER 
INTERNATIONAL CHAPTER PRESIDENTS 
 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY.  In February, Embassy Tunis' MEPI 
Coordinator spoke to the newly-elected presidents of the 
Junior Chamber International (JCI) chapters in Tunisia about 
MEPI programs, specifically highlighting the Small Grants 
Program.  There are approximately 2,700 JCI members in 
Tunisia, aged 18-40.  The JCI members call themselves 
"citizens of the world."  Their main focus, according to the 
JCI charter, is personal development and the betterment of 
their communities.  One chapter has already been awarded a 
MEPI small grant, and there are many possible MEPI projects 
in the pipeline.  The JCI member base is rich in 
opportunities for collaboration, as this organization 
provides an alternative to membership in the ruling political 
party in Tunisian communities.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) In February, Embassy Tunis' MEPI Coordinator spoke to 
Tunisia's Junior Chamber International's (JCI) incoming 
presidents for 2006 about MEPI programs at one of their 
regularly-scheduled training sessions, held in the northern 
Tunisian city of Bizerte.  The goal was to have the 
presidents take the goals and opportunities afforded by MEPI 
funds back to their chapters, and alert members to a possible 
funding source for any reform-related projects that members 
might envision in their communities.  Although an overview of 
all MEPI grants was given, we focused on the Small Grants 
Program, as the most appropriate grant size for individual 
members' projects.  The MEPI Coordinator was impressed with 
the vision and scope of some of the projects under 
consideration.  There is an opportunity to actively work to 
develop a stronger partnership between MEPI/Tunis and the JCI 
membership base in Tunisia. 
 
¶3.  (U) JCI is a worldwide federation of young leaders and 
entrepreneurs, with nearly 200,000 active JCI members between 
the ages of 18-40 in over 100 countries, and millions of JCI 
alumni.  Its mission encompasses personal development of the 
member and advancement of the global community.  The JCI 
organization, headquartered in the U.S., was founded in 1944 
on the premise that young people working for mutual 
understanding could prevent another holocaust in the future. 
In Tunisia, the national chamber, headed by national 
president Mounir Baatour, has approximately 2,700 members, 
spread out across the country into 120 individual chapters. 
Each president is elected for a one-year term in a 
chapter-wide election.  JCI is truly a democratic 
organization, and members are developing precursor skills 
necessary for political participation on a wider scale.  The 
group's members also view themselves as "citizens of the 
world," according to JCI's national credo. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The number of chapters in Tunisia and the 
membership base have continued to grow since JCI began here 
in 1983.  This growth compares favorably with the stagnation 
of the ruling party youth groups, that are having trouble 
recruiting youth, according to JCI members.  When asked if 
JCI has problems with political authorities, the national 
president stated that "JCI is apolitical, and we are moderate 
in our views."  The focus of the organization is not on 
politics, but on the individual and the community.  Although 
JCI has members who are involved with the ruling Democratic 
Constitutional Rally (RCD) party, so far neither RCD or the 
GOT has interfered in a significant way with the group.  And 
when it comes to MEPI, the group is keen to apply for 
funding.  According to national executive vice-president, 
Amine Haj Said, "the higher levels of the government are 
pro-MEPI.  It is only when you start dealing with local 
politicians who rule over local jurisdictions that you have 
trouble.  This is because they are jealous, because we are 
attracting young people and growing, and they are not." 
However, he admitted that they have to be careful to work 
with local officials, who can be obstacles to successful 
projects in their communities.  Mr. Haj Said speaks from 
first-hand experience, because he was the first JCI member to 
successfully receive a MEPI small grant. 
 
¶5.  (U) In 2005, the JCI chapter in Ksibet El-Mediouni in 
east-central Tunisia was awarded a MEPI small grant of 
$18,240 to provide eight training courses on leadership, 
business, and entrepreneurial skills intended to spark 
interest in civic activism among women and youth.  Additional 
components of this project will include supporting 
participation by new members in local and national events 
related to the JCI activities; providing training in 
marketing, accounting, banking, and management techniques for 
rural businesswomen; and supplying microgrants to women 
artisans. 
 
¶6.  (U) Other projects that individual members are planning 
to submit in the future are also quite promising.  JCI Gremda 
VP Ennouri told MEPI Coordinator that their chapter is 
 
planning two conferences in October 2006 to address the 
subject of Islam and democracy "to boost the democratic 
initiative in our country."  The keynote speaker will be a 
U.S. professor from the Center of Middle Eastern and North 
African Studies at the University of Michigan, who also 
serves on the board of the Center for the Study of Islam and 
Democracy.  Another chapter, JCI Zarzis, is attempting to 
develop an economic zone in that community along the southern 
coast to attract foreign investment for tourism, commercial 
and industrial enterprises, and a commercial port.  JCI 
Monastir is planning a Middle East-Africa business conference 
for June 2006, and will be hosting groups from both North and 
Sub-Saharan Africa. 
 
¶7.  (U) At the national level, the plans grow larger.  The 
national president hopes to train the 120 chapter presidents 
in parliamentary procedures based on "Robert's Rules."  He 
also hopes to establish an annual contest to recognize the 10 
top students in various study areas, and give them national 
recognition and further training.  There will also be a 
contest for the nation's best invention by a young person, in 
a similar format.  An online directory to connect members 
with other members worldwide is planned, and this will 
provide more opportunities for business exchanges.  Another 
initiative is to establish a Junior Achievement organization 
in Tunisia, which would take this type of progressive 
thinking to an even younger group of people. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  As the vision and programs of these 
young leaders unfold, the membership base at JCI shows that 
it is actively thinking about ways to engage the global 
community, and about how it can better members' lives and 
communities.  It is clear from these initial contacts that 
the group is serious and hard-working, and a potential source 
of young leaders for State-sponsored programs.  It is also 
fortunate for Post to have access to a receptive body of 
young people, because it can be difficult to identify and 
connect with youth in Tunisia.  Post intends to stay engaged 
with this group to pursue new MEPI projects in the future. 
END COMMENT. 
BALLARD