07TUNIS1380
RESPONSE TO CALL FOR NOMINATIONS: 2008 SECRETARY'S
Mon Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #1380/01 2881255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151255Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3995UNCLAS TUNIS 001380 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/IWI, NEA/MAG, DRL, AND ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PREL PHUM KPAO TS
SUBJECT: RESPONSE TO CALL FOR NOMINATIONS: 2008 SECRETARY'S 
AWARD FOR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN OF COURAGE 
 
REF: A. STATE 126072 
 
     ¶B. TUNIS 1044 
     ¶C. TUNIS 986 
     ¶D. TUNIS 293 
     ¶E. TUNIS 708 
     ¶F. 06 TUNIS 1658 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Embassy Tunis is pleased to nominate Samia Abbou 
for the Secretary's Award for International Women of Courage. 
 Secretary Rice remarked on International Women's Day that 
the day commemorates women, "who are the international 
defenders of what President Bush has called the 
non-negotiable demands of human dignity."  When Samia's 
husband Mohamed Abbou was convicted of "defaming the 
judiciary" in 2005, after he posted articles online critical 
of President Ben Ali (he was released on July 24, see Refs B 
and C), Samia had many options.  She could have chosen to 
remain quiet, avoided the spotlight,  and actively distanced 
herself from civil society activists.  She did not.  Instead, 
she choose to highlight her husband's cause in the 
international arena, calling attention to freedom of 
expression and association issues as well as prison 
conditions.  Her work personifies the defense of human 
dignity, and her dedication, courage, and leadership in this 
cause have made her an example and an inspiration.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  During Mohamed Abbou's two-year incarceration in 
El Kef prison (he was released on July 24, see Refs B and C), 
Samia Abbou was subject to regular police harassment and 
surveillance (Refs D,E, and F).  For example, Samia was 
routinely followed by plainclothes policemen, who were also 
stationed outside her home.  On occasion, someone would 
rattle her doors and windows late at night frightening her 
young children.  Police would stop her frequently during her 
weekly drives to El Kef prison (a two hour drive from Tunis), 
where her husband was incarcerated.  Harrassment would 
notably escalate whenever Samia took action to promote her 
husband's cause, such as meeting with US Embassy officials or 
international NGOs. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Though worried for herself and her family, Samia 
found the courage to become an international spokesperson for 
freedom of expression and prisoner's rights to call attention 
to her husband's cause.  For example, on October 16, 2006, 
Samia Abbou rallied the wives of other political prisoners 
for a one-day hunger-strike to protest their husband's 
continued detention.  Following the 
hunger-strike, police harassment and surveillance of Samia 
Abbou and her family dramatically increased, but Samia 
continued to speak out.  Mohamed Abbou's case received a 
significant amount of international attention, and much of 
that is due to Samia's work as a spokesperson.  Her work drew 
attention not only to her husband's case, but to the 
challenges faced by civil society activists in general. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  It is important to note that Samia Abbou balanced 
the demands of activism with the challenges of suddenly 
acting as a single parent.  She was a source of compassion 
and strength to not only her own family as well as to the 
many families that found themselves in similar situations. 
It takes a lot of courage to do what Samia Abbou did, and she 
did most of it on her own.  Samia is currently focusing on 
obtaining her law degree and license to practice law.  The 
legal profession will be lucky to gain a talented, eloquent, 
and dedicated defender of human rights. 
 
¶5. (SBU) While Samia says that her husband's release was, 
"the present of a lifetime," the Embassy feels that it is 
important to formally recognize her contributions to the 
advancement of civil liberties in Tunisia.  Freedom of 
expression is a central element of any democracy, and as such 
is an important element of post's democracy promotion 
strategy.  Post's efforts are most effective in conjunction 
with the efforts of local activists, of which there is a 
small but dedicated cadre.  Samia and Mohamed Abbou are, 
while not young, among the younger members of this group, and 
have the potential to become the leaders of a new generation 
of activists.  They undoubtedly have a long career ahead of 
them, but in the meantime, post feels that it is  important 
to recognize that Samia Abbou did what she did, at great 
personal cost, simply because it was the right thing to do. 
 
---------------------- 
Biographic Information 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) 
 
Full Legal Name: Samia Hammouda Abbou 
Job Title/ Association: Student 
DOB: November 3, 1965 
Country of Birth: Tunisia 
Citizenship: Tunisian 
Address: Rue 1 0240 El-Ouardia, Tunis 1009 
Telephone: 20 984 225 
E-mail address: abboumohamed@gmail.com 
Passport Number: z866990 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Samia Abbou was notified of her nomination. 
DESJARDINS