08AMMAN2671
KBR TRAFFICKING LAWSUIT GENERATING WIDE INTEREST
Mon Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAM #2671/01 2591148
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151148Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY AMMAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3525
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 6071
RUEHKT/AMEMBASSY KATHMANDU 0056UNCLAS AMMAN 002671 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KTIP NP IZ JO
SUBJECT: KBR TRAFFICKING LAWSUIT GENERATING WIDE INTEREST 
IN JORDAN 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: A lawsuit recently filed in California 
against Kellogg Brown & Root, Inc., and Jordanian firm Daoud 
& Partners for allegedly trafficking 13 Nepalese into Iraq 
has generated wide interest. Commentators are demanding that 
the GOJ investigate, prodded along by spurious allegations 
that the Chief of the Royal Court is involved (septel). In 
2005, the Ministry of Labor closed one of the co-conspirator 
companies named in the lawsuit, Morning Star for Recruitment 
and Manpower Supply, for its role in facilitating the entry 
of laborers into Jordan. The company is again operational but 
not believed to be directly recruiting workers. No other 
investigations or measures were taken against any of the 
companies named in the lawsuit.  On September 10 Foreign 
Minister Salah Bashir denied that the MFA or Jordanian 
Embassy in the U.S. had received any notice of, or had any 
information about, the lawsuit. 
 
Origins of the Lawsuit 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Family members of twelve Nepalese taken hostage and 
killed in Iraq in 2004 and a survivor of the incident 
submitted a lawsuit on August 27 in the Central District 
Court of California alleging they were trafficked across 
international borders to provide labor in U.S. military 
facilities. The complaint is against Kellogg Brown & Root, 
Inc. (KBR), and its Jordanian subcontractor Daoud & Partners 
(Daoud). Three companies are also listed as co-conspirators 
and active participants in the trafficking enterprise: 
Moonlight Consultant Pvt, Ltd (Moonlight), Morning Star for 
Recruitment and Manpower Supply (Morning Star), and Bisharat 
& Partners (Bisharat). Moonlight is a Nepalese Company. 
Morning Star and Bisharat are Jordanian companies as is Daoud 
& Partners. 
 
¶3. (U) According to the complaint, Moonlight recruited the 
plaintiffs through an advertisement for hotel jobs in Amman. 
Once in Jordan, Morning Star provided the plaintiffs to 
Daoud, reportedly sub-contracted by KBR to provide workers 
for their work in Iraq. The plaintiffs were allegedly 
required to hand over their passports, told there were no 
hotel jobs, and informed they would be working at Al Asad Air 
Base, north of Ramadi, instead. Daoud then contracted 
Bisharat to transport the plaintiffs to Ramadi. Bisharat 
arranged the transportation along the dangerous 
Amman-to-Baghdad Highway where two weeks earlier, Daoud had 
seen two drivers kidnapped. Part of the caravan was 
intercepted, with twelve Nepalese taken hostage and later 
killed. The surviving plaintiff made it safely to the Air 
Base. 
 
¶4. (U) Also according to an article in the Washington 
Business Journal on July 11, the U.S. Department of Labor's 
Office of Administrative Law ruled in April 2008 that the 
men's families were entitled to death benefits. The same law 
firm, Cohen, Milstein, Hausfeld & Toll PLC, that filed the 
aforementioned complaint sued, pro bono, Daoud and its 
insurance company under the Defense Base Act, which is 
similar to a workers' compensation statute for military 
facilities overseas. Daoud was ordered to pay $100,000 to the 
families of each victim. KBR was not part of the lawsuit 
because the relevant insurance policy was written in the name 
of Daoud. 
 
Legal Actions 
------------- 
 
¶5. (U) On March 17, the Jordanian MFA provided post a 
diplomatic note (in response to a February 2008 diplomatic 
note asking for information for the 2008 Trafficking in 
Persons Report) stating that Morning Star was closed by the 
Ministry of Labor in 2005 after its owner, Adnalin Frank Kiko 
Santos, was summoned to explain its role in this trafficking 
case after it was detailed in the media. According to the 
diplomatic note, it was clear that the owner's husband, Iyad 
Mansur, who had previous experience working with Moonlight, 
had facilitated the recruitment of the Nepali workers. The 
note also indicated that the Nepali workers did not enter the 
country under the name of Morning Star but as transit 
passengers. MOL officials subsequently confirmed this last 
point. 
 
¶6. (U) According to the diplomatic note and several MOL 
officials, Morning Star itself filed a criminal lawsuit 
against Iyad Mansur in Amman Criminal Court stating that he 
individually, and not the company, was responsible for the 
recruitment of the workers. According to the MOL, the case is 
still pending and Morning Star is again in business but not 
directly recruiting workers. No other investigations or 
actions were taken against any of the co-conspirators (Daoud, 
 
Morning Star, or Bisharat) in Jordan.  An Agence 
France-Presse article on September 8 quotes a statement from 
Daoud that it denies "any role in the unfortunate case" and 
"does not have any information that a lawsuit was filed 
against it outside of Jordan." 
 
Call for Investigations 
----------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The lawsuit has prompted a flurry of stories and 
opinion pieces in the Jordanian press.  The level of interest 
can be partially attributed to false assertions that Bassem 
Awadallah, Chief of the Royal Court, had a stake in one of 
the companies (septel).  Despite the mud being thrown in 
Awadallah's direction, the underlying messages being aired 
are that trafficking is serious, that it violates Jordanian 
law and harms Jordan's interests, and that the allegations 
detailed in the complaint need to be investigated. 
 
Visit Amman's Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman 
 
Beecroft 
Beecroft