08ANKARA1652
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3006
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1652/01 2591358
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151358Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7463
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9167
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4739
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3231
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6861
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6702
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3272
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 15, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Gul and Baykal Mend Fences at Sogut Festivities 
Media outlets report President Abdullah Gul, opposition CHP Leader 
Deniz Baykal, MHP Leader Devlet Bahceli and cabinet ministers 
participated in the ceremony to commemorate the 727th anniversary of 
the founding of the Ottoman Empire in Sogut town in the Marmara 
province of Bilecik.  President Gul said, "We sacrifice our 
interests when we waste our energy fighting with each other," in 
reference to the ongoing controversy between Prime Minister Erdogan 
and media mogul Aydin Dogan's Dogan Media Group over alleged 
irregularities in the Germany-based Turkish charity Deniz Feneri. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "the ice is breaking" between 
President Gul and opposition CHP Leader Baykal as Baykal and Gul 
shook hands at the ceremonies yesterday.  In addition, papers note 
Baykal, who opposed Gul's candidacy for president referred to Gul 
for the first time publicly as "Mr. President." 
 
The Erdogan-Dogan Spat Continues 
Media outlets continue to report on the ongoing spat between Prime 
Minister Erdogan and the Dogan Media Group regarding the fraud trial 
of Germany-based Islamist-oriented Deniz Feneri charity and its 
alleged links to Islamist-leaning media outlets in Turkey and the 
ruling AKP officials.  The Dogan Group's newspapers and television 
channels report allegations that donations raised by the Deniz 
Feneri charity in Istanbul were used to support the AKP and media 
outlets close to the governing party.  Saturday's papers report the 
International Press Institute (IPI) released a statement asking 
Prime Minister Erdogan to cease his attempts to pressure the Turkish 
media.  Mainstream Vatan says the PM shrugged off the call made by 
IPI, which Vatan describes as, "One of the most prestigious press 
organizations around the world." Erdogan asked, "Who is IPI to issue 
me an ultimatum?"  Erdogan also lashed out at media tycoon Aydin 
Dogan for pressuring the government for favors.  Aydin Dogan 
rejected the PM's claim, saying he had not asked the government for 
anything illegal.  Liberal Radikal reports on Monday Erdogan's 
remarks in Istanbul was again "full of insults, threats and 
blackmail."  Saturday papers report former Parliament Speaker Bulent 
Arinc denounced the irregularities within Deniz Feneri charity, 
stressing that the charges should be examined by the Turkish 
authorities as well. 
 
Papers report that on Wednesday, a verdict is expected in the Deniz 
Feneri case in Germany.  Some officials from opposition parties CHP 
and DSP will travel to Germany to observe court proceedings. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Dogan Media Group--the PM Controversy 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "It seems Prime Minister 
Erdogan needs to learn about the indispensable role of the freedom 
of the press in a democracy.  In a normal democracy, he would have 
to address allegations in the Deniz Feneri Frankfurt indictment 
instead of blaming newspapers for reporting the indictment.  If only 
he knew democracy and believed the supremacy of law." 
 
Tamer Korkmaz wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "It is not easy 
to believe that the Dogan Media Group is only after corruption cases 
because of their journalistic integrity.  The Dogan Media Group 
seems to like trying to defame the government.  As the archives tell 
us, when serious corruption cases occurred during the February 28 
process, the Dogan group did not pursue out a single story on this 
topic." 
 
Erol Manisali in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "If we really 
oppose the type of fraud in the Deniz Feneri case, we must also 
oppose the actions of American and European imperialism in the 
Middle East.  The March 12 and September 12 military takeovers, 
Operation Provide Comfort, March 6 1995, November 2 2002, and July 
22, 2007 are all links in the same chain.  Merely opposing the 
irregularities in the Deniz Feneri won't mean anything other than 
 
ANKARA 00001652  002 OF 003 
 
 
saving the current day." 
 
"An Important Visit from the U.S."  (Ortadogu) 
Media outlets report on the visit of Chairman of U.S. Joint Chief of 
Staff Admiral Mike Mullen as a chance for the U.S. and Turkey to 
discuss the crisis in the Caucasus, the PKK, and the ongoing 
military coordination between the two countries.  Leftist Taraf 
carries the headline, "Was this the Montreux Visit?" and speculates 
this "surprise" visit may have been Mullen's attempt to discuss the 
revision of the Montreux Agreement.  Islamist-oriented Zaman carries 
the headline, "U.S. Chief of Staff Discussed the Bosporus Straits 
with Erdogan."  Meanwhile, far right Ortadogu reports in "An 
Important Visit from the U.S." that "Mullen is Chief of Turkish 
General Staff General Basbug's first official guest." 
 
In a related story, over the weekend mainstreams Milliyet and Sabah 
reported the USS McFaul, described by Sabah as a "guided missile 
destroyer," has re-entered the Black Sea.  Milliyet reports "it 
looks like the McFaul will enter and exit the Black Sea in line with 
the Montreux restrictions in order to maintain a presence in the 
Black Sea."   Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet referred to the ship's 
maneuvers as "cheating" in that the point of the Montreux 
restrictions "is to limit warship presence in the Black Sea," but 
the entrance and exit of the McFaul allows it to abide by the 
restrictions while "maintaining its military presence in the Black 
Sea." Reports highlighted the 21-day limitation for foreign war 
ships according to the Montreux Covention, and mentioned that the 
USS McFaul spent less than three weeks but also speculated about the 
legitimacy of a revolving door approach.  Hurriyet noted earlier 
rumors that, "the U.S. will dilute Montreux by exiting and 
re-entering the Black Sea, and that's exactly what happened." 
 
DTP Presents Defense in Closure Case Tomorrow 
Mainstream Sabah reports DTP chairman Ahmet Turk will present the 
party's verbal defense at the Constitutional Court tomorrow. 
Reportedly, at the Court, Ahmet Turk will warn, "If the DTP is 
closed, the Kurdish people will distance themselves from the 
political platform, resulting in chaos and violence.  We've been 
reiterating that the Kurdish issue can be resolved by peaceful 
means.  The DTP doesn't want violence, but peace.  Our party is the 
defender of the legal solution for the Kurdish issue.  Closing the 
DTP will mean insisting on not resolving the Kurdish issue." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey/Armenia 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "During a press conference 
in Baku, Energy Minister Guler was asked whether there was a 
possibility the Nabucco pipeline could pass through Armenia.  Guler 
said "This is not on the agenda for now."  This answer indicates 
that there was a vast change in balances in the Caucasus following 
the war between Georgia and Russia.  Georgia is no longer a safe 
route for the Nabucco pipeline.  At this time, Turkey, Azerbaijan, 
Europe and all other investors will seriously evaluate Armenia's 
participation in the Nabucco project.  Aside from Armenia, there is 
only one other country the pipeline can pass through - Iran.  Of 
course, this choice upsets the U.S. immensely.  Just to avoid this 
choice, the U.S. is pressuring Turkey to open the Turkey-Armenia 
border, and Ankara announced the opening of a new page in 
Turkey-Armenia relations. At the same time Minister Guler is not 
confirming the possibility of Armenia's participation in the 
pipeline." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "In order to end the 
hostility with Armenia regarding the events of 1915, the experienced 
Ambassador Volkan Vural suggested that Turkey say, "We do not 
approve of what happened in 1915."  In addition, Ambassador Vural 
suggests Turkey pay the Armenians affected by those incidents a 
symbolic compensation.  Unfortunately, Vural was harshly criticized 
for his words.  But his intellectual capacity is enough to respond 
bravely to this criticism.  We have right to expect the same kind of 
 
ANKARA 00001652  003 OF 003 
 
 
bravery from Armenia.  The political leadership on both sides has a 
huge responsibility in this issue.  It is not possible to solve this 
problem with mutual accusations.  The only way toward a solution is 
a scientific examination of history and political encouragement that 
can address current needs." 
 
Ali H. Aslan in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Washington appreciates the 
new military-civilian developments in Turkey concerning the Kurdish 
question and President Gul's visit to Yerevan.  It will, however, be 
difficult for Turkey to become the 'winner' regarding the Armenian 
problem without healing the wounds of the incidents between Muslims 
and Christians during World War I.  Dialogue and a mutual respect 
are necessary for this to happen.  I believe 'empathy' will help a 
lot in getting over national and international enmities." 
 
Editorial Commentary on U.S. Elections, Pakistan 
 
Ceyda Karan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Russian leader 
Putin joined the Europeans in openly supporting Barack Obama.  There 
is a general concern about the future of the world if McCain and 
Palin win the U.S. presidential elections.  80 percent of Europeans 
wish to see Obama as the new President of the United States. 
Meanwhile, the Republicans' campaign is based on an entirely 
aggressive and militarist approach.  If the Democrats fail against 
Republicans this time, the Europeans will have to work with a U.S. 
leadership who cares not for the rest of the world's concerns at 
all." 
 
Sedat Sertoglu in mainstream Aksam: "The U.S. began crossing the 
Pakistani border in order to pursue the Taliban and al-Qaeda, who 
fled there after attacks in Afghanistan.  The number of Turkish 
martyrs in clashes with the PKK terrorists increases every day. 
Turkey should also pursue terrorists into northern Iraq whenever 
necessary, and shouldn't worry about the U.S. reactions against such 
types of hot pursuit." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Foreign Minister Ali Babacan said the fifth round of indirect 
talks between Syria and Israel will be held on September 18-19 in 
Istanbul. 
 
- One soldier has been killed when a landmine, believed to have been 
planted by the PKK, went off in the southeastern province of Siirt. 
 
 
- An August survey conducted by labor union KESK indicates a family 
of four needs 730 YTL monthly to meet its food expenses. 
 
International News 
 
- A Russian passenger liner has crashed in the central Russian city 
of Perm, killing all 88 passengers, including a Turk, and crew. 
 
- Russian troops left positions near the Georgian Black Sea port of 
Poti, as agreed in a deal between Russia and the European Union 
earlier this month. 
 
- NATO Military Committee Chairman Admiral Giampaolo Di Paola says 
the military alliance does not want a new Cold War with Russia. 
 
WILSON