08ANKARA1625
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9715
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1625/01 2541359
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101359Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7411
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9155
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4714
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3218
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6850
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6690
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3260
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 001625 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
German Charity Charged with Fraud Linked to Turkey 
All media outlets continue their prominent coverage into the ongoing 
German investigation into alleged indiscretions by the 
Islamist-oriented Deniz Feneri charity organization based in 
Germany.  On Tuesday, Deniz Feneri ("Light House") managers appeared 
before court in Germany on charges regarding the embezzlement of 
donations.  German financial inspector Alexander Bohm told the court 
60 percent of the charity's donations were illegally sent to finance 
Turkey's ruling AKP and several Islamic companies.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet and other Dogan Media Group papers quote the 
Turkish-heritage German lawmaker Hakki Keskin as saying "a 
considerable part of the 41 million Euros raised in donations was 
couriered to Islamist-oriented companies and media outlets in 
Turkey."  Mainstream Milliyet says there were documents presented to 
the court which showed Deniz Feneri funds were given to PM Erdogan 
to extend to tsunami victims in eastern Asia. 
 
Papers also report the Turkish Deniz Feneri charity managers held a 
press conference yesterday to respond to charges over alleged links 
with the German Deniz Feneri organization based in Germany.  The 
head of the charity in Turkey, Engin Yilmaz, acknowledged the 
Turkish Deniz Feneri received donations totaling 6.94 million Euro 
from the German charity over the last three years, but stressed the 
transfer of funds from Germany had been "totally legal."  Liberal 
Radikal points to the fact that Turkish Deniz Feneri officials admit 
accepting the funds from the German-based Deniz Feneri, but that 
they still insist there was no link between the two organizations. 
 
 
German prosecutor Kerstin Lotz also reportedly claimed there were 
links between the Deniz Feneri charities in Turkey and Germany.  She 
also said the Islamist-leaning Kanal 7 televisions in Turkey and 
Germany, which had close ties with the two charities, were also 
linked to each other.  The prosecutor presented as evidence a 
program Kanal 7 TV aired about the Deniz Feneri organization, which 
showed a poor family in urgent need of help, giving bank account 
numbers for donations to the family.  The bank account turned out to 
be the account of Deniz Feneri in Germany. 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports when the AKP came to power in 
2002, Deniz Feneri managers applied twice to Turkey's top 
administrative court the Council of State (Danistay) to obtain the 
status of "organizations working for public interest," and thus 
receive authorization for collecting donations without applying to 
the authorities in advance.  The Council of State turned down both 
requests.  In 2004, the AKP council of ministers changed the law of 
associations, shifting the authority to grant aid organizations the 
status of "working for public benefit" from the Council of State to 
the Council of Ministers as well as allowing Deniz Feneri to collect 
donations without obtaining prior permissions, reports Cumhuriyet. 
 
 
RTUK's 'Critical' Meeting Postponed 
All papers report the Deniz Feneri indictment also charges Zahid 
Akman, the head of Turkish radio and television watchdog RTUK, for 
laundering money from Germany to Turkey.  The Deniz Feneri 
investigation also revealed that Akman continued holding key 
positions in four German companies linked to Deniz Feneri for almost 
a year even after he was appointed a member of the RTUK board, in 
spite of the fact that RTUK law banned such engagements for its 
members.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports a regular meeting 
of RTUK board members was canceled yesterday when the board's 
pro-AKP members declined participating in the meeting which was 
expected to question Akman over the charges.  Papers note that 
recent changes in the RTUK law required the approval of the PM to 
take legal action against the board members.  "Akman is trying to 
gain time to avoid resignation," writes tabloid Posta whereas 
mainstream Hurriyet says "RTUK's AKP board members skipped the 
 
ANKARA 00001625  002 OF 005 
 
 
meeting to avoid discussions over Akman's position." 
 
Opposition CHP, MHP Reaction to Deniz Feneri Scandal 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said the scandal in Germany has 
helped reveal one of the sources that had been used to finance the 
AKP.  Opposition far right MHP leader Devlet Bahceli lashed out at 
Prime Minister Erdogan and called on Turkish prosecutors to probe 
allegations over the accusations in the Deniz Feneri charity. 
Bahceli said the PM, "in panic," resorted to "blackmail" in an 
effort to silence press reports concerning the irregularities. 
"Erdogan is applying methods such as blackmail in order to save his 
dynasty.  The PM is acting with a psychology of guilt," emphasized 
Bahceli. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Deniz Feneri Scandal 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The problem of 
corruption is now the weakest link of the AKP government. 
Corruption charges were overshadowed by the AKP closure case 
proceedings but the sale of the Sabah-ATV media group should have 
been the most obvious example for this debate.  The, the AKP's Saban 
Disli [former Deputy Chairman] bribe case surfaced, and now the 
Deniz Feneri allegations have also surfaced.  If the CHP focuses its 
campaign merely on corruption, the AKP will likely suffer more 
serious wounds." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The Prime 
Minister's reaction against the Dogan Media Group was harsh and 
untimely, and he looks as if he has no tolerance for criticism.  The 
corruption debate over the Deniz Feneri case and the Saban Disli 
case deserves serious attention. Yet at the same time, Turkey's 
media tradition, like in the Dogan Media Group, is corrupt as well. 
Central media outlets have become a place for dirty business 
connections.  In order to have a full and complete democracy, Turkey 
is needs to restructure relations between the media and politics." 
 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Prime Minister 
Erdogan made a very suspicious move against media's main duty of 
being a watch dog over the government.  Given the recent 
presidential trip to Yerevan and other international efforts which 
Turkey is involved, Prime Minister Erdogan's step only casts a 
shadow over potential success story for Turkey.  This is very 
annoying." 
 
Ergun Babahan commented in Sabah:  "The main reason for the current 
tension in Turkey is due to not having a serious opposition party. 
People have lost their faith in political parties and expect the 
media to work like an opposition party.  When politics is weakened, 
the media gets stronger and automatically becomes an extension of 
the trade.  And the weak opposition picks the strongest media group 
as its supporter.  This is the current problem in Turkey, the weak 
opposition is threatening the democracy." 
 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in Milliyet:  "An indictment is always considered 
as news in every country with a free press.  From a democracy 
perspective, it is very wrong for Erdogan to target a media group 
for covering news.  It is not a common attitude in democracies for a 
Prime Minister to react against such news with such fury.  The PM's 
attitude during the recent events has cost him political support. 
Aydin Dogan urged the PM to stop targeting the media and exert 
efforts to carry Turkey toward the EU.  This is Turkey's real 
agenda.  We hope that PM Erdogan will stop targeting the media soon 
and start working on Turkey's real agenda." 
 
Mustafa Mutlu wrote in Vatan:  "During the Ergenekon investigation, 
the partisan media, without waiting for the indictment, declared 
everyone guilty.  In the Ergenekon case, there wasn't even an 
indictment, yet, in the Deniz Feneri case is near conclusion. 
 
ANKARA 00001625  003 OF 005 
 
 
Besides, all over the world, it is the media's right and duty to 
make news after an indictment is released." 
 
President Gul Appoints Rectors for 23 Newly Founded Universities 
All papers report that President Gul appointed rectors to 23 newly 
found universities.  Milliyet notes that 16 of these rectors were 
among the scholars who had signed a declaration that asked for 
freedom for headscarf in universities.  And 12 of them were on the 
top of the list which was submitted by the High Education Board 
(YOK). 
 
Justice Minister Approves the Prosecution of 36 People Under Article 
301 
Liberal Radikal reports that Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin 
approved the prosecution of 36 people under article 301 of the 
Turkish Penal Code.  Sabah reports that Justice Minister Sahin gave 
the green light to invoke article 301 of the penal code against 
author Temel Demirel for inciting hatred at a press conference held 
one day after the murder of Armenian journalist Hrant Dink. 
 
PKK Terror 
Hurriyet reports an ongoing large scale military operation against 
PKK in Turkey's southeast.  Following an armed attack by PKK 
terrorists in Sirnak Beytussebap area a few days ago, the Turkish 
military launched a comprehensive land operation, supported by 
Sikorsky helicopters, in the region.  Forces from Special 
Operational Unit are heavily stationed in Sirnak's Kato Mountain, a 
Hurriyet local reporter notes. 
 
Meanwhile, Cumhuriyet reports that Prime Ministry's Anti-Terror 
Board meeting will be held tomorrow in Ankara, and Prime Minister 
Erdogan will chair.  The board includes Chief of Turkish General 
Staff, Chief Commanders, ministers and representatives from security 
and intelligence agencies.   According to Cumhuriyet, the meeting 
will focus on the social, cultural and economic factors in the fight 
against PKK terror. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Iraq-PKK 
 
Abdulhamit Bilici in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "A recent column in 
the pro-Barzani English daily Kurdish Globe says the PKK is the 
largest obstacle in front of the northern Iraqi Kurds' Kirkuk cause. 
 It advises the regional government to take the PKK card from 
Turkey's hands, and totally discard the organization in the region. 
Some who looks at northern Iraq from Turkey believe Kurdish leaders 
are holding the PKK as a trump card against Turkey.  It's unclear 
whether the 'PKK card' is in the hands of the Kurdish regional 
government, Turkey, Iran or the US.  But it's clear that questioning 
what the PKK is about has begun on the other side of the border." 
 
 
Bush's Military Game 
Media outlets report on U.S. President Bush's announcement to 
withdraw 8000 troops from Iraq, but stops short of any further 
withdrawal.  Media coverage is skeptical of Bush's military plans, 
primarily because of the announcement to send 4500 additional troops 
to Afghanistan, where the U.S. is under intense local criticism for 
the rise in civilian casualties resulting from U.S. operations 
there.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "Bush's Military 
Game," that "only 8000 US troops will withdraw from Iraq," but "4500 
additional troops will be sent to Afghanistan," as "Bush apologizes 
for the civilian loss of life in Afghanistan," which "totals 3000 in 
the last three years."  Liberal Radikal carries straightforward 
coverage of the Iraq pullout, but notes "a village in Afghanistan is 
enraged at the U.S." regarding civilian casualties in Herat.  Far 
right Ortadogu reports, "Bush transfers soldiers from Iraq to 
Afghanistan." 
 
Russian Troops Remain in Georgia 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Russian Soldiers Are a 
 
ANKARA 00001625  004 OF 005 
 
 
Permanent Fixture," in Georgia as "7600 soldiers are sent to South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in "Russia 
Remains in Georgia," that, "Yesterday Russia decided that they no 
longer see South Ossetia and Abkhazia as Georgian territory," and, 
"Russia will commence new diplomatic relations on the ambassadorial 
level with South Ossetia and Abkhazia."  Leftist Taraf reports, 
"Russia gives the green light to diplomatic relations with Abkhazia 
and South Ossetia."  Mainstream Hurriyet notes, "While Russia has 
recognized the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and has 
begun diplomatic relations with the two countries, yesterday Russia 
said they will not recognize the independence of northern Cyprus 
because 'the ethnic problems in the Caucasus and in Cyprus are 
different." 
 
In a related story, leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "We 
Don't Want to Be Like Northern Cyprus," that Abkhazian 
Parliamentarian Soner Gogua told the paper "Russia is our only 
lifeline," and "we see Turkey as a second lifeline as a neighbor on 
the Black Sea," and, "we would value the establishment of relations 
with Turkey."  In addition, the paper notes Gogua emphasizes, "We 
realize Turkey is in a tough situation because of its NATO alliance 
and its strategic energy relations with both Russia and Georgia." 
 
Russia Angered by U.S. Withdrawal from Civil Nuclear Deal 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "Nuclear Cooperation 
Shelved," that "Washington has halted its agreement with Moscow." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The U.S. decided to halt the 
civil nuclear deal with Russia because the U.S. was not satisfied by 
the steps taken by the EU against Russia."  CNN Turk reports, 
"Russia reacts angrily to the decision by the U.S. to withdraw from 
a civil nuclear deal."  Liberal Radikal reports, "The U.S. can deal 
more damage to Russia by taking a multi-faceted approach to 
penalizing Russia for its actions." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Pakistan 
 
Ergin Yildizoglu in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "The US must 
urgently provide financial support to Pakistan, or this new 
government will not last long either.  If this new Pakistani 
government collapses, a new military takeover will be inevitable. 
Pakistan is a nuclear power.  If state power in Pakistan dissolves 
toward a point where it cannot control these nuclear weapons, the US 
and NATO might not stand a chance other than uniting the 
Afghanistan-Pakistan geographies into a single war platform.  Such a 
scenario would be a total catastrophe, especially at a time when 
Russia is trying to intensify its influence and halt NATO's 
expansion in the region.  If any lessons are to be taken from 
Pakistan, they would be related to the societal cost of becoming too 
intermingled with militarist points such as the US, flirting with 
political Islam, and turning a blind eye to the irregularities of 
politicians for the sake of short-term stability." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Kurdish DTP mayor of the southeastern city of Batman, Huseyin 
Kalkan, has been sentenced to ten month in prison for spreading 
"terror propaganda." 
 
- Energy Minister Hilmi Guler has invited Azerbaijan and 
Turkmenistan to make joint energy investments with Turkey in energy 
projects in the Black Sea. 
 
- Mehmet Buyukeksi, a businessman known to be close to the ruling 
AKP, has been elected the president of Turkish Exporters' Union 
(TIM). 
 
International News 
 
ANKARA 00001625  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
- President Bush has announced a plan to return from Iraq about 
8,000 US military personnel over the next several months. 
 
- Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov stated on Tuesday Russia officially 
established diplomatic relations with South Ossetia and Abkhazia. 
 
 
- Israeli cabinet minister Rafi Eytan suggests Israel could abduct 
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad over the threats he has made 
against the Jewish state. 
 
WILSON