08ANKARA1711
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Sep 25 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1560
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1711/01 2691354
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251354Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7560
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9196
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4796
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3265
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6887
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6730
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3302
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey Seeks Files from Germany regarding Deniz Feneri Fraud 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Vatan, Radikal and Cumhuriyet report Ismail 
Buyukkilic, the Turkish notary public who notarized fake 
documentation for the Germany-based Turkish charity Deniz Feneri 
official Mehmet Gurhan, was linked to the ruling AKP.  The fake 
document authorizes the Islamist Kanal 7 TV president Zekeriya 
Karaman to deal with Gurhan's assets in Turkey.  It was issued on 
behalf of Gurhan while he was still in prison in Germany for the 
embezzlement of donations collected by Deniz Feneri.  Buyukkilic 
tried to run for parliament on the AKP ticket in Istanbul during the 
July 22 general elections last year.  His brother is the AKP mayor 
of Melikgazi town in Kayseri.  Papers report the Justice Ministry 
and the Turkish Union of Notaries were investigating the 
authorization in question.  Papers also report the Ankara 
prosecutor's office was preparing to ask the German court in 
Frankfurt for more information about the Deniz Feneri fraud case. 
The German court announced during the verdict that those responsible 
for the scandal were hiding in Turkey. 
 
On the other hand, AKP deputy chairman Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat and 
CHP deputy group chief Kemal Kilicdaroglu will fire accusations at 
each other in a face-to-face debate under the roof of the parliament 
today.  The debate, to be televised, will be moderated by a 
prominent journalist, Star TV anchorman Ugur Dundar.  Firat and 
Kilicdaroglu are planning to debate after a duel of words last week 
regarding allegations of the AKP's involvement in Deniz Feneri 
scandal in Germany.  On Wednesday, Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan 
urged the two politicians to not hold their debates on television, 
but to settle disagreements at court. 
 
Warning against Corruption from MUSIAD 
Hurriyet, Vatan, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman and others:  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports that  The Independent Industrialists and 
Businessmen Association (MUSIAD), known for its close relationship 
to the AKP government, visited PM Erdogan yesterday and presented 
him with a report advising Erdogan on the Turkish Economy during the 
global economic crisis.  Mainstream Vatan says the report, "asked 
Erdogan to re-shuffle the cabinet, find more effective ways to deal 
with corruption, stop fighting with the media and focus on the EU 
reforms." 
 
Survey: 47.8 Percent Believe Erdogan Linked to Deniz Feneri Fraud 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the results of a public 
opinion survey conducted in September by the Political Research 
Strategy Development Center.  According to the survey, 78.3 percent 
of Turkish people believe there were indiscretions in the 
Germany-based Islamist-oriented charity Deniz Feneri, while only 
10.1 percent think there were no irregularities.  Of those surveyed, 
47.8 percent believe Prime Minister Erdogan was linked to the 
irregularities while 34.4 percent disagree.  Another 64.9 percent 
say they do not believe that the AKP was investigating corruption 
cases.  The survey carried results of interviews with 4,868 people 
in 16 cities. 
 
'Ergenekon' Investigation 
Media outlets report retired General Hursit Tolon, a suspect 
detained in the Ergenekon investigation, was taken to the hospital 
Wednesday and then returned to prison following medical checks. 
Tolon's lawyer asked for Tolon's release due to blood pressure and 
immune system problems.  Islamist-oriented Zaman, carries the front 
page headline, "Ergenekon Suspects Seek Release from Prison through 
Hospital Transfers." 
 
In a related story, the latest detentions in the Ergenekon case 
include former police officer Adil Serdar Sacan, former mayor of 
Istanbul's Esenler neighborhood Gurbuz Capan, retired Colonel Tanju 
Guvendi, and leftist-nationalist journalist Tuncay Ozkan.  Ozkan's 
lawyer told the press yesterday Ozkan was charged with membership to 
 
ANKARA 00001711  002 OF 004 
 
 
an illegal organization. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Democracy-Political Debates/Ergenekon Case 
 
Turker Alkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Recent events 
show that Turkish democracy is unique and one of a kind.  This is a 
country where the PM launches war against the media.  Here in 
Turkey, intellectuals, writers and artists are detained without 
being told the charges against them.  There are 850 web sites that 
are banned in Turkey, which indicates that we have the freedom to 
live under the government's bans.  Turkey's level of internet 
freedom is akin to Iran, Saudi Arabia and Zimbabwe.  I wonder 
whether we will realize the fact that freedom is a comprehensive 
concept.  Freedom is not only about the freedom to wear the 
headscarf." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak: "Turkey's 
intellectuals, opinion makers, bureaucrats and politicians have 
always sought to preserve institutional honor.  Especially where 
crimes related to public or official institutions are concerned, 
certain red lines are not crossed.  For the first time, a prosecutor 
[i.e. the Ergenekon prosecutor] has dared to fight the ongoing 
unspoken rule of silence.  But this is not enough unless the media, 
military and politicans clean their own houses.  I think the 
Ergenekon case will pave the way for this process to start." 
 
Yavuz Donat wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Ancient Romans enjoyed 
watching fights between two gladiators.  Witnessing the blood of 
human killings increased the cheers and pleased the audiences 
immensely.  While centuries have passed by, unfortunately, in some 
countries people still witness fights similar to those among 
gladiators in ancient Rome.  There will be a verbal struggle between 
the AKP's Firat and the CHP's Kilicdaroglu today, very much like a 
verbal gladiator battle.  I hope the public will boycott this 
debate.  Unfortunately, vicious arguments are a vital part of our 
political culture and politicians in Turkey gain many supporters 
through fighting." 
 
Huseyin Gulerce wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "TGS did not 
object to retired generals and lieutenants taken into custody under 
the Ergenekon investigation.  The military is cleansing itself and 
has discouraged those who might attempt to take a path outside the 
law.  It has, in a way, announced that unlawfulness would not be 
tolerated.  The public wholly supports this attitude.  However, we 
are concerned the military will try to redefine 'politics' and 
continue intervening in the will of the people." 
 
Cartoon in today's mainstream Milliyet: 
 
 
 
PM Erdogan is depicted shouting "Here comes Ergenekon," while he is 
on top of a Lighthouse ("Deniz Feneri" in Turkish) that is labeled 
with a Kanal 7 TV sign.  The lighthouse is next to AKP office, and 
piles of "aid money" sacks are seen stuffed in the windows of the 
lighthouse.  Meanwhile, the public incredulously watches the scene 
unfold. 
 
Organizations' Declaration for Free Press 
Hurriyet, Aksam, Sabah, Zaman, Milliyet and Cumhuriyet highlight a 
joint declaration issued by Turkey's main and leading professional 
press institutions.  A total of 11 press bodies convened to address 
Prime Minister Erdogan's recent call to boycott media outlets who 
report on the irregularities in the Deniz Feneri case.  Orhan Erinc, 
Chairman of the Turkish Journalists' Association (TGC), called for 
freedom of expression across the board and emphasized the importance 
of a free press as well as union rights at media outlets.  The joint 
declaration was signed by 11 domestic press-related institutions, 
including the Press Senate, the Press Institute Association, the 
Contemporary Journalists Association and the European Journalists' 
 
ANKARA 00001711  003 OF 004 
 
 
Union. 
 
Only One Bidder for Turkey's Fourth Nuclear Tender 
Hurriyet, Radikal, Sabah, Milliyet, Vatan:  Today's papers report 
that only one company offered a bid in the fourth tender opened for 
the construction and operation of Turkey's first nuclear power plant 
in Mersin-Akkuyu.  The lone bidder consortium included Russia's 
Atomstroy Export and Inter Rao, along with Turkish company Park 
Teknik.  Mainstream Milliyet describes the bidding as "a fiasco" 
while Sabah notes that the tender was held despite requests for 
postponement. 
 
Iran and Russia Stir the Pot at the UN 
Coverage of the UN General Assembly Meetings focuses on Iranian 
President Ahmadinejad's antics and Russia's refusal to join the Iran 
meetings.  Mainstream Milliyet quotes from the Iranian President's 
speech in its banner headline, "The End of the American Empire is 
Getting Close."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "The 
American Empire is crumbling," as the Iranian President "targets the 
U.S. and Israel during his speech at the UN General Assembly."  In a 
related article, Cumhuriyet reports, "Russia Boycotted the Iran 
Meeting," and notes, "this strikes another blow to tensions that 
have increased between the U.S. and Russia over Georgia."  Liberal 
Radikal reports, "Traditional Quarrels at the U.N. Podium," as 
"Moscow boycotts the Iran nuclear meeting because of criticism from 
Bush and Sarkozy regarding Georgia," while "Ahmadinejad blasts 
Obama, Peres, and the Jewish lobby."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
carries one of Ahmadinejad's quotes from his television interview 
with CNN's Larry King as a headline, "Why Didn't Europe Give Alaska 
to the Jews?"  The article notes Ahmadinejad criticized Europe for 
"resettling Jews in Palestine" after World War II by saying, "Why 
were the Palestinians victimized?  Why couldn't Europe give the Jews 
some other land, like Alaska?" 
 
Bryza: Russia is too weak for a New Cold War 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
European and Eurasian Affairs Matt Bryza spoke to Azerbaijan's ANS 
television station and said, "Russia violated international law when 
they invaded Georgia," but "Russia is too weak to start a new Cold 
War." 
 
DHS Uses Mind-Reading Technology to Counter Terrorism 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports the U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
is testing new technology that seeks to detect terrorist intentions 
among travelers in the U.S.  The paper reports, "The U.S. will read 
the minds of terrorists," by using "The Detector of Bad Intentions." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "They Will Read 
Human Minds," and calls the development "a move towards an Orwellian 
society." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- In an address to the European Parliament on Wednesday, the Greek 
Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomew said, "I have criticized EU countries 
for their hesitations about Turkey's EU membership, despite the fact 
that there are already many Muslims living in Europe." 
 
- The latest annual world investment report from the UN Conference 
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) says Turkey is the 23rd most 
preferred global location for direct foreign investment. 
 
- Transsexual singer Bulent Ersoy appeared before court Wednesday on 
charges she "attempted to turn the public against compulsory 
military service." 
 
International News 
 
 
ANKARA 00001711  004 OF 004 
 
 
- According to sources from the presidency who are attending UNGA 
meetings, Turkey will bring together the leaders of Pakistan and 
Afghanistan for talks in Istanbul in the next few months. 
 
- The Iraqi Parliament approves legislation to hold local elections 
throughout Iraq, except in Kirkuk, Erbil, Dohuk, and Suleymaniye 
provinces. 
 
- North Korea threatens to reactivate its nuclear reactor at 
Yongbyon. 
WILSON