08ANKARA1586
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4351
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1586/01 2471422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031422Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7341
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9134
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4681
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3197
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6833
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6674
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3244
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
President Gul Expected to Visit Yerevan 
All papers gave extensive coverage to the developments regarding 
President Gul's potential trip to Armenia for the September 6th 
soccer match between the Turkish and Armenian national teams. 
Mainstream Hurriyet reported the final decision will be reached 
after MFA Deputy Undersecretary Unal Cevikoz returns from Yerevan. 
"Security, the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute and the genocide claims are 
the main issues of concern to Ankara," Hurriyet added.  While 
columnists from mainstream as well as Islamist leaning dailies 
supported Gul to go to a larger extent, Turkish business circles 
also gave similar support.  Turkey's business group TUSIAD issued a 
statement and urged President Gul to use 'this historic 
opportunity.'  Papers also drew attention to the comments from 
Turkish national team coach Fatih Terim, who told a press conference 
in Istanbul, "Football is an activity which brings nations closer, 
and political problems should be left off the pitch.  We are going 
there to play football, not to make a war." 
 
Meanwhile, the ruling opposition party AKP leaders asked its 
parliamentarians not to travel to Yerevan for the game, papers 
reported.  Milliyet, Radikal and Hurriyet noted that the decision 
was taken in order not to face criticism from opposition parties. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever commented in mainstream Hurriyet: "A Caucasus 
Platform involving Russia, Georgia and Azerbaijan may now be a 
distant dream.  However the platform effort itself is very important 
to pursue because it creates a dialogue mechanism while minimizing 
foreign intervention.  Armenia should not be excluded from the 
Caucasus Platform.  Otherwise the territorial integrity of Armenia 
will be at stake too.  Turkey should align with Armenia against 
Moscow's efforts at direct influence over Yerevan.  Also, this would 
prevent the declaration of Karabakh's independence in the midst of 
all this turmoil.   Given all of these facts, President Gul's trip 
to Yerevan is even more important." 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in both the business daily Referans and 
liberal-intellectual Radikal: "President Gul's trip to Yerevan will 
be a giant step toward the future.  I don't think he will, but I 
wish during his visit he could go to the 'Genocide Monument' in 
Yerevan and pay his respects.  Such a gesture would elevate Turkey's 
position rapidly before international community.  And such a gesture 
has nothing to do with recognition of genocide.  It only means 'I am 
aware of the tragic memories from our common history.  I am here to 
show my respect to the human agony.'  I wish he was able to make 
this gesture." 
 
Abdullah Muratoglu wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "President 
Gul's trip to Yerevan will likely cause a positive impact on this 
new phase of bilateral ties.  Let's hope that Yerevan will not turn 
down Turkey's peace-seeking hand.  Had Yerevan acted wisely some 15 
years ago, there would be enormous benefits for Armenia.  For 
instance, we would have Baku-Yerevan-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline, and 
the 1915 events could have been limited to an acceptable frame. 
Armenia lost all of those chances.  In any case Turkey should 
continue to do whatever is necessary for peace." 
 
Sami Kohen commented in mainstream Milliyet:  "The September 6th 
soccer game between Turkey and Armenia is an historic opportunity to 
invigorate the weak relationship between Turkey and Armenia.  Now, 
some circles are criticizing Gul's possible visit to Armenia before 
our bilateral problems are solved.  However, the only way to resolve 
problems is to meet and talk.  This visit will serve Azerbaijan's 
benefit as well because Turkish diplomacy will support Azeri rights 
within the Caucasus' crises.  No one should expect any concrete and 
sparkling results from this visit.  If this gesture can start a new 
 
ANKARA 00001586  002 OF 004 
 
 
process, even that should be considered as success." 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Recent Turkish foreign 
policy is based on good relations with all its neighbors.  Active 
foreign policy has been pursued from Greece to Iran to Syria.  The 
only exception to this policy is Armenia.  Turkey has been unable to 
improve relations with Armenia because of Armenia's foreign policy, 
the Diaspora's stance and Azerbaijan's uneasiness.  The soccer game 
is an opportunity to start a new era in Turkey's relationship with 
Armenia.  President Gul's visit to Armenia will be a good will 
gesture and that is why I believe that his visit to Armenia will be 
the right decision." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "Regardless of 
speculations, President Gul should go to Armenia.  Turkey may not 
benefit from this visit but if it is cancelled, Turkey will be left 
in a bad position which is against its role in the region as a 
peacemaker.  The only way to end conflicts is to create channels for 
discussions.  Gul should not waste the opportunity to attend this 
football game." 
 
Cuneyt Arcayurek wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "What will 
Turkey gain from President Gul visiting Armenia?  Will this visit 
prove to be a step forward which might cause Armenia to withdraw 
forces from Upper Karabakh?  PM Erdogan does not expect much from a 
visit which is not expected to bring concrete results.  Erdogan has 
made it clear that he doesn't think like Gul because he prohibited 
AKP lawmakers from traveling to Yerevan for the game." 
 
Mustafa Unal wrote in Islamist leaning Zaman: "President Gul's 
decision to visit Yerevan overlaps with the AKP policies.  PM 
Erdogan approves of Gul's effort.  Objections might be raised 
against Gul visiting Armenia, but the arguments put forth by the 
opposition CHP and MHP were far from convincing.  Establishing ties 
with Armenia is important for the sake of regional stability.  The 
communication channels between the two countries must be opened in 
order to find a resolution to our problems.  Turkey has been a good 
regional example by favoring solutions on Cyprus.  Gul's acceptance 
of Sarkhisian's invitation will put Turkey one step ahead in the 
international arena." 
 
Lavrov and Babacan's 'Diplomatic Duel' 
Media outlets report Foreign Minister Ali Babacan met Tuesday with 
his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov in Istanbul.  In a joint news 
briefing following the talks, Babacan stressed stability and 
security in the Caucasus was "vitally important" to all countries of 
the region.  He said both Turkey and Russia agreed that the Caucasus 
Platform initiative was aimed at boosting trust among regional 
countries.  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "Lavrov denied secret 
missile sales to Iran," and "called for an international police 
force to secure peace in the Caucasus."  Meanwhile, mainstream Sabah 
notes Babacan responded to a question about Turkey and Russia's 
disagreement regarding Georgia's territorial integrity by saying, 
"Sometimes allies have different ideas on some topics."  Liberal 
Radikal writes, "Turkey and Russia Say they are Friends, Despite 
Disagreements about the Territorial Integrity of Georgia." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet is more negative in, "For the Second 
Time, Russia Rejects Turkey's Caucasus Platform," and draws 
attention to Russia's demands, regarding who sits at the table, are 
met.  Leftist Taraf carries the headline, "Diplomatic Duel," and 
notes "Lavrov implied Turkey may be sending weapons to Georgia," but 
"Babacan denied Turkey's involvement in arms shipments to Georgia." 
In addition, the paper notes, "Babacan defended Georgia's 
territorial integrity," while Lavrov "defended Russia's recognition 
of the breakaway republics." 
 
Babacan also said the results of the first six months of the year 
show Russia is Turkey's leading foreign trade partner, particularly 
in energy.  "We have a multi-faceted partnership.  Over the past 
months of this year, the trade turnover between our countries 
 
ANKARA 00001586  003 OF 004 
 
 
amounted to 20 billion dollars; bilateral cooperation must be 
further developed," Babacan emphasized.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports Babacan stated the customs crisis between the two countries 
would be resolved by the "spirit of flexibility and cooperation" 
Russia was expected to demonstrate.  Lavrov said Russia wishes to 
continue trade and stressed that discrimination against Turkey was 
out of the question.  On possible cuts in the supply of Russian 
natural gas to Turkey, Lavrov stressed that so far Russia never 
violated its energy deals with other countries.  Economic-political 
Referans, however, believes Russia will not seek urgent solutions to 
the existing problems regarding customs.  Turkish trucks have been 
stranded on the Russian border since the beginning of the conflict 
between Russia and Georgia. 
 
Gul and Bush Discuss Regional Developments 
Mainstream Milliyet reports President Bush and President Gul talked 
on the phone yesterday about the Caucasus Initiative, the Kirkuk 
problem and the ensuing talks in Cyprus.  Mainstream Sabah notes 
"Gul requested support for the Caucasus Proposal in order to ensure 
long term security in the Caucasus," but Bush "had reservations" 
about the proposal because, "Bush finds Russian occupation of 
Abkhazia and South Ossetia unacceptable."  Meanwhile, mainstream 
Hurriyet writes Bush and Gul merely "discussed their views regarding 
regional developments." 
 
Saban Disli Resigns from his Post in AKP 
All papers report that AKP Deputy Chairman and Sakarya deputy Saban 
Disli resigned from all of his posts in the party.  Earlier the main 
opposition party CHP documented that Disli took a $1 million bribe 
to settle a land issue with the state offices in Silivri. 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that the AKP central executive board 
convened this week and many members of the board said that the 
document could harm the party even if Disli were innocent. 
Reportedly, PM Erdogan told Disli to choose between trade and 
politics.  Disli resigned from his posts as the deputy chairman of 
the party and member of the executive board.  However, he will 
continue to be an AKP parliamentarian.  Liberal Radikal reports that 
Disli said that he resigned from his posts "to prevent further 
damage to the AKP because of the CHP's groundless claims."  The CHP 
claimed that Disli's resignation from party leadership is not 
satisfactory, and he should be tried in a court of law.  Mainstream 
Vatan notes that this is the first time that an executive member 
resigned from the AKP because of bribery allegations. 
 
New Round of Talks in Cyprus 
Mainstream Milliyet reports "Talat and Christofias will meet to draw 
up the road map to the September 11th discussions," where "The 
Turkish side wants guarantees that a new Cyprus Republic must be 
established where the Turkish and Greek sides have equal political 
status."  Mainstream Sabah reports "Christofias has partially 
accepted the Turkish demand for political equality," but "the 
dispute lies in who is the guarantor of the island," as, "The 
Turkish side wants Ankara as the guarantor, but the Greek side wants 
the EU as the guarantor."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak draws 
attention to the role of the U.N. in observing these talks. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Cyprus 
 
Halit Kakinc argued in mainstream Aksam: "Greek Cypriot leader 
Christofias addressed his people in a speech, saying, 'Get used to 
the idea of a Turkish president in Cyprus.  We will not continue 
governing the Turks forever; we will share the administration in a 
rotating presidency.'  Christofias was also tough on a bishop who 
opposes peace efforts: 'This is not a religious state -- it's not 
the church that is that is determining state policies in Cyprus, but 
my party which received 53 percent of the vote.'  It will be 
difficult, but we might have a settlement this time since we have 
pro-solution politicians on both sides in Cyprus." 
 
TV News: 
 
ANKARA 00001586  004 OF 004 
 
 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Turkish General Staff (TGS) said in a statement on its webpage 
the Turkish and Russian naval commanders met aboard a Turkish 
frigate in the Black Sea to discuss the recent developments in the 
region. 
 
- Batman's Kurdish mayor Huseyin Kalkan has been sentenced to a 
one-year prison term on charges he spread PKK propaganda on the 
Copenhagen-based Roj TV. 
 
- One soldier is killed in skirmish with the PKK terrorists in the 
Black Sea province of Giresun.  Two others were killed in Bingol. 
 
International News 
 
- The Iranian chief of staff said the Iranian air forces would hold 
a wide-scale exercise "to display the ability and strength of those 
defending Iran's sky." 
 
- Iraqi PM Nuri al-Maliki said a draft security deal between 
Washington and Baghdad on the status of U.S. forces in Iraq will be 
submitted to parliament within 10 days. 
 
- A mosque frequented by Turks was attacked in the town of Obernai 
near Strasbourg in France. 
 
WILSON