08ANKARA1600
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Sep 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6164
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1600/01 2491145
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051145Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7368
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9147
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4694
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3205
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6841
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6682
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3252
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 5, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
TGS Chief Basbug Calls on NGOs to Support the Social Fight Against 
the PKK 
Sabah, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Vatan, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman and 
others:  General Basbug paid his first visit as the Chief of General 
Staff to the Southern province of Diyarbakir.  General Basbug and 
military commanders met with Diyarbakir Governor Huseyin Avni Mutlu 
and representatives of non-governmental organizations. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says General Basbug asked for the NGO's 
assistance in regard to the social aspect of the fight against 
terrorism.  Mainstream Vatan reports that during the meeting with 
the NGOs, General Basbug said "the PKK is at a breaking point.  In 
order to eliminate the PKK, people should show great determination 
against the terrorist organization." 
 
Gul Breaks a Fundamental Taboo and Goes to Armenia 
Reaction to Gul's visit to Yerevan remains overwhelmingly positive 
in the mainstream and Islamist news outlets as they focus on the 
details of the trip and the good will gestures involved in the trip. 
 However, nationalist outlets harshly criticize Gul for going to 
Armenia and circulate provocative rumors to paint the visit in a 
negative light.  Islamist-oriented Zaman notes that Armenian 
President Sarkisian will honor President Gul with "an Iftar at the 
Presidential Palace" before the World Cup qualifying soccer match 
between Turkey and Armenia on September 6th.  In addition, the paper 
notes during the bilateral meetings "Gul will support the 
establishment of a commission of historians who can examine the 
genocide claims, invite Armenia to join the Caucasus Platform, and 
discuss the Nagorno Karabakh dispute."  Mainstream Aksam reports 
"Yerevan will ask that the border be opened between Turkey and 
Armenia," but that Gul will "pressure Armenia to abandon its 
genocide claims" and also "to withdraw its troops from Naghorno 
Karabakh."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak praises Gul in "The Bravest 
Step: Gul's Decision to Go to Armenia is seen as open-minded Turkish 
foreign policy."  Liberal Radikal reports PM Erdogan supports Gul's 
visit by saying, "You cannot achieve any objectives by running from 
the table."  Mainstream Hurriyet makes a comment on football 
diplomacy by noting, "Turkish Armenians Will Attend the Match and 
Wave the Turkish Flag."  Leftist Taraf carries the headline, "Gul 
Breaks a Taboo," as "Gul's visit to Yerevan breaks a 93-year period 
by starting a new era of relations," which, "breaks one of Turkey's 
most fundamental taboos." Star daily says President Gul will invite 
President Sarkisian to the follow-up game in Istanbul on October 14, 
2009 between the Turkish and Armenian national teams. 
 
 
Meanwhile, beginning with an unsourced report on nationalist news 
channel, Haberturk, some media focused on claims an Armenian 
terrorist would attend the match as a guest of Armenian officials. 
In "So-Called Provocation," Radikal reports, "Someone tried to cast 
a shadow over Gul's trip to Armenia with baseless charges that Gul 
will watch the match together with an Orly massacre suspect," 
referring to a terrorist attack in June 1983 in which a bomb killed 
eight at the Turkish Airlines' desk at Paris' Orly airport. Radikal 
cites the Haberturk report, who ran a story last night claiming "a 
terrorist who was responsible for the Orly massacre will watch the 
match as an official guest of the Armenian government," but Radikal 
called the Haberturk story "a provocation" and "a baseless report 
which attempted to undermine Gul's visit."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet, meanwhile, gives credit to the claims in "Gul's 
Controversial Visit." The paper reports "Heated debates were 
triggered when it was learned that Gul will watch the game together 
with the Orly massacre suspect."  Cumhuriyet also notes CHP Leader 
Deniz Baykal sarcastically suggested, "Why doesn't Gul just go ahead 
and lay a wreath at the genocide memorial in Yerevan?" Nationalist 
Tercuman notes Gul is going to Yerevan "despite the reactions of the 
Turkish people."  Meanwhile, CNNTurk reports, "Armenian officials 
reject reports that terrorist Varujan Garbisian is among the VIP 
guests who will watch the September 6th soccer match." 
 
ANKARA 00001600  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
International Praise and Domestic Criticism Regarding the Visit 
Mainstream and Islamist outlets proudly embrace international praise 
for Turkey's efforts to soften its relationship with Armenia.  Both 
the EU and the U.S. showered praise on Gul's acceptance of the 
invitation to attend the World Cup qualifying soccer match between 
Turkey and Armenia.  CNNTurk reports, "Matt Bryza says Gul's visit 
will accelerate the solution to the Nagorno Karabakh issue."  In 
"The U.S. is Also Pleased," Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "U.S. 
State Department Spokesperson for Europe Mark Toner noted 'We 
welcome Gul's decision and we congratulate the two presidents for 
coming together and exerting efforts toward peace and 
reconciliation."  Zaman also reports EU Enlargement Commissioner 
Olli Rehn "greeted Turkey's decision with pleasure," and noted, 
"This visit will be included in the next report" regarding Turkey's 
EU accession. 
 
Papers also cover negative reactions from the two opposition 
parties, CHP and MHP.  MHP Deputy Chairman Vural urged President Gul 
not to go to Yerevan.  CHP leader Baykal sarcastically asked 
President Gul to lay a wreath at the Genocide Monument in Yerevan. 
PM Erdogan defended Gul amidst such criticism by saying, "We think 
that this is a positive thing and Foreign Minister Babacan will 
accompany Gul.  There will be talks between the two presidents, and 
the foreign ministry officials of both sides will follow up." 
Regarding possible reaction from Baku about the Yerevan trip, PM 
Erdogan told reporters that he explained the visit to Azeri 
President Aliyev recently.  Zaman reports President Gul will make an 
official visit to Baku before he goes to the United States on 
September 20. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the President's Trip to Armenia: 
 
Ferai Tinc commented in mainstream Hurriyet: "President Gul's 
decision to go to Yerevan is a strong step toward peace in the 
Caucasus.  Gul's visit sets a good example for solving problems 
through peaceful means as opposed to use of force like the 
Russia-Georgia example.  Armenia should no longer be left out of the 
economic cooperation zone between Azerbaijan, Turkey and Georgia. 
Given the current domestic conditions, both the Armenian and Turkish 
presidents have taken brave steps." 
 
Murat Yetkin advised in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "So far the 
Armenian genocide issue has been a burden that has shackled Turkish 
foreign policy.  It was also a negative point in Turkish-American 
relations.  American presidents have intervened at the last minute 
to prevent a vote on a U.S. congressional resolution recognizing the 
events of 1915 as genocide.  From now on, the only way to keep this 
resolution off the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives is for 
Turkey to develop relations with Armenia. Turkey should be able to 
move forward in its relationship with Armenia by keeping in mind its 
role as a regional player.  Unlike his predecessor, President 
Sarkisian clearly indicates his will to normalize bilateral ties and 
adds that the genocide issue is not a precondition for 
Turkish-Armenian relations.  If this visit becomes a successful one, 
President Gul will be remembered for his historic decision, despite 
efforts that criticize the visit." 
 
Mahmut Ovur wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "It seems that President 
Gul's visit to Yerevan will be a turning point in the tense 
relations between Turkey and Armenia.  The positive approach to a 
football game could extend to positive developments regarding trade. 
 In addition, the opening of the Kars border gate may be discussed. 
As a matter of fact, this visit is a very good start not only for 
Turkey-Armenia relations but also is good for bilateral ties among 
all Turkey's neighbors.  President Gul made a very brave and 
historic decision by going to Yerevan." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Prior to his visit to 
Yerevan, President Gul told Baku that this visit will also serve 
 
ANKARA 00001600  003 OF 004 
 
 
Azerbaijan's interests.  With this visit, President Gul will make a 
positive start for the future.  Presidents Gul and Sarkisian will 
meet prior to the football game and later the foreign ministers of 
the both countries will continue bilateral dialogue.  The general 
expectation from this meeting is to open discussions for the future 
of the Caucasus, not to resolve Turkey's historic problems with 
Armenia." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak: "President Gul 
has taken a giant step toward the future of Turkish-Armenian 
relations.  By establishing relations with Armenia through bilateral 
dialogue, Turkey can get rid of its 'genocide baggage.'  Closer ties 
between Turkey and Armenia will also make important contribution to 
the ongoing peace efforts in the Caucasus." 
 
Mustafa Balbay in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "PM Erdogan 
approves of President Gul's travel to Yerevan, but doesn't want AKP 
lawmakers to accompany Gul.  Thus, it could be said that Gul is 
embarking on this trip without the backing of his party.  Has 
Armenia announced a review of its traditionally anti-Turkish 
policies?  No.  On the contrary, this visit may send the signal that 
Turkey does not object to Armenia's claims.  Some comments that this 
visit will draw Turks and Armenians closer are wrong, because Turks 
and Armenians are already close to each other.  Aside from the 
radical elements on both sides, we see no serious problem. 
Nevertheless, may the best team win in Yerevan." 
 
Ihsan Dagi in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "With President Gul going to 
Yerevan, Turkey's soft power may have reached Armenia.  The way to 
strengthen this effort would be establishing ties gradually and 
opening the border with Armenia.  Turkey did not lose anything by 
taking the initiative in Cyprus after 2002.  Turkey pushed the 
dynamics for change in Cyprus and a similar initiative must be taken 
regarding Armenia.  Turkey's efforts regarding Armenia should not be 
restricted to the President's visit; the government, also, should be 
able to take such initiatives." 
 
Praise for Turkey as a Peacemaker - Israel/Syria Talks 
Media outlets note the public praise for Turkey as a peacemaker from 
French President Sarkozy and Syrian President Assad.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports "Sarkozy praised Turkey," for its efforts in the 
Israeli/Syria peace talks, while Syrian President Assad said "We 
could not have conducted these peace talks without my brother 
Erdogan."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "French President Sarkozy 
praises the peace talks between Israel and Syria that were carried 
out by Erdogan."  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "Sarkozy says Europe 
Appreciates Turkish Efforts."  Mainstream Aksam reports "Sarkozy 
Applauds Turkey at a Meeting in Damascus," and "while Sarkozy 
opposes Turkey's EU entry, this time he praised Turkey."  CNN Turk 
reports, "Sarkozy Hails Turkey for its efforts in peace negotiations 
between Israel and Syria." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Peace Efforts between Israel-Syria 
 
Mustafa Unal in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Even though the talks were 
indirect, Turkey initiated talks between Syria and Israel.  Now, 
direct talks between the two countries will commence after the 
presidential elections in the U.S.  The summit in Damascus also 
brought Arab nations and Europe to the same table, which inspires 
hopes toward peace and stability.  While the talks did not produce 
concrete results, Turkey has become a bridge that connects the 
European and Arab Worlds." 
 
RTUK Director Charged with Laundering Charity Funds to Turkey 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal, and Cumhuriyet report independent 
lawmaker Kamer Genc and opposition CHP lawmaker Cetin Soysal 
submitted separate motions to parliament in connection with a German 
High Court case alleging money laundering by the Turkish-owned Deniz 
Feneri Islamic charity.  According to the German indictment, the 
funds were sent to several points in Turkey, including some media 
 
ANKARA 00001600  004 OF 004 
 
 
outlets such as the Islamist-leaning broadcaster Kanal 7 TV.  Genc 
said "Deniz Feneri managers raised around 41 million Euros by 
exploiting the religious feelings of Turks in Germany," and 
"transferred part of those funds to Turkey instead of helping needy 
people."  Genc asked if PM Erdogan was planning an investigation 
into the alleged ties between the organization in Germany with the 
Deniz Feneri Society in Turkey.  He also asked whether the Radio and 
Television High Board (RTUK) chairman Zahid Akman, a former partner 
of Deniz Feneri in Germany, was involved.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports Akman, who stands charged with money laundering, was barred 
by the court from entering Germany from May 2007 to May 2012 because 
of additional investigations regarding Akman's possible illegal 
activities in Germany.  Other suspects charged in connection to the 
Frankfurt case accused Akman of being a courier.  Akman denied the 
charges in a press briefing yesterday, and said he would go to 
Germany soon to clear his name.  German legal experts say Akman will 
be detained if attempts to enter Germany, according to Hurriyet. 
 
PKK 'Pardons' Riza Altun 
Media outlets report Riza Altun, a top PKK member in charge of the 
organization's funds in Europe, was pardoned for embezzlement.  Last 
year Altun was sacked for embezzling PKK money and cooperating with 
foreign intelligence agents.  However, following an interrogation on 
Mount Kandil, Altun has been pardoned.  According to unnamed 
sources, PKK leaders Murat Karayilan and Murat Karasu wanted Altun 
to be executed.  Altun was captured in France in 2007 but was later 
released.  He was detained in Austria for forgery in July 2007, but 
was allowed to go to Mount Kandil despite Turkey's requests for his 
extradition. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Friday, PM Erdogan will meet U.S. Undersecretary of State for 
Political Affairs William Burns at the PM office of Dolmabahce 
Palace in Istanbul.  Later that afternoon, Erdogan will meet with 
Georgian PM Lado Gurgenidze in the same location. 
 
- Opposition MHP MP Oktay Vural said AKP vice-chairman Saban Disli 
resigned amid bribery charges in order to protect PM Erdogan, and 
not to give the public a message against corruption. 
 
- Renowned seismology specialist Professor Ahmet Mete Isikara 
predicts an intense earthquake in Istanbul between 2010 and 2014. 
 
International News 
 
- Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou said Greek 
Cypriots could not afford to make any more concessions regarding a 
bi-zonal, bi-communal federation. 
 
- EU foreign ministers will meet to discuss their line on Russia 
ahead of talks next week between the French and Russian presidents 
on the Georgia crisis. 
 
- Alaska Governor Sarah Palin said the United States sent troops to 
fight in the Iraq war on a "task from God." 
 
WILSON