08DAKAR1023
SENEGAL-WADE TIGHTENS HIS GRIP ON THE JUDICIARY
Mon Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO7479
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1023 2520931
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 080931Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1074
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS DAKAR 001023 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL-WADE TIGHTENS HIS GRIP ON THE JUDICIARY 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Alioune Niane, a long time embassy contact and a 
judge at the Court of Accounts, said that with recent judicial 
appointments, the reinstatement of the Supreme Court and his 
resignation as the head of the National Association of Judges, 
President Abdoulaye Wade's grip over the judiciary has further 
increased. End Summary 
 
¶2. (SBU) A perennial thorn in Wade's and the Ministry of Justice's 
side, Alioune Niane, a vocal critic of the lack of independence in 
the judiciary, said that he had no choice but to resign as the 
President of The National Association of Judges because the 
government was threatening to use sympathetic judges to set up an 
alternative association and was also withholding some CFA 40 million 
(USD 90,000) in funds.  Niane, who described his forced resignation 
as a "coup d'tat of sorts", underlined that for years the former 
Minister of Justice and current Minister of Interior Cheikh Tidiane 
Sy, had been applying indirect pressure to force his hand, going as 
far as trying and failing to get the Court of Accounts, a body that 
audits government Ministries, or any entities that receives funds 
from the State, to bring him up on disciplinary charges. 
 
¶3. (SBU) As the Chairman of the High Council of the Judiciary, an 
institution that manages the career of judges, President Wade has 
several tools at his disposal to remove those who have fallen out of 
favor.  This includes exile to a distant region or the blocking of 
promotions.  However since neither option was available in Niane's 
case the government targeted his powerbase as head of the National 
Association of Judges.  Unlike criminal courts that have regional 
tribunals, the Court of Accounts is based only in Dakar, "so exiling 
me to some backwater was not option," Niane explained.  Also I am 
not up for promotion for a while so really there was no other way 
they could neutralize me." 
 
¶4. (SBU)  This time however, Niane felt that he could not afford to 
see all his work go to waste by creating a fracture within the 
professional judiciary by having another Association created.  He 
described his successor, Abdoulaye Ba who is the President of the 
Regional Tribunal in the northern city of Louga, as a "man of the 
system".  However, Niane was quick to emphasize that the 
Association's Secretariat still contained many who were supportive 
of his cause: "In fact, there are many judges who agree that the 
judiciary is not independent and is controlled by the Executive, but 
they are afraid to lose their jobs.  I can understand that.  This is 
especially true of the most senior judges who owe their positions to 
the President." 
 
¶5. (SBU) The High Council of the Judiciary, which is co-chaired by 
the Minister of Justice, recently appointed or promoted twenty five 
new judges whom Niane describes as being people who will be 
unwilling to challenge the Executive, accusing them of being too 
intertwined with politicians.  He commented that the new Inspector 
General of the Judiciary, Daniel Sane, was cited in a report 
prepared by the Court of Accounts that uncovered rampant corruption 
when he headed the government Committee on Bids.  He was equally 
dismissive of the Supreme Court which he believes was only set up to 
centralize power: "When the Supreme Court was abolished in 1992 it 
was to increase the specialization of the Courts, there was no first 
among equals.  Today the President's principal judicial interlocutor 
is the Head of the Supreme Court to whom all other Courts are 
subordinate.  So orders go down the system and information is 
filtered up through one channel." 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) This latest move is consistent with President Wade's 
efforts to further consolidate his control over all branches of 
governance, as manipulating both the ruling Democratic Party of 
Senegal (PDS) and his succession are becoming increasingly 
burdensome responsibilities for the aging Wade.  While, most judges 
are well respected and are proud to be seen as being independent of 
Executive influence they could or would not, in the end, protect the 
champion of their cause, Niane.  Given Wade's control of the 
personnel system, the judges have little choice but to kowtow to the 
wishes of the President if they wish to advance.  End Comment