08KHARTOUM1435
LACK OF PEACE DIVIDENDS IN SOUTHERN KORDOFAN LEAVES THE
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO8343
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1435/01 2661416
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221416Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1954
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 001435 
 
DEPT FOR AF A/S FRAZER, SE WILLIAMSON, AF/SPG 
NSC FOR PITTMAN AND HUDSON 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KDEM SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: LACK OF PEACE DIVIDENDS IN SOUTHERN KORDOFAN LEAVES THE 
NUBA FRUSTRATED AND DESPERATE 
 
REFS: (A) KHARTOUM 1427 
(B) KHARTOUM 1309 
(C) KHARTOUM 629 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
¶1. (SBU) During a meeting with poloff in Kadugli on 14 September, 
Deputy Governor of Southern Kordofan Daniel Kodi (SPLM) expressed 
frustration with what he perceived as a  lack of peace dividends 
from the CPA and the neglect of Nuban interests by the GoSS and the 
GNU.  Kodi explained the challenges of integration, the lack of a 
functioning Joint Integrated Unit for Southern Kordofan, alleged NCP 
arming of Arab groups in the state, and the pressing need for the 
SPLM to win a majority in the state assembly during upcoming 
legislative elections in order to exercise the right of popular 
consultation.  He urged the USG to urge others to pay attention to 
concerns of the Nuba and help the people of Southern Kordofan.  End 
summary. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
KODI: INTEGRATION IS JUST NOT WORKING OUT 
------------------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) In a meeting with poloff in Kadugli, Southern Kordofan on 
14 September, Deputy Governor Daniel Kodi (SPLM) criticized the 
progress of police and civil service integration in the state. 
Integration of the former SPLA-controlled areas into the state and 
federal administration, now three years delayed, began with 
integration of the SPLA police into the federal police force in 
August (reftels A and B).  Kodi's biggest complaint is that what is 
occurring is "absorption," not "integration."  In 2007, 2,400 civil 
service vacancies were identified, according to Kodi.  Currently, 
the state government is accepting applications for the vacancies 
from those in the formerly SPLA-controlled areas.  Kodi indicated 
that it will be very difficult for many in the SPLA areas to attain 
positions in the Southern Kordofan civil service because the civil 
service law requires personnel to have certain qualifications and 
years of experience before being hired.  Because the SPLA-controlled 
areas in Southern Kordofan have been closed off to the rest of the 
state for over 20 years, people in those areas are unlikely to meet 
the necessary qualifications for integration into the civil service. 
Furthermore, Kodi explained, language is a problem.  The official 
language of the government is Arabic, yet many in the SPLA areas do 
not speak Arabic.  "One of the tragedies we will face," said Kodi, 
"is that a part of us may not have the chance to be integrated." 
This is very serious, he added, and "we (the SPLM) are trying to 
make the NCP understand that they must be flexible on integration, 
particularly when it comes to the civil service. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
NCP-GENERATED CONFLICT IN SOUTHERN KORDOFAN 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶3. (SBU) The biggest obstacle to peace in Southern Kordofan, said 
Kodi, is the NCP.  Tribes have good relationships with one another 
in Southern Kordofan, but the NCP uses race and religion to "divide 
the people," claimed Kodi.  "If you could see the number of guns in 
the hands of the people, particularly Arab tribes such as the 
Misseriya and the Riezegat," said Kodi, you would be astonished. 
"The NCP is militarily supporting groups for their own political 
gains," said Kodi. 
 
¶4. (SBU) When poloff questioned Kodi on the status of the Southern 
Kordofan Joint Integrated Unit (JIU), he reported that it is neither 
joint, nor integrated.  Two years ago, 3000 SAF and 3000 SPLA troops 
were identified to form the JIU.  Up until now, the troops do not 
train together, patrol together, or live together.  The SAF and SPLA 
troops report to different commanders and are under different 
administrations. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
THE CENSUS DEBACLE AND A LOOK TOWARDS ELECTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶5. (SBU) Poloff asked Kodi about the conduct of the April-May 
national census in Southern Kordofan.  Kodi himself  had called for 
an SPLM boycott of the census in the state at the time, which led to 
a significant undercount in the Nuba Mountains region (ref C).  "I 
made it clear that people should not participate in the census," 
said Kodi, because of a number of unresolved issues that plague 
Southern Kordofan.  He believes that census coverage of the state 
was no more than 28 percent, although the Central Bureau of 
Statistics in Khartoum claims that at least 95 percent of all areas 
in the North were covered.  "If I had allowed the census in Southern 
Kordofan to take place," said Kodi, "I would have betrayed my 
people."  He  explained his reasons for boycott as: the lack of 
 
KHARTOUM 00001435  002 OF 003 
 
 
border demarcation, the inability of Nuban IDPs to return to 
Southern Kordofan, the lack of integration in Southern Kordofan 
state, and general insecurity in the area caused by armed groups and 
landmines.  Kodi insisted that although Nuban IDPs wanted to return 
to the area to participate in the census, the NCP blocked their 
return.  "The NCP wanted census results to show that the Arab 
population in Southern Kordofan is higher than the African 
population," claimed Kodi.  It is a racial issue for the NCP, said 
Kodi, and the NCP wants to portray the Nuba Mountains as more Arab 
than African so that it can command the area's rich resources. 
 
¶6. (SBU) On elections, Kodi stated that the NCP is more willing to 
go to elections than is the SPLM.  "For us in Southern Kordofan," 
said Kodi, "it is a matter of losing everything if the SPLM doesn't 
win the majority in the state legislature."  All of our sacrifices 
will have been in vain if the SPLM loses in Southern Kordofan.  "The 
NCP hopes to keep the current power-sharing status quo," he said, 
which means that if the NCP wins the elections in Southern Kordofan, 
it will call the shots on the popular consultation.  If the NCP 
holds a majority of power during the popular consultation, it will 
not vote to amend the rights of the Nuba people under the CPA. 
"There is potential danger for this state if the SPLM does not make 
the necessary arrangements to win the elections." 
 
¶7. (SBU) Kodi stressed that students and tribal chiefs are the best 
conduits for civic and voter education in Southern Kordofan because 
of their access to the communities and ability to speak Nuban 
languages.  "We have a serious problem with illiteracy in Southern 
Kordofan" and many will not understand why it is important to vote. 
Since elections have never brought us anything good in the past, 
said Kodi, many will wonder why this time is any different. 
 
------------------------------- 
WHAT 2 PERCENT OF OIL REVENUE? 
------------------------------- 
¶8. (SBU) Poloff asked D/G Kodi if the Government of Southern 
Kordofan is receiving its allotted 2 percent of oil revenue from the 
state, as promised to the state in the CPA.  "Have you seen the 2 
percent? If so, then let me know where it is," said Kodi, laughing. 
This money has never appeared in the state budget, he added.  "The 
only peace dividend that our people have enjoyed is the absence of 
war."  Other than that, there has been no change in the lives of the 
Nuban people. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Kodi pleaded that all aid given to Southern Kordofan by 
international partners be directed to civil society organizations 
and not the government.  The Sudanese system of finance is "not 
capable of managing money," claimed Kodi.  Currently, not enough 
money is going to the war-affected areas of our state. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Kodi mentioned that he had recently met with GoSS 
President Salva Kiir Mayardit to describe the "neglect" of Southern 
Kordofan and Blue Nile state by the GoSS and the SPLM.  Kodi 
explained to Kiir that Southern Kordofan is not accruing any 
benefits from the CPA, and that as a result, people are becoming 
restless.  "We fought together," said Kodi, "yet there is a 
negligence of the needs of the Nuban people by the GoSS."  The SPLM 
has promised to provide capacity-building for some of our people, 
yet they have not delivered on their promise.  Kodi explained that 
he and Kiir agreed to the appointment of a senior representative to 
the GoSS who would represent the interests of Southern Kordofan and 
Blue Nile.  Currently, no Nuban representative is a member of the 
GoSS (not surprising since the area is not in South Sudan).  Kodi 
ended by asking poloff to deliver an important message to the 
American people - "We believe that the US is powerful and has great 
influence.  We appeal to the US to influence others (in Sudan and in 
the international community) to help the people of Southern 
Kordofan." 
 
-------- 
COMMENT 
-------- 
¶11. (SBU) Kodi, just back from extensive medical leave in the UK 
partly as a result of alcoholism, is quick to describe doomsday 
scenarios for the future of Southern Kordofan.  While he acted as 
the spoiler for the census in Southern Kordofan, and is pessimistic 
about the newly-started integration process, Kodi's views represent 
an important sentiment in the Nuba Mountains:  that the Nuba just 
aren't getting what they deserve out of the CPA.  Manipulation of 
Arab tribes against the Nuba by the NCP and neglect of Nuban 
concerns by the GoSS is leading the Nubans down a path of 
desperation.  Not only has integration come three years too late, 
but also the state government is not receiving the oil revenue it 
has been promised, nor seeing the fruits of development.  If 
 
KHARTOUM 00001435  003 OF 003 
 
 
elections occur in Sudan in 2009-2010 and the SPLM does not control 
the state's popular consultation process, which is vaguely stated in 
the CPA as the State Assembly's responsibility to consult the people 
on CPA implementation in the state and to endorse any 
"rectification" of procedures in the CPA, then the pro-SPLM Nuba 
have no shot at redressing their concerns.  What the Nubans fear 
most is that they will be left hanging in the balance if the South 
decides to secede from Sudan and the Nubans only option is 
integration with what they regard as a brutal NCP north that has 
mercilessly subjugated the Nubans in the past.  If the Nubans feel 
like their fate is moving quickly and definitively in this 
direction, and they are not being given consideration by their 
southern comrades, the Nubans could take violent measures to make 
their voices heard, especially if provoked by Arab militias.  Kodi's 
statement that the SPLM in the Nuba Mountains must make "the 
necessary arrangements to win the elections in Southern Kordofan" is 
frightening. There is no doubt that close attention should be paid 
the Nuba Mountains on all areas of CPA implementation, and the 
elections in particular. One of the problems is local leaders like 
Kodi who have not provided the leadership the SPLM needs in the 
region. End Comment. 
 
FERNANDEZ