08NAIROBI2158
Somalia - US Mission Officers Visit Hargeisa
Fri Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO1350
RR RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2158/01 2560848
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120848Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7033
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROME 0391
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 7374
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 NAIROBI 002158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM ECON SOCI SO
SUBJECT: Somalia - US Mission Officers Visit Hargeisa 
 
REF: Djibouti 117 
 
NAIROBI 00002158  001.2 OF 005 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  On September 9, US Mission officers visited 
Hargeisa, Somaliland and met with government officials, political 
party representatives, and organizations implementing U.S. 
Government-funded activities.  The visit provided an opportunity to 
reinforce key messages made by Assistant Secretary of State for 
African Affairs Jendayi Frazer during her visit in February (reftel) 
and for USAID to meet in Somaliland, for the first time in over two 
years, with its implementing partners.  The government and political 
party representatives expressed similar perspectives on dialogue and 
compromise which successfully prevented a political crisis earlier 
this year.  They pledged to cooperate toward free, fair, and 
transparent presidential elections in 2009.  While they emphasized 
the need for formal recognition of Somaliland, the officials told us 
they are shifting focus to request direct economic assistance.  All 
contacts noted the deepening economic crisis caused by high prices, 
food shortages, and the pressure of refugees and Internally 
Displaced Persons (IDPs).  Implementing NGOs noted significant 
challenges but emphasized the enormous potential for their 
Somaliland programs.  All interlocutors asked that U.S. officials 
regularly return to Hargeisa to collaborate and strengthen the 
U.S.-Somaliland relationship.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
A Working Visit in Somalia 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On September 9, 2008 Somalia Unit Pol/Econ Officer Jessica 
Davis Ba, USAID/East Africa Program Officer for Somalia Hodan 
Hassan, and two Assistant Regional Security Officers visited 
Hargeisa, the capital of Somalia's self-declared Republic of 
Somaliland.  The delegation was met at Egal International Airport by 
Minister of Interior Abdullahi Ismail Ali, Minister of Civil 
Aviation Ali Mohamed, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Saeed 
Mohamed Nur, and Head of National Intelligence Mohamed Nur Osman. 
The Somaliland government hosted the U.S. mission officers and 
coordinated the logistics of the visit. 
 
¶3.  (U) During the visit we reinforced Assistant Secretary Frazer's 
messages from her February trip to Hargeisa (reftel), met with our 
humanitarian and development partners, engaged with key officials 
and government interlocutors, and met with contacts central to the 
electoral process in Somaliland.  We gained perspectives from USAID 
and DOS grantees CARE, International Republican Institute, Education 
Development Center, and the Public International Law and Policy 
Group.  It was the first visit to Hargeisa by a USAID official in 
more than two years. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) We established new contacts in the security sector, 
including with representatives from the Somaliland police, 
intelligence services, and advisors with the United Nations Rule of 
Law and Security Program based in Hargeisa.  The meetings on 
security-related matters will be reported septel. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Somaliland Seeks to Consolidate Relationship 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) We met with Minister of Interior Abdullahi Ismail Ali, 
Minister of National Planning and Coordination Ali Ibrahim, Minister 
of Education Hassan Mohamud, and Minister of State for Foreign 
Affairs Saeed Mohamed Nur.  We expressed our gratitude to the 
government for hosting the visit and for meeting with us during 
Ramadan.  Building on points Assistant Secretary Frazer made in 
February, we acknowledged that Somaliland's democratization process 
has distinguished it from its regional neighbors and is its greatest 
asset in Somaliland's quest for formal recognition.  We 
congratulated all stakeholders for reaching agreement on an election 
timetable and returning to consensus politics.  We especially 
praised their efforts to avoid violence and settle the political 
impasse through dialogue and discussion.  (Note:  In June, 
Somaliland's political parties peacefully compromised on the one 
year extension of President Riyale's term in office, a new date for 
presidential elections date, and an amendment to the voter 
registration law and electoral law to accommodate these changes. 
End Note.)  Expressing our commitment to Somaliland's democratic 
development, we encouraged the preparations for free, fair, and 
transparent presidential elections in March 2009, based on a 
national voter registration exercise. 
 
¶6.  (U) Minister Ibrahim welcomed embassy officers to Somaliland, 
"the oasis of calm in the middle of a sea of insecurity," urging 
 
NAIROBI 00002158  002.2 OF 005 
 
 
that it should be the first of many future visits.  Ibrahim stated 
that the relationship between the United States and Somaliland is 
continually improving and that he sees the visit as a way to further 
consolidate relations.  Ibrahim described the economic and social 
impact of regional insecurity that has resulted in an increased flow 
of refugees and IDPs.  He said that Somaliland has fulfilled its 
international responsibility to accommodate all arrivals, treating 
them equally with Somalilanders, and giving them opportunities for 
work.  The minister said that even without direct development aid or 
formal recognition, "We recognize ourselves, rely on ourselves, and 
view national unity, sovereignty, statehood, and independence, as 
the highest priority." 
 
---------------------- 
We Cannot Eat Politics 
---------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) Ibrahim said that in Somaliland, peace and consultative 
processes are a tradition that will be maintained.  He expressed 
appreciation of the U.S. commitment to Somaliland's political 
development, but insisted that political and economic development 
must go hand in hand.  Ibrahim lamented that despite their best 
efforts, poverty is deepening.  Drought conditions have caused more 
of the rural population to seek opportunities in towns, and an 
extremely high unemployment rate has resulted in idle youth which he 
described as "a time bomb."  This pressure is compounded by high 
inflation.  The price of basic foodstuffs like rice and wheat has 
increased 138 percent in the last year in Hargeisa, and between 350 
to 480 percent in rural areas, he said.  Ibrahim made an urgent 
appeal for direct food aid for a population "that is lucky to have 
one meal per day." 
 
¶8.  (U) Ibrahim told us the government has just finalized a 
five-year reconstruction and development plan that Somaliland needs 
the donor community to commit and disburse the USD 550 million 
required to implement it.  The minister thanked the United States 
for its commitment to institutional development projects, but asked 
that we also focus on improving livelihoods through job creation and 
microcredit, especially for women.  Ibrahim said that it is private 
sector-generated wealth that is sustaining Somaliland's economy. 
Ibrahim noted that the government has just approved a legal 
framework for Somaliland's banking industry and parliament is in the 
process of ratification.  He told us this regulatory framework 
should improve banking facilities as Somaliland "moves past hawalas 
into a more sophisticated and transparent financial system." 
 
¶9.  (U) Ibrahim concluded that the political system can only be 
sustained with a solid economic foundation.  Minister of Education 
Hassan Mohamud echoed many of Ibrahim's points about the fragility 
of the economy and the high cost of living negatively impacting 
Somaliland's 4,500 teachers.  Mohamud told us that teachers receive 
only a limited salary from the government of about USD 50 per month 
and rely on individual contributions paid by parents.  Mohamud asked 
for U.S. assistance to Somaliland's educational institutions with an 
emphasis on technical education.  The minister lamented that 
Somaliland does not have a single vocational training institute, 
asserting that if its youth gained skills, they would have more 
avenues for opportunity. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Security Concerns and Piracy On the Rise 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Minister of the Interior Abdullahi Ismail Ali expressed 
his concerns on the recent explosion in piracy.  He asked for 
capacity building of the Somaliland Coast Guard "which is no match 
for the well-armed and well-equipped pirates now taking over the 
coastal waters."  Ali said that despite limited capacity, Somaliland 
was successful in recently arresting five pirates from Puntland who 
were each sentenced to fifteen years in prison.  The officials 
welcomed our commitment to combating piracy and our continued 
collaboration on security planning, particularly in the area of 
counter-terrorism. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) In our introductory remarks, we raised concern about 
mobilization for armed conflict with Puntland in the disputed Sool 
region, noting that renewed fighting would further deplete limited 
resources and undermine Somaliland's democratic process.  We 
encouraged the officials to engage in dialogue to address the 
territorial dispute.  To this Ibrahim responded, "Peace cannot be at 
the expense of our own territory and we have never been the 
aggressor in this area."  The minister suggested that we engage 
Puntland "the aggressor, and caution that it should not provoke 
 
NAIROBI 00002158  003.2 OF 005 
 
 
problems."  In conclusion, the ministers reiterated their hope to 
have more U.S. delegations visit Somaliland and to continue to 
expand our relationship. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
We Must Make War to Get Your Attention 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) To emphasize the separation of the executive and the 
legislative branches of government, Speaker of the Somaliland 
Parliament Abdirahman Abdillahi and Bashe Mahammed Farah, Second 
Deputy in the House of Representatives, met with us at the 
conclusion of the ministerial meeting.  The Speaker began by 
categorically stating that the international community has ignored 
Somaliland.  Unlike Somalia, Somaliland receives no bilateral 
assistance, budgetary support, or direct aid.  He stated that with 
monthly salaries averaging approximately USD 40, basic needs are not 
being met.  Abdillahi said that contrary to the Transitional Federal 
Government (TFG) which receives capacity-building and salaries for 
its police, parliament and civil servants, Somaliland gets nothing. 
The Speaker said "We must make war; only then will the world pay 
attention to us."  He stated that instead of focusing on 
recognition, Somaliland will stress its development needs.  "With 
development, recognition will come," he concluded. 
 
¶13.  (U) Abdillahi addressed many of the same issues that he raised 
during an August 28 meeting with Ambassador Ranneberger in Nairobi, 
such as inflation and worsening economic conditions in Somaliland. 
The Speaker objected to President Riyale having improperly awarded 
livestock and oil exploration contracts.  The Speaker spoke 
positively about the burgeoning political parties, representative of 
citizens from all regions, instead of being clan-based.  Abdillahi 
told us that while Somaliland does not have working relations with 
the TFG, "We are praying for peace and mutual support of the 
Djibouti Agreement." 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Political Parties Appeal for Assistance 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (U) We met with representatives of Somaliland's three political 
parties -- the ruling Allied People's Democratic Party (UDUB), the 
Kulmiye party, and the Justice and Welfare party (UCID).  We opened 
the meeting by congratulating them for their efforts to return to 
consensus politics.  The party representatives deferred to Ahmed 
Mohamed Silanyo, Chairman of the Kulmiye party to offer initial 
perspectives.  After extending a warm welcome, Silanyo said that 
while Somaliland has managed to maintain its sanity in an insecure 
region, security and economic challenges remained.  He discussed the 
global economic downturn, the pressure of refugees, and high prices 
and food shortages that are causing a humanitarian crisis in 
Somaliland.  Silanyo concluded, "No matter what, we are determined 
as a nation and people to maintain stability, democracy, peace and 
security." 
 
¶15.  (U) A representative from the UCID party asked why the United 
States could engage directly with Southern Sudan and not with 
Somaliland.  The opposition party representatives, like the 
government representatives, asked for direct assistance to 
Somaliland's political and economic development.  They requested 
food aid with one asking, "Do we not deserve to be helped?"  A 
Kulmiye representative emphasized the high regard that Somalilanders 
have for the United States, saying "Even our Islamists are 
pro-American - but America rewards its enemies more than its 
friends."  He appealed for us to closely follow the next elections. 
"If the results are acceptable, the international community must do 
its part and reward us for staying on the democratic path." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Preparations on Schedule for 2009 Elections 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (U) All the party representatives agreed that the election 
timetable is being met.  They said the democratic process and 
political parties are new to Somaliland and in urgent need of 
capacity building.  They asked for assistance with election-related 
transportation, equipment, and training costs, and presented us with 
a proposal to assist all three parties.  (Note: The proposal is a 
request from all three parties for basic office equipment, 
computers, supplies, and vehicles with a total budget of about USD 
80,000).  Jama Mohamed Omar, member of the National Electoral 
Commission (NEC) told us that most of the equipment for the voter 
registration process has arrived and the NEC will complete its 
 
NAIROBI 00002158  004.2 OF 005 
 
 
recruitment and training of staff during Ramadan.  The voter 
registration process is on schedule to begin October 14.  Omar 
concluded that all stakeholders are collaborating with the NEC and 
"All Somalilanders are speaking with one voice on elections." 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Qaran Leaders Rights Still Not Restored 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶17.  (U) After discussions with the political party representatives, 
we met with Dr. Mohamed Abdi Gabose, Chairman of the Qaran political 
association.  Gabose told us that although President Riyale promised 
Assistant Secretary Frazer that he would restore all of the rights 
of the Qaran leaders, he remains disenfranchised.  Gabose thanked us 
for following his case and for the recent intervention by the 
Special Envoy who directly addressed this issue with President 
Riyale.  At that juncture, Riyale gave us complete assurances that 
Gabose can participate in the electoral process, not as Qaran, but 
as a citizen.  However, Gabose told us that his court record has not 
been expunged, making him ineligible to register to vote or to 
participate in the electoral process.  He stated that President 
Riyale will need to write a letter to the regional court formally 
requesting the restoration of the Qaran leaders' political rights. 
 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Challenges Exist, Opportunities Plentiful 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (U) For the first time in Hargeisa, we met with USAID and State 
Department-funded organizations working in Somaliland: the 
International Republican Institute, CARE, Education Development 
Center, Public International Law and Policy Group, and Interpeace. 
Our partners spoke very highly of one another's work and the synergy 
between them.  Several themes emerged from our discussion, including 
the vibrancy of civil society, the need to support capacity of 
governance institutions, and the challenges related to restrictions 
of independent radio in Somaliland. 
 
¶19.  (U) The newest USG-funded organization working in Somaliland is 
the Public International Law and Policy Group (PILPG).  Chief of 
Party Casey Kuhlman spoke about the organization's work with the 
parliament in the areas of legislative reform and capacity-building. 
 PILPG collaborates with UNDP's Rule of Law program to support the 
development of security sector, environmental, and business 
legislation.  The International Republican Institute (IRI) is 
strengthening the political parties and the parliament.  Program 
Manager Danny Irungu spoke of the challenge of moderating the 
political parties' high expectations vis-a-vis the assistance IRI 
can provide.  IRI is working with PILPG and Interpeace to support 
the upcoming voter registration drive/elections, as well as working 
with the parliament.  A needs assessment of the political parties 
was recently completed and will be shared with USAID. 
 
¶20.  (U) Interpeace shared with us the progress on preparations for 
the upcoming voter registration/national identification effort. 
Interpeace is providing the NEC with technical assistance and 
hardware to carry out the exercise, set to begin on October 14.  The 
equipment has arrived and the NEC and Ministry of Interior are in 
the process of hiring the hundreds of people necessary to staff the 
1000 registration sites throughout the country.  Interpeace's 
Somaliland program officer Peder Pederson asked for us to help 
procure 50 to 100 tents for sites in locations without any 
infrastructure. 
 
¶21.  (U) Education Development Center described the increasing 
challenges of operating in south-central Somalia with the worsening 
security situation.  A large teacher training exercise was cancelled 
in the south in the last few days due to insecurity. Nevertheless, 
EDC continues to reach over 250,000 children through its radio 
instruction programming.  Senior Advisor Sera Kariuki spoke of the 
great popularity of the illustrated folklore stories and its success 
of using the Somali traditional oral culture to enhance literacy. 
There are plans to publish similar stories for older children and to 
develop an animated DVD.  Kariuki also noted the challenges of 
obtaining permission from the Minister of Information to 
re-broadcast the lessons on Radio Hargeisa.  Chief of Party Said 
Yassin spoke of the successful training of radio practitioners from 
all over Somalia.  He remarked that the radio staff from other areas 
in Somalia with vibrant competition among private stations 
challenged the Deputy Minister of Information for the Somaliland 
government's restrictions on independent radio. 
¶22.  (U) CARE spoke of its long history in Somalia/Somaliland and 
 
NAIROBI 00002158  005.2 OF 005 
 
 
the USAID-funded civil society programming.  Team Leader Tim Muia 
remarked that many of the local NGOs working with USAID implementing 
partners have benefited from capacity-building support from CARE. 
Muia spoke of the need to build the capacity of governance 
institutions so there is not an imbalance with better organized 
local NGOs.  He also noted that local media organizations are 
challenging the government on its ban of independent radio.  Muia 
suggested that the United States may be able to encourage the 
Somaliland government to allow independent radios to emerge. 
 
¶23. (U) All of the partners noted the impact on the social and 
physical infrastructure of Hargeisa caused by the influx of IDPs 
from southern Somalia and refugees from Ethiopia.  In addition, they 
lamented that increasing commodities prices and potential drought in 
the Sool/Sanaag have resulted in deepening of poverty in Somaliland. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶24.  (SBU) Although the visit lasted only a few hours, all of our 
contacts appreciated the opportunity to talk with us on their turf. 
The visit and meetings received positive coverage in the Somaliland 
television, print and electronic press, making the front page of 
several newspapers.  All of our interlocutors shared similar 
concerns about the economy and the welfare of the people of 
Somaliland.  The relationship between the executive and legislative 
representatives appeared constructive and the ruling and opposition 
parties were respectful to one another.  There were no concerns 
raised over the voter registration process or the electoral 
timetable, which is an excellent sign.  Even our implementing 
partners seemed to be operating with a sense of synergy.  The 
collegiality and cooperation among key actors in Somaliland contrast 
dramatically with the highly confrontational and divisive relations 
that characterize politics in other regions of Somalia. 
 
RANNEBERGER