08NAIROBI2231
SOMALIA - PUNTLAND RESPONSE TO A/S FRAZER'S PIRACY
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXYZ0011
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNR #2231/01 2661350
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221350Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEPVAA/COMJSOC FT BRAGG NC IMMEDIATE
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA  IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 7387UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 002231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EWWT FR PGOV PINS PREL SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - PUNTLAND RESPONSE TO A/S FRAZER'S PIRACY 
LETTER 
 
REF: STATE 93932 
 
NAIROBI 00002231  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  Post forwarded A/S Frazer's reftel letter urging more be 
done on piracy to Mohamed Muse Hersi, President of Somalia's 
semi-autonomous Puntland region.  Hersi's response follows in 
paragraph 3. 
 
¶2.  Separately, poloff shared A/S Frazer's letter with Ali 
Abdi Aware, Puntland's foreign relations minister.  Aware 
affirmed Puntland was doing all it could to counter piracy 
off its Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden coasts.  Not 
surprisingly, his letter contained an extensive list of 
equipment and materiel Puntland needs, includin six boats, 24 
sport utility vehicles, and training and salaries for a 
250-man Anti-Piracy Brigade.  By our calculations, the latter 
alone carries a $4.5 million price tag.  Aware praised the 
September 16 French raid rescuing two French nationals from 
Somali pirates.  Aware said more countries should take direct 
action against the pirates, rather than pay astronomical 
ransoms for hijacked ships and crews.  Aware pointed out that 
Puntland had rescued an Indian ship and crew in April, after 
India had given Puntland permission to interdict.  Those 
captured pirates had been tried and sentenced to life.  Aware 
said his government wants more international coordination on 
piracy, and said he will be the primary point of contact for 
future cooperation. 
 
¶3.  Begin Text of Letter: 
 
Dear Assistant Secretary, 
 
Thank you for you letter of 9 September 2008 passed on to me 
by H.E. Ambassador Michael E. Rannenberger.  I greatly value 
your emphasis on the importance of our relationship.  Your 
government,s support to Somalia in general and Puntland in 
particular is very much appreciated.  I could not agree more 
that we need to take action to curb challenges including 
piracy detrimental to our cooperation. 
 
I am pleased to reconfirm that Puntland State Government 
remains committed, despite our limited means, to fight piracy 
in Puntland waters.  I expressed my concern in detail on the 
growing piracy as well as other security and terrorism 
related issues in my letter of 9 April to the U.S. Government 
through Ambassadors Rannenberger and Yamamoto, hoping to get 
early assistance to combat pirates before reaching the 
current level of madness. 
 
The recurrence of security incidents from the end of last 
year prompted initiatives taken by the Government in 
collaboration with the communities and civil society 
organizations.  A new Ministry for Security was instituted in 
December 2007 with an increased budget allocation for the 
implementation of rule of law and a senior experienced police 
general with a proven record appointed as its Minister.  A 
new Police commander and a Deputy Commander were also 
appointed later as a beginning of first touches of a 
comprehensive reform of Police Command structure.  In line 
with these changes, a new Puntland Security Policy was drawn 
and approved by the Cabinet Council in June. 
 
By using three low speed ships and four short scope radars of 
our own, we have done as much as we could do under 
circumstances of limited resources and equipment, hunting 
down the known criminals, arresting nearly 40 of them, 
wounding some seriously and killing a few in the course of 
duty.  Puntland forces rescued an Indian cargo ship and its 
crew from pirates last April.  Those arrested in that 
operation are now serving life imprisonment and the other 
prisoners are awaiting trial.  Numerous planned attacks on 
foreign vessels and boats have also been intercepted, 
frustrated or thwarted by Puntland security forces.  Pirates 
continue to fight back, buying loyalty and hideouts in major 
towns, thereby endangering security personnel.  However, 
inland pirate resistance has weakened and poses only 
occasional desperate threat to the individual security 
personnel. 
 
As cost increased with the number of continuous security 
operations carried out over the last 10 months coupled with 
food price hikes and drought, we have been unable to pay most 
of the salaries. 
 
NAIROBI 00002231  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
With the help of the international community and the United 
States, Puntland administration, at best, can take the 
following actions: 
 
-- Placement of a marine force of 35 men in each of six 
selected coastal settlements: Gara'ad, Eyl, Hafun, Bargal, 
Alula and Las-Khorei and an additional 40-man mobile rapid 
deployment unit to deny pirates to launch attacks from the 
shore since little can be done when a ship is seized at sea; 
-- Supply of arms to the 250-man Special Task Force against 
piracy; 
-- Legislation of an anti-piracy act by the Parliament of 
Puntland; 
-- Dissemination of public information brochures through the 
media explaining how piracy is un-Islamic, un-Somali and a 
criminal activity in international law; and 
-- Promotion of community national awareness about the issue 
of piracy. 
 
This is as far as we can stretch ourselves.  Yet, it will not 
tackle the present piracy problem effectively without 
external backing, because huge ransoms demanded and paid 
enabled the pirates to buy faster marine transport and more 
weapons.  I would like therefore to ask your Government and 
the international community to assist us in the following 
areas: 
 
-- Training of the Special Task Force against piracy; 
-- Budget support for the task force for a period of 12 
months ($50 per day X 250 for subsistence, incentives, 
health, fuel and maintenance); 
-- Twenty-two four-wheel drive pick-up vehicles; 
-- Supply of six speed boats to cover the 1650 km coastline 
of Puntland and 
Communication equipment. 
 
Finally Madam, I strongly believe that with your help on an 
emergency basis we can together defuse the ongoing situation 
in Puntland waters starting with a coordinated sea and land 
attack to free the ten or so ships and their crews now being 
held.  We look forward to hearing from you and the 
international community at your earliest convenience. 
 
With my highest considerations. 
 
Best Regards, 
 
//signed// 
 
Mohamoud Muse Hersi, 
President, 
Puntland State Government 
 
End Text. 
 
¶4.  Post will convey Washington's response when available. 
RANNEBERGER