08OTTAWA1177
ELECTION KICK-OFF HIGHLIGHTS TORY PREPARATIONS
Mon Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO8003
OO RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #1177/01 2522127
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 082127Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8452
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 001177 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL CA
SUBJECT: ELECTION KICK-OFF HIGHLIGHTS TORY PREPARATIONS 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 1171 (Canada Calls Election) 
¶B. OTTAWA 632 (Election Preparations) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Prime Minister Harper called a federal election 
on September 7 for voting on October 14 (Ref A).  Harper emphasized 
continuity and stability in his first message to voters.  Dion 
branded Harper an extremist.  Although Harper signaled the date at 
least a week in advance -- and most observers have been expecting a 
fall election for months -- not all the parties appeared equally 
ready.  The Liberals, particularly, experienced opening logistical 
snafus.  The Conservatives have the advantage of incumbency and a 
well-oiled campaign machine that has been in a high state of 
readiness for at least a year. End summary 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) PM Harper kicked-off the Conservative national campaign 
directly after receiving the Governor General's consent to national 
elections.  Harper delivered a message that underscored continuity 
and stability, and warned that Liberal leader Stephane Dion was "not 
worth the risk."  After the launch, Harper made his first campaign 
stop in Quebec City, confirming media reports that the Conservatives 
will make a big push in Quebec, hoping to build on the ten seats 
they won in the Quebec City region in 2006.  Harper moved on to 
British Columbia and Saskatchewan today to campaign in Liberal-held 
ridings in suburban Vancouver and Regina, Conservative officials 
told media, to reinforce the message that the party is on the 
offensive. 
 
 
Liberals Offer Stark Choice 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) In contrast to Harper's message of stability, Liberal leader 
Stephane Dion framed the election as a "stark choice" between his 
"richer, fairer, greener" Canada and what he called "the most 
conservative government in our history."  He made a direct appeal to 
Quebecers, underlining his identity as one of them.  He vowed to 
wage an aggressive campaign and railed against "distorted" 
Conservative attack ads.  He admitted to reporters--for the first 
time--to a hearing disability that he said hampered his English 
speaking and contributed to his communication difficulties.  Dion's 
campaign start was low-key.  His official plane will not be ready 
until September 10, limiting him to events in Ottawa and Montreal 
that can be reached by campaign bus.  Moreover, he was on the 
defensive from media inquiries over his "green" campaign's use of a 
gas-guzzling Boeing 737.  (The Conservatives have had their more 
fuel efficient Airbus on retainer since 2004 and the NDP beat the 
Liberals to Air Canada's only other spare.) 
 
¶4. (U) NDP leader Jack Layton ignored his other opponents and 
focused exclusively on the Conservatives, saying he is running to be 
PM.  The tactic is a change for the NDP which traditionally seeks to 
exert influence, rather than wield power.  Layton's first campaign 
stops will take him to western and northern Canada.  Bloc Quebecois 
leader Gilles Duceppe appealed to Quebecers to vote Bloc to stave 
off a Conservative majority government.  Duceppe said the 
Conservatives were extreme and out of step with Quebec values. 
After his campaign launch in Montreal, he moved to rural Quebec and 
Trois Rivieres, where party leaders say they need to shore up 
support.  Green Party Leader Elizabeth May portrayed herself as a 
populist non-politician, and as agent of change, "hope and 
optimism." 
 
 
Tory War Room's Disciplined Operation 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Operating from their high-tech "war room" in Ottawa (Ref B), 
Conservative officials said they will follow the same formula for 
every day of the campaign: a 06:00 EST daily policy announcement or 
Qevery day of the campaign: a 06:00 EST daily policy announcement or 
briefing by Conservatives MPs, events by PM Harper to reinforce the 
message, followed by an evening rally.  The pattern repeats the 
Conservatives' successful policy-a-day tactic in the 2006 campaign. 
However, some media outlets are reportedly balking at taking live 
video feed from the Conservative war room due to conflict of 
interest concerns.  The Conservatives were the only party to begin 
running televised ads at least a week before the campaign.  The ads 
focus on PM Harper as a family man, which media analysts saw as an 
effort to soften his image and stress his middle-class credentials. 
Liberal ads will start running on September 8, according to press 
reports. 
 
 
Battle of the Campaign Signs 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Mission Canada posts reported that the Conservatives and Bloc 
Quebecois were the first off the mark with campaign signs. On Day 
Two, Ottawa and Toronto officers reported largely only Conservative 
campaign signs on city streets with few from other parties.  In 
Quebec, Montreal and Quebec City officers found that the Bloc 
Quebecois was the first to erect its signs, although the 
 
OTTAWA 00001177  002 OF 002 
 
 
Conservatives had also begun to post signs in Quebec City. 
Vancouver, Winnipeg and Halifax reported few or no signs.  However, 
Vancouver said that recent Conservative election-related 
announcements had raised the party's visibility in the city. 
Halifax reported that municipal election signs were up, but no 
federal placards. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Comment: Campaign signs are a visible expression of 
momentum and a test of organizational muscle, activist participation 
and resources.  The Conservatives' deep pockets have enabled them to 
get off to a strong start.  Party officials told us in May that 
their signs, brochures and campaign materials were already ready to 
go.  They clearly intend to mount an aggressive campaign, making 
logistics especially important for the Liberals and other opposition 
parties. 
WILKINS