08STATE97129
USUN INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE IN UNSC MEETING ON IRAN
Thu Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0006
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7129 2550223
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 110220Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 3016
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 097129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC IR
SUBJECT: USUN INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE IN UNSC MEETING ON IRAN 
SANCTIONS SEPTEMBER 11, 2008 
 
The United States thanks the Chair for his report on the 
actions taken by states in fulfillment of their 
obligations under Resolutions 1737, and 1747 and 1803 to 
take measures to counter the proliferation and development 
of nuclear technology and ballistic missiles by Iran.  I 
must note that Iran continues to defy the continued 
demands of this Council to suspend its uranium enrichment 
program and activities related to its heavy water reactor, 
and has failed to cooperate with the IAEA's investigation. 
 
Today, I would like to make four points. 
 
First, the United States believes it essential that Member 
States swiftly, fully and robustly implement the 
provisions of United Nations Security Council resolutions 
1737, 1747 and 1803.  We encourage all states to take 
actions that are complementary to those explicitly 
required by these resolutions to achieve the international 
community's ultimate objective: persuading Iran to make a 
strategic decision to abandon its pursuit of a nuclear 
weapons capability.  Full implementation of the 
resolutions will maintain pressure on Iran to change 
course. 
 
Second, we need to remember that financial sanctions form 
a key part of the measures imposed by this Council.  By 
exercising vigilance over Iran's access to the 
international financial sector, we will be able to limit 
Iran's ability to procure items that could benefit or 
advance its nuclear and missile program.  To help achieve 
this goal, the United States, France and the United 
Kingdom distributed a list of banks domiciled in Iran 
which included their branches and subsidiaries abroad. 
 
Third, the United States has endeavored to answer the 
Council's call for all states to exercise vigilance over 
the activities of financial institutions in their 
territories with all banks domiciled in Iran, in order to 
avoid such activities contributing to 
proliferation- sensitive nuclear activities and the 
development of nuclear weapon delivery systems.  We also 
seek to aid the 1737 Committee in carrying out its mandate 
to examine information regarding alleged violations of 
imposed measures and to seek information from all states 
regarding actions taken by them to implement the imposed 
measures.  It is in this vein that the United States 
undertook to provide a briefing to Council members on 
September 10 about our own efforts to implement the 
provisions of the Iran sanctions resolutions related to 
financial institutions.  Our goal is to assist other 
states in deciding how to carry out this vigilance, 
particularly because we have encountered a number of 
attempts by Iran to avoid sanctions through the use of 
deceptive financial practices.  Vigilance is a matter for 
each member state.  We would encourage other countries to 
share their experiences so that we may help each other 
implement the provisions of these resolutions more 
effectively. 
 
Finally, the United States' objective remains a diplomatic 
resolution to this issue.  Iran must fully and verifiably 
suspend its uranium enrichment-related, reprocessing, and 
heavy water-related activities, and cooperate fully with 
the International Atomic Energy Agency, as required by the 
UN Security Council. 
RICE