08USUNNEWYORK875
UNSC MEETS AT SAUDI/ARAB LEAGUE REQUEST
Mon Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4248
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0875/01 2731726
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291726Z SEP 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5014
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 000875 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KPAL KWBG UNSC IS PA LE SY IR
SUBJECT: UNSC MEETS AT SAUDI/ARAB LEAGUE REQUEST 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The UN Security Council met September 26 in 
response to the request by Saudi Arabia on behalf of the Arab 
League to discuss Israeli settlement activity.  The Saudi FM 
spoke first and accused Israel of intransigence and a lack of 
good faith in dealing with the settlements issue.  Arab 
League Secretary General Amr Moussa also protested Israeli 
settlements policy which he said contributed to making a 
viable future Palestinian state a "mere mirage."  The PA 
President said Israeli settlements cut the West Bank into 
cantons and changed the configuration of Jerusalem, but swore 
he would never cease to negotiate.  The Israeli Perm Rep said 
that settlements were not the major issue as they had never 
been an obstacle to peace for Israel and cited terrorism as 
"this century's Black Plague." 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Secretary stressed the strong USG commitment to 
achieving a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians 
and called on the international community to support the 
parties to that end.  She urged the international community 
to speak out against terrorism and stated that the Council 
should take up the matter of one member of the UN (Iran) 
calling for the destruction of another member (Israel).  The 
European states on the Council largely stressed both parties' 
obligations and briefly touched on settlements, as did Costa 
Rica, China, Vietnam, Panama, and Burkina Faso.  Conversely, 
Libya, Indonesia, and South Africa focused their statements 
exclusively on Israeli settlement activity.  End summary. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Security Council met for a formal meeting 
September 26 in response to the request by Saudi Arabia on 
behalf of the Arab League to discuss Israeli settlement 
activity.  The Council first heard briefings from Saudi 
Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal, Arab League 
Secretary-General Amr Moussa, and PLO Chairman/PA President 
Mahmoud Abbas, and a response from Israeli Perm Rep Gabriela 
Shalev.  The Presidency then opened the floor to remarks from 
Security Council members. 
 
Saudi Arabia 
------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Saudi FM Prince Saud al-Faisal opened the session 
by accusing Israel of intransigence and an absence of good 
faith in dealing with the settlements issue, accusing the 
Israeli government of humiliating the Palestinian people and 
changing the geographic and demographic facts on the ground. 
Continued construction in East Jerusalem makes it "virtually 
impossible" to envision the establishment of an independent 
Palestinian state, he continued, and called upon Israel to 
immediately cease all settlement activity.  "The only true 
path to Israel,s security is peace," said Saud, adding that 
"the moment for serious action is upon us."  He described the 
peace process as being in "stagnation," and characterized 
Palestinian anger and frustration as reaching serious levels. 
 He concluded by noting that he was not asking for any action 
from the Council now, but said the meeting should remain 
"open" until the issue has been resolved. 
 
Arab League 
----------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Arab League chair Amr Moussa began by recalling the 
September 2006 Security Council meeting convened at the Arab 
League's request to reinvigorate the peace process, with the 
goal of reaching a comprehensive peace, and most of whose 
goals have not been achieved.  He said he had "hoped the 
Syrians and Lebanese would have a voice in this meeting."  He 
accused Israel of lacking the political will to accept a 
viable Palestinian state equal to Israel, saying Israel has 
refused to put anything in writing and simply wants to hold 
more meetings.  He noted that the Annapolis requirements of 
stopping settlement construction and removing illegal 
outposts have not been met.  If this situation continues, 
Moussa said, it will have serious repercussions for peace, 
since Israel continues to build settlements and change the 
demographic facts on the ground.  He was dismissive of 
Israeli-Syrian indirect talks facilitated by Turkey, and held 
out little hope, due to Israeli intransigence.  This 
situation has made the possibility of a viable Palestinian 
state a "mere mirage," Moussa protested.  The Arab League 
continues to abide by the terms of its peace initiative, he 
declared, and called on Israel to reconsider the Arab peace 
offer and to cease its settlement policy.  The situation also 
requires an "honest broker," he added.  (Note: Both Saud and 
Moussa threatened to come back to the Council for a "product" 
if no progress is made on settlements.  End note.) 
 
PLO/PA 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000875  002 OF 004 
 
 
------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) PA President Mahmoud Abbas focused his entire 
remarks on settlements and their impact on the peace process, 
though he swore that he would never cease to negotiate for 
peace.  Using PLO Negotiations Affairs Department maps (which 
were circulated to SC members during the briefing), he called 
into question the three settlement blocks of Ariel, Ma'ale 
Adumim, and Efrat which divide the West Bank into four 
different cantons and jeopardize the creation of a viable 
Palestinian state.  While phase one of the Roadmap calls for 
a definitive end to Israel's settlement policy, he said, the 
"policy persists to the banks of the Jordan river."  He 
questioned how he could continue to negotiate if these 
settlement policies continue.  He called on the Quartet to 
closely track the implementation of the Roadmap.  He opined 
that even the Israeli government considers some of the 
settlements illegal, though they continue.  He cited French 
President Sarkozy and Secretary Rice's interventions on the 
issue which have not received a positive response.  On 
Jerusalem, he said that all previous agreements have 
stipulated that there should be no change to the 
configuration of the city, though the Israeli government does 
not enforce these agreements with the Jerusalem mayor.  He 
lamented the active aggression by Israeli settlers against 
the Palestinian population.  Nevertheless, he said, "I am 
ready to pursue negotiations.  I will never cease to 
negotiate.  But, how can resolutions not be heeded?" 
 
Israel 
------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Israeli Perm Rep Gabriela Shalev, in her first 
appearance before the Council, said that if a stranger was 
seated at the table he would falsely think that settlements 
were the major concern on the ground, not terrorism or the 
threats posed to peace and security by Hamas, Hizballah, or 
Iran.  She said that negotiations were continuing on the 
ground, as they should be, and not through the Security 
Council.  She reiterated Israel's commitment to a two-state 
solution and said "the question was not whether to achieve it 
but how."  She stressed that Israel was ready to make painful 
concessions and that settlements would not be an obstacle to 
peace.  Shalev called on the Arab world to play a pivotal 
role in supporting a moderate PA; condemn toxic statements, 
like those made by the Iranian President; and recognize 
Israel's right to exist.  She said that Israel understands 
its obligations to peace and security in the region.  She 
called for efforts to be made to confront all obstacles on 
the ground and build confidence.  She described terrorism as 
"this century's Black Plague."  Shalev reiterated President 
Peres' offer in his speech to the General Assembly to hold a 
peace talks in Jerusalem with all interested Arab states. 
She stressed that progress towards peace would be made 
through bilateral meetings, such as the Peres-Abbas meeting 
earlier that morning, not by meetings in fora like the 
Security Council. 
 
U.S. 
---- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Secretary listened to the two parties and the 
French FM before delivering her intervention.  She stressed 
her commitment and the President's to finding lasting peace 
between Israel and the Palestinians.  She described how a 
year ago there was no serious peace process but today there 
is one, despite the complications.  She listed the bilateral 
meetings that had taken place this week alone, including the 
Peres-Abbas meeting earlier that morning, Foreign Minister 
Livni's meeting with Abu Ala'a September 23, President Bush's 
meeting with President Abbas September 25, and her own 
meeting later that day with President Abbas.  She noted the 
Quartet meetings that afternoon and the Quartet's role as the 
appropriate forum for such issues.  She said that the 
Annapolis process calls for not just negotiations but 
progress on the ground and the fulfillment of Roadmap 
obligations, and the U.S. continues to press both parties to 
that end. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) She called on the international community to 
support the parties in their bilateral negotiations; to 
insist that the parties live up to their Roadmap obligations; 
and to provide financial assistance to the PA so that it can 
provide services to its people.  She cited the historic 
levels of U.S. assistance, including direct budgetary 
support.  The Secretary called on regional states to fulfill 
their assistance pledges to the PA.  Noting the Arab Peace 
Initiative, she asked regional states to reach out to Israel 
since a comprehensive solution requires that Israel be a 
valued partner in the Middle East.  She urged the 
international community to speak out against terrorism and 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000875  003 OF 004 
 
 
said that the taking of innocent human life is never 
acceptable.  The Secretary ended by stating that the Council 
should be discussing the Iranian president's statement before 
the General Assembly earlier in the week.  She said, "The 
U.S. will be asking that the Council convene again to take up 
the matter of one member of the UN calling for the 
destruction of another member of the UN in a way that simply 
should not be allowed." 
 
European states stress 
both parties' obligations 
------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The French FM quoted President Sarkozy's June 23 
statement to the Knesset that there will be no peace without 
a total halt to settlement activity but then recalled the 
Iranian President's UNGA speech, describing it as "an 
unacceptable message before the General Assembly."  He 
stressed the need to combat terrorism, welcomed the truce in 
Gaza, and said there would be no security for Israel without 
a democratic Palestinian state and no security for the world 
without peace in the Middle East.  The Belgian FM termed 
settlements in East Jerusalem as illegal, so it was important 
to have a discussion in the Security Council but that it 
could not be restricted to one issue.  He said the 
negotiations launched at Annapolis must lead to a peace 
agreement for an independent and viable Palestinian state to 
guarantee coexistence and peace to both Palestinians and 
Israelis.  He noted the security progress in the West Bank, 
called for Israel to lift movement and access restrictions, 
and said the Gaza truce must not be an end in itself but lead 
to a better situation for all Gazans. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The Italian FM, in the strongest European 
statement, said that both parties must be encouraged to 
proceed since the clock is ticking against peace.  He 
considered Israel's security as non-negotiable; that the 
Palestinian state needs solid institutions upon which it can 
be built; and that Arab states must continue to provide 
support.  He said the Israeli settlement process does not 
facilitate the peace process and Israeli political leaders 
must come to a more satisfactory solution.  He welcomed 
President Abbas' commitment to the peace process and saluted 
Egypt for its role negotiating the Gazan truce.  Turning to 
Lebanon, he voiced concern for the resurgence of violence. 
He said he hoped there would one day be Syrian-Israeli and 
Lebanese-Israeli peace and that Syria would one day be a 
helpful international actor.  He ended by noting the serious 
threat posed by Iran. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The British State Secretary noted the progress to 
date with the two parties talking, the cease-fire holding, 
reform ongoing in the PA, and security progress in the West 
Bank.  He urged the Quartet to issue a strong message later 
that day, called for support for both sides, and noted that 
all parties must support progress for peace.  He, too, noted 
the "grievous comments" by the Iranian president and said it 
was no way to talk about another member state.  The Croatian 
FM in a short statement said there had been solid and 
substantive progress during the year but more needed to be 
done.  He termed the present a "crucial time for the peace 
process." 
 
Libya, Indonesia, and South Africa 
only focus on settlements 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU) The Libyan Perm Rep gave a long intervention 
focused exclusively on settlements and chastised the Council 
for not being able to agree during the year on a Presidential 
statement "no matter how grave the situation."  He described 
the morning session as the first time a group of states asked 
only for the opportunity to be heard.  The Indonesian FM also 
focused his statement on the negative effects of settlements 
and the unlawful acts of settlers.  The South African FM 
cited the Fourth Geneva Convention before reiterating the 
Roadmap language on freezing settlements and dismantling 
outposts.  She described the situation on the  ground as not 
having improved significantly since Annapolis.  She said 
positive political progress must result in progress on the 
ground. 
 
Costa Rica, China, Vietnam, Panama, 
and Burkina Faso focus more broadly 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The Costa Rican FM referenced resolution 181, 
which calls for the creation of two states, and described it 
as a tragedy that the Palestinian state was never created 
back when the state of Israel was founded.  The FM noted the 
various delays in the founding of the Palestinian state, but 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000875  004 OF 004 
 
 
said the PA was taking on the features of a state and that 
was why Costa Rica had recognized it as such in February.  He 
noted that neither of the parties has done everything it 
should have and called for the participation of the Arab 
states in the chamber to play an active role in facilitating 
the peace process.  The Chinese Deputy Pol Counselor 
reiterated China's "ardent hope to see progress" and said it 
was imperative that the talks produce results.  Noting that 
the talks are not conducted in a vacuum, he voiced concern 
for the Gaza humanitarian situation and Israel's settlement 
expansion.  He called for neither side to wait for the other 
side to take the first step in meeting its Roadmap 
obligations and called for the Quartet to help accelerate the 
negotiating process.  He said the Security Council could and 
should play an important role. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) The Vietnamese Perm Rep echoed the UN 
Secretary-General's statements that settlement activities are 
contrary to the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Roadmap.  He 
noted UN Special Coordinator for the Peace Process Serry's 
comments before the Council September 18 that the peace 
process was at a crossroads and called for the parties to 
work together and take reciprocal steps.  The Panamanian Perm 
Rep recognized the importance of the meeting and described 
the situation as more complex than one single issue, though 
settlements do violate the rights of one party and called for 
their halt.  The Burkinabe FM who chaired the meeting said 
encouraging signs are emerging and we need to transform will 
into success.  He called for greater effort from both sides, 
terming it in the interest of everyone in the Middle East. 
Khalilzad