07ADDISABABA3434
MELES TELLS CODEL INHOFE HR2003 INSULTING
Mon Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Addis Ababa
VZCZCXRO1558
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHDS #3434/01 3370449
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 030449Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8719
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CJTF HOA PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADDIS ABABA 003434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP PREL PGOV EAID PTER ET SO
SUBJECT: MELES TELLS CODEL INHOFE HR2003 INSULTING 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles acknowledged Ethiopia's 
challenges as an emerging democracy to a visiting CODEL led by 
Senator James Inhofe, but clearly stressed that H.R. 2003 - The 
Ethiopia Democracy and Accountability Act - was an insult and risks 
jeopardizing the excellent U.S.-Ethiopia relationship if enacted 
into law.  Meles noted Ethiopia's strong commitment to 
counter-terrorism, but emphasized that Ethiopia does not expect a 
special treatment because of its strong CT cooperation.  He did 
request, however, that the U.S. express its legitimate constructive 
criticism of Ethiopian actions in a fair and respectful manner and 
refrain from legislating about the "minutia of internal politics in 
Ethiopia."  Meles appreciated the robust military, economic, and 
diplomatic cooperation with the United States, but stressed that 
Ethiopia would not stand down in its own fight against terrorism 
even if legislation resulted in a significantly diminished 
relationship.  Senator Inhofe and members of his delegation thanked 
the Prime Minister for his candor and for the strong U.S.-Ethiopian 
cooperation.  Senator Inhofe said that H.R. 2003 does not reflect 
the position of the United States.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Prime Minister Meles hosted Senator Inhofe's delegation 
including Congressmen Ander Crenshaw, Robert Aderholt, Dan Boren, 
Tim Walberg, and Mike McIntyre on November 29.  The delegation was 
joined by Congressional staff members, Ambassador Yamamoto, and 
PolCouns (note taker).  Tesfaye Yilma and Fesseha Tesfu, MFA 
Director General for the Americas and Europe and Deputy Chief 
Advisor to the Foreign Ministry respectively accompanied the Prime 
Minister. 
 
ETHIOPIA'S COMMITMENT TO FIGHTING TERRORISM 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Prime Minister Meles opened the meeting by noting the Horn 
of Africa's position as the "epicenter" of the terrorist threat in 
the region.  Meles argued that terrorists want to establish a 
caliphate here despite what he proclaimed to be Abyssinia's unique 
status as the only country in the world that may not be the target 
of jihad due to the Prophet Mohammed's instruction to followers to 
protect it.  Its geographic position has forced Ethiopia to remain 
entrenched in the fight against terrorism since the 1990s to protect 
its own national interests, Meles stated.  The Prime Minister 
emphasized that it was the fight against terrorism that forced 
Ethiopia to take military action in Somalia against the Council of 
Islamic Courts and affiliated militias last year and he noted that 
it was a unilateral decision based on Ethiopia's interests.  Meles 
emphasized that Ethiopia did not request financial support from the 
U.S. for that endeavor, but noted that Ethiopia derived adequate 
satisfaction from the strong U.S.-Ethiopia cooperation since then as 
it was evident to Ethiopia that the U.S. "was in the same trench" as 
Ethiopia.  Ethiopia is fighting terrorism in its own interests, he 
stated, "we will do it with or without the U.S., but we prefer to do 
it with you." 
 
ETHIOPIA'S SURVIVAL DEPENDS ON DEMOCRATIZATION... 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Moving beyond the war against terror, the Prime Minister 
argued that Ethiopia's survival depends on democratization as it is 
too divisive for anything else.  While stressing that the government 
is serious about democratization, Meles was quick to note that it is 
Ethiopia's process.  After recounting the government's version of 
events following the 2005 elections, Meles conceded that the 
Ethiopian Government (GoE) had made mistakes and could have done 
better with better training and equipment.  He then shifted to the 
positive democratic openings that have occurred since late 2006 -- 
revised parliamentary rules to accommodate a multi-party 
legislature, a reform agenda for the National Electoral Board, and 
the pardon of 71 opposition leaders convicted for post-election 
disturbances. 
 
...BUT DON'T LEGISLATE HOW WE DO IT 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Meles quickly moved to H.R. 2003, the "fly in the ointment" 
of an otherwise strong bilateral relationship.  The Prime Minister 
objected to the House-passed bill, arguing that it is unfair and 
unduly singles out Ethiopia.  Highlighting the lack of human rights 
or democratic institutions or processes in the "open air prison" of 
Eritrea, Meles argued that H.R. 2003 effectively represented the 
United States "kicking its friend" when others have far more 
egregious records.  Meles particularly highlighted a provision in 
the bill limiting security assistance until the President certifies 
 
ADDIS ABAB 00003434  002 OF 002 
 
 
that Ethiopia's National Electoral Board (NEB) includes 
representatives from all parties in parliament.  Meles argued that 
such a provision not only does not reflect a U.S. best practice -- 
where no national elections board exist and ruling parties at the 
state level administer elections -- but contradicts an agreement 
between the ruling and opposition parties from the inter-party 
dialogue that NEB members would be politically neutral.  Despite the 
fact that that provision was already in an earlier version of the 
bill before the inter-party dialogue began, Meles argued that the 
bill's sponsor included the provision to accommodate disgruntled 
rejectionists in the opposition who were unwilling to accept the 
NEB's independence. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Meles concluded by noting that he felt personally insulted 
by the House of Representative's passage of H.R. 2003 as it 
reflected a friendly country telling Ethiopia how to operate and 
suggested that the ultimate enactment of the bill, if passed by the 
Senate, would jeopardize the excellent U.S.-Ethiopia cooperative 
relationship.  As friends, Meles advised, the United States should 
be fair and respectful if it is going to criticize Ethiopia, but 
"don't legislate about the minutia of internal politics in 
Ethiopia." 
 
H.R. 2003 IS NOT THE POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Senator Inhofe was quick to clarify to the Prime Minister 
that H.R. 2003 had not yet "passed the Congress" as Meles repeatedly 
lamented, and noted his own speech on the Senate floor opposing the 
bill -- comments which the GoE have acclaimed and reproduced 
throughout state media sources.  Congressmen Aderholt, Boren, and 
Walberg explained U.S. parliamentary procedure and how the 
combination of being introduced under suspended rules and subjected 
to a voice vote helped expedite H.R. 2003 through the House without 
the degree of scrutiny that it may have deserved.  Congressman 
Walberg remarked that the Prime Minister's discussion "helps remind 
us of the consequences of our decisions" and Congressman Crenshaw 
highlighted the utility of a bicameral legislature which provides an 
additional safeguard to ensure a thorough vetting of potential 
legislation.  Senator Inhofe and the entire delegation said that 
H.R. 2003 has not passed the Congress and does not reflect the 
position of the United States.  Senator Inhofe strongly opposes the 
bill.  All members of the delegation expressed their sincere 
appreciation to the Prime Minister and the Ethiopian Government for 
the robust bilateral relationship and cooperation that the U.S. and 
Ethiopia share. 
 
¶8. (U) Senator Inhofe has cleared this cable. 
 
YAMAMOTO