07ANKARA2891
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3213
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2891/01 3381457
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041457Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4540
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8530
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3588
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2497
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6293
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6107
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2693
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002891 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Peshmerge Tightens Measures against the PKK 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports the Kurdish regional 
administration in northern Iraq is tightening security measures 
against the PKK "in line with intelligence obtained from the 
Americans."  The Peshmerge forces patrol Mount Kandil 24 hours a day 
and search all cars passing by in order to prevent food and 
equipment transfers to the PKK.  Following the Turkish military 
operation in Iraq this weekend, Peshmerge are reinforced with heavy 
weapons, artillery and armored units.  Mainstream Sabah, liberal 
Radikal and the leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet report the Turkish 
military buildup on the border with Iraq continues.  Cumhuriyet 
predicts the Turkish military presence will be permanent in order to 
prevent future PKK infiltrations. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Iraq Incursion 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in the mainstream Hurriyet (12/4):  "There are 
conflicting reports about the military operation conducted on 
December 1.  According to pro-government journalists, it was 'the 
first operation conducted following the flow of intelligence from 
the US.'  Some TV channels, who have been reporting on a potential 
CBO for weeks, stressed their correctness with pride.  However, when 
we glance at the foreign press, we see completely different 
reporting.  According to the New York Times, the Washington Post and 
others, what happened on December 1 was not any different than 
previous operations.  Foreign newspapers carried statements from 
Iraqi sources that denied the attacks.  While Turkish TV channels 
make fun of those who claimed it would not be possible to launch an 
operation during winter, the Washington Post reports that a military 
officer from the region agreed that winter was not a good time to 
launch an operation.  A high ranked officer from the southeast told 
Reuters that 'winter conditions don't allow for a major land 
operation.  Possible operations in the future will be limited to air 
strikes and artillery fires.'  I am not criticizing the Turkish 
Military for conducting limited operations during winter, or the 
politicians who have 'snow policies.' I am irritated by the timing 
of the operation.  Why did the government authorize the military 47 
days after the resolution passed the Parliament?  Why was the 
government so late to take action, why?" 
 
Muharrem Sarikaya commented in the mainstream Sabah (12/4): 
"Following the Turkish General Staff (TGS) statement on the CBO 
conducted on December 1, a high level official from the Kurdish 
Regional Administration's Peshmerge Ministry said that 'there was no 
reference in Iraqi Patrol Command reports that Turkish troops 
crossed the border on December 1.  The operation might have taken 
place in the no man's land and the restricted zone that is not under 
our control'.  With this information, northern Iraqi Kurdish 
officials, for the first time, referred to a 'no man's land and a 
restricted zone.'  As a matter of fact, on June 8th, Turkey 
designated part of the territory as a military zone and restricted 
access to this area.  Now, there is a similar zone in Northern Iraq 
as well.  This means that Turkey is fulfilling its desire to 
establish a buffer zone along the border.  I asked the deputy Prime 
Minister Cemil Cicek yesterday to comment on the zone.  Cicek said 
"the Turkish military knows the region well and will do whatever is 
needed" and added that Turkey has agreed on many issues with the 
Baghdad Administration.  Turkey wants to push terrorism out of its 
borders.  That is the point where we are now and the rest is 
detail." 
 
Kurdish Conference in Brussels 
All papers report the "EU, Turkey and the Kurds" conference held in 
the European Parliament in Brussels, in which former Kurdish 
lawmaker Leyla Zana, the pro-Kurdish DTP leader Nurettin Demirtas, 
DTP deputy Ahmet Turk, Nobel Peace Prize-winning Iranian lawyer 
Shirin Ebadi, South African cleric Desmond Tutu, Professor Noam 
Chomsky, and MEP Joost Lagendijk participated.  Mainstream Hurriyet, 
Sabah, and Vatan report Zana said a "comprehensive agreement with 
 
ANKARA 00002891  002 OF 003 
 
 
Abdullah Ocalan" was essential for unity and peace in Turkey.  Ahmet 
Turk asked for a "special status" for the Kurds in Turkey, and like 
DTP leader Demirtas, called for no further Turkish operations into 
northern Iraq.  Lagendijk, co-chairman of Turkey-EU Joint 
Parliamentary Commission, urged the PKK to lay down arms 
"unconditionally," and the DTP to distance itself from the PKK. 
Islamist oriented Zaman and Yeni Safak say Zana's "Ocalan 
propaganda" angered Lagendijk.  Meanwhile, papers also report Ahmet 
Gulabi Dere, a PKK member sought by Interpol, joined the conference. 
 Two weeks ago, papers reported that Turkey asked Belgium to 
extradite Dere on terrorism charges. 
 
Bakoyannis Gives Friendly Messages on Eve of Babacan Visit 
Mainstream Milliyet carries an exclusive interview with Greek 
Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis on the eve of her visit with 
Turkish counterpart Ali Babacan.  "We extend our hand to Turkey; now 
it's time to forget the past," she said.  Bakoyannis also urged 
Turkey to exert efforts to protect regional stability, stressing the 
importance of preserving Iraq's territorial integrity.  She 
reiterated that Greece was definitely against a division in Cyprus. 
"There are 35,000 Turkish troops in Cyprus while the international 
community can't find 12,000 soldiers for Lebanon," Bakoyannis said. 
She reiterated that Turkey's EU membership would boost regional 
peace, stability and welfare.  Bakoyannis noted Foreign Minister Ali 
Babacan would visit not only Athens, but also Western Thrace. 
"Turks in Western Thrace study Turkish language in school and enjoy 
special quotas in universities and in the public sector.  This is 
the European way for dealing with minorities," she emphasized. 
Bakoyannis also underlined Turkey's reluctance to recognize the 
ecumenical status of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate and to reopen 
the Halki Seminary in Istanbul. The Greek FM said the Patriarch, a 
Turkish citizen, would promote Turkey abroad and added that the 
recognition of his status would offer a fine example in meeting the 
EU criteria. 
 
Poll: The Number of Women wearing Headscarves Increases in Turkey 
Mainstream Milliyet carries the second part of a survey on 
"Religion, secularism and turban in Turkey" conducted by "Konda" 
company, which shows that the rate of women covering their heads for 
religious reasons has risen to 73 percent, up from 63.4 percent in 
¶2003.  Those believing female public servants should cover their 
heads increased to 68.9 percent this year, up from 62.6 percent in 
¶2003.  Analysts say the AKP administration is responsible for the 
increase. 
 
Wilson: PKK is the Enemy, not Turkey's Ethnic Kurds 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Ambassador Ross Wilson statement on the 
embassy website regarding US policy on the Kurds, "We are focused on 
working with our Turkish allies and partners in Iraq against a 
violent, terrorist enemy.  However, it should be made clear that the 
PKK is the enemy - not Turkey's ethnic Kurds, nor any other ethnic 
group in this diverse country." 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 7.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkey's Civil Aviation General Directorate said there is no 
evidence of sabotage in Friday's plane crash in Isparta, in which 50 
passengers and seven crew members were killed.  The first report on 
the crash says the plane deviated from its route, but the reason was 
unclear. 
 
- The chairman of parliamentary constitutional commission, AKP 
deputy Professor Burhan Kuzu, said the new constitution would allow 
girls wearing headscarves in universities. 
 
- Center right DP leader Mehmet Agar said his party will hold an 
extraordinary convention on January 6 and former parliament speaker 
 
ANKARA 00002891  003 OF 003 
 
 
Husamettin Cindoruk will run for party leadership. 
 
- The Dutch-Turkish company Multi Turkmall will spend 120 million 
Euro to build a shopping mall in the mainly Kurdish southeastern 
city of Diyarbakir. 
 
International News 
 
- President Abdullah Gul, on an official visit to Pakistan, praised 
Pakistan's moves toward democracy. 
 
- The Orthodox Church in south Cyprus is to reportedly develop a 
plan for resolving problems on the divided island. 
 
- On Monday, Israel released 429 Palestinian prisoners, a gesture 
meant to bolster Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas. 
 
WILSON