07ANKARA2914
TURKEY: PEACE UNIVERSITY TO DEVELOP ECONOMY,
Fri Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6252
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHAK #2914/01 3411127
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071127Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4578
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PRELEVU EINV TU IS
SUBJECT: TURKEY: PEACE UNIVERSITY TO DEVELOP ECONOMY, 
UNDERSTANDING IN THE WEST BANK 
 
REF: ANKARA 2779 
 
¶1. (SBU) This cable contains confidential business 
information not intended for external distribution. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary:  As President Gul prematurely announced 
during the recent Peres/Abbas visit to Turkey, Bilkent 
University Rector and philanthropist Ali Dogramaci is 
building a "Peace University" straddling Israel and the West 
Bank to increase understanding and create sustainable 
development.  Surrounded by a high security wall, the campus 
will house 4,500 Palestinians, Israelis, and others, who will 
work or study at the nursing and teaching colleges or medical 
facilities.  Dogramaci says he has gained GOT and GOI support 
and will have full control over every aspect of the project. 
Like the Erez Industrial Zone, the Peace University is a 
Turkish private sector initiative designed to complement the 
ongoing Middle East Peace Process by strengthening the 
Palestinian economy.  While Dogramaci,s plans may seem 
ambitious, he has the financial resources and political 
connections to deliver on his promises.  End Summary. 
 
¶3. (SBU) After developing several community-based school 
projects in rural Turkey, Bilkent University Rector and 
Foundation Chair Ali Dogramaci was determined to find a 
swords-to-ploughshares approach to the Israel-Palestine 
conflict.  His answer -- a "Peace University" straddling 
Israel and the West Bank.  Envisioned as more than a college, 
Dogramaci explained to us that the Peace University will be a 
community where Israelis and Palestinians will work and live 
together in a secure environment and provide desperately 
needed services to the local Palestinians.  Since beginning 
his project in August 2006, Dogramaci told us he has lobbied 
ruling and opposition parties in Turkey and Israel to 
successfully gain political buy-in.  He claimed that Benjamin 
Netanyahu initially objected to 3,000 Palestinians residing 
on Israeli soil, but extended his support contingent on 
maintaining the highest level of security.  In reciprocity, 
Dogramaci will build a second, larger university in the West 
Bank to provide services to neighboring Israelis. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Dogramaci has fully developed his vision.  A large 
security wall encircling the campus will include two heavily 
guarded entrances; one opening into Israel and the other to 
the West Bank.  In addition to the nursing and teaching 
colleges, Dogramaci plans to build a 200-bed state-of-the-art 
hospital and an adjacent hotel of equal capacity for the 
patients, families.  The faculty, administrators, students, 
staff, and their families, including 3,000 Palestinians, 800 
Israelis, and 700 Turks, Europeans, and North Americans, will 
live together in modern high-rises.  Support facilities will 
include restaurants and shops as well as primary and 
secondary schools for the employees' children.  Dogramaci 
also envisions a mosque, synagogue, and chapel located in a 
central quad.  University students will gain on-the-job 
training at the medical facilities and schools.  Outside the 
West Bank wall, Dogramaci has planned a 1,000-2,000 capacity 
outpatient clinic to provide medical services to local 
Palestinians at market prices.  Contingent on GOI 
case-by-case approval, the clinic could transfer patients 
requiring additional treatment to the hospital within the 
walled campus. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Working with the GOI, Dogramaci said he has 
identified a property adjacent to the north-west tip of the 
West Bank.  The GOI extended qualified industrial zone (QIZ) 
status to the area, providing Dogramaci with full autonomy 
over the project.  Dogramaci plans to use companies owned by 
Bilkent University's foundation to build and secure the 
facility.   He has, he stated, already begun to personally 
recruit the faculty from top institutions around the world. 
Should any resident not abide by the principles of peaceful 
coexistence, under the parameters of a QIZ, Dogramaci can 
fire without question.  He plans to make his first trip to 
the site in January and begin construction of his 'university 
upon a hill' shortly thereafter. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: The Dogramaci family has a long history of 
education-based philanthropy.  In 1984, his father,s 
foundation established Bilkent, Turkey,s first private 
university.  After assuming the position of rector in 1993, 
Dogramaci parlayed his family,s wealth and political 
influence into a series ambitious projects, many requiring 
the amendment of Turkish law.  He is dedicated to the 
creation of the Peace University, which he plans to name 
after his father, and has taken the necessary steps to remove 
any potential political road blocks.  While his projects may 
seem ambitious, Dogramaci has always delivered.  End Comment. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
ANKARA 00002914  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
WILSON