07STATE167346
SOMALIA - INSTRUCTIONS FOR DECEMBER 17 DEBATE
Fri Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7346 3490005
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 142346Z DEC 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 0000
RUEHAE/AMEMBASSY ASMARA PRIORITY 0000
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 167346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM PHSA EWWT XA XW SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - INSTRUCTIONS FOR DECEMBER 17 DEBATE 
 
 
¶1.  This is an action cable.  Please see paragraph 2. 
 
¶2.  USUN is requested to draw from the following points for 
the December 17 debate on Somalia 
 
Begin text: 
 
-- We thank UN Special Representative of the 
Secretary-General Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah for his insightful 
 
SIPDIS 
briefing this afternoon. 
 
-- The United States welcomes the appointment of Nur "Adde" 
Hassan Hussein as the new Prime Minister of 
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG).  We hope the TFG 
can now focus on renewing its efforts towards inclusive 
political dialogue and resuming the comprehensive political 
process outlined by the TFG Charter. 
 
-- We hope Prime Minister Hussein will draw on his 
humanitarian background in helping to address the needs of 
Somalia's nearly one million displaced persons and in working 
to alleviate current impediments to effective delivery of 
U.S. and other international humanitarian aid. 
 
-- We urge the TFG to move quickly to facilitate the drafting 
of a new constitution and formation of key 
commissions, such as the National Electoral Commission, that 
will allow national elections to take place on 
schedule in 2009. 
 
-- We also continue to call on Somali stakeholders across the 
political spectrum to re-join the political dialogue process 
and discuss key elements of the transitional political 
process leading towards national elections in 2009. 
 
-- In Fiscal Year 2007, the United States continued to 
respond to the humanitarian needs of the Somali people and 
supported continued political dialogue in Somalia.  The 
United States was the largest bilateral donor of humanitarian 
assistance, with approximately $90 million provided in FY 
2007, an additional $25 million in development and democracy 
assistance, and we continue to be the largest bilateral donor 
in support of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), 
with nearly $59.6 million provided to date in support of this 
effort. 
 
-- In moving forward with implementation of the Congress 
outcomes and the transitional process, it is important that 
all transitional committees appointed by the TFG are fully 
inclusive of all key stakeholders, including those who may 
not have participated in the Congress. 
 
-- We call on all Somali and regional actors to prevent 
extremist elements from using Somalia as a safe haven for 
continued attacks against civilians, the TFG, and AMISOM. 
The United States has repeatedly urged the TFG leadership 
to reach out to key stakeholders, particularly in Mogadishu, 
to resume the transitional political process 
and work towards an effective ceasefire arrangement as the 
best means of isolating extremist elements seeking to 
prevent further political dialogue. 
 
-- The United States commends AMISOM, and in particular the 
Ugandan forces, for their efforts in 
Somalia operating under difficult and dangerous 
circumstances.  We welcome the commitment by Burundi, Ghana, 
and 
Nigeria to deploy forces in support of AMISOM.  We urge all 
AU Member States that have pledged to send troops to 
Somalia to do so without delay, and we urge the international 
community to assist the AU with the 
necessary logistical and financial resources so that AMISOM 
may be fully deployed. 
 
-- The United States continues to support the full and timely 
deployment of AMISOM as a critical component in 
restoring stability and creating the space for continued 
dialogue and reconciliation. 
 
-- The United States once again would like to stress the need 
for contingency planning for a UN peacekeeping 
operation to Somalia.  We ask that the DPKO send a technical 
assessment mission to Somalia as soon as 
conditions allow. As we all know, dynamics in Somalia are 
fluid and can change at any time - we must begin the 
contingency planning now so that the UN is prepared to deploy 
if and when conditions on the ground permit. 
 
-- The United States remains concerned about the increase in 
piracy off the coast of Somalia.  We commend our 
partners in the Combined Task Force 150 that continue to 
patrol the Gulf of Aden and Indian Ocean to protect the 
safe passage of merchant ships, especially ships carrying 
humanitarian cargo. 
 
-- The U.S. supports the July 5 letter from the IMO Secretary 
General Mitropoulos to the SYG on the need for a 
new Security Council resolution to address the problem of 
piracy off the coast of Somalia.  The U.S.looks forward to 
working with other members of the Council on this issue next 
year. 
 
-- The United States is gravely concerned about the 
deteriorating humanitarian situation, especially in 
south-central Somalia.  We will continue monitoring the 
humanitarian situation and welcome continued close 
coordination and cooperation with the UN Country Team and our 
donor partners in Nairobi to ensure that humanitarian 
assistance 
reaches those in need inside Somalia. 
RICE