06ABIDJAN955
COUNTRY CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR MS. CILIA DE COCK
Fri Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #0955/01 2370914
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250914Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO AMEMBASSY ACCRA 0608UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABIDJAN 000955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IV
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE REQUEST FOR MS. CILIA DE COCK 
 
REF: ACCRA 1923 
 
¶1. Post warmly welcomes the visit of Ms. Cilia De Cock and 
grants country clearance for travel to Abidjan from 
AUGUST 29, 2006 TO SEPTEMBER 02, 2006. 
 
¶2.  The purpose of the trip is to visit cashew processors in 
the southern parts of Cote d'Ivoire (OLAM in Dimbokro) and to 
participate in the Cashew Conference with ARECA in 
Yamoussoukro. 
 
¶3.  Post point of contact for the visit is Erfana Dar, 
Economic Officer, (225) 22.49.4602, cell (225) 05.07.53.10 
 
¶4. Other pertinent information: 
 
Crime Threat: Criminal activity constitutes the 
major security threat for Americans in Cote 
d'Ivoire.  However, amidst the current crisis, the 
possibility of American citizens becoming caught 
up in any renewed violence in Abidjan cannot be 
ruled out.  The most common types of violent 
crimes are armed robberies and carjackings. 
Although the police and gendarmes are very aware 
of the critical nature of the crime problem in 
Cote d'Ivoire, a lack of resources and training 
often keeps them from being able to deter crimes 
or apprehend those responsible for committing 
criminal acts. 
 
Political Violence/Terrorism: Cote d'Ivoire's threat 
rating for international terrorism is currently high, 
while the threat rating for political violence is 
critical.  Employees are warned that, while there is no 
measurable anti-American sentiment in Cote d'Ivoire, 
there are communities within the country that are 
sympathetic to the causes of certain terrorist groups 
operating in other parts of the world. The more 
immediate concern, however, relates to the political 
situation in Cote d'Ivoire.  Cote d'Ivoire experienced 
a military coup in December 1999 and major incidents of 
political unrest since 1999 include three attempted 
coups, the most recent occurring on September 19, 2002. 
The last coup attempt also involved a major military 
mutiny and divided the country into two sections.  The 
southern portion of the country remains under regular 
government forces' control, while the central and 
northern portions are under control of the former rebel 
movement.  In early November 2004 Ivorian 
government forces launched aerial attacks in cities in 
northern Cote d'Ivoire, resulting in several deaths, 
including nine French soldiers and one American 
civilian.  The French reacted by destroying most 
Ivorian air assets and seizing the airport.  In 
response, there were widespread confrontations 
accompanied by looting, rioting, and violence in 
Abidjan and elsewhere.  Non-emergency American 
employees and family members were placed in authorized 
departure status.  The authorized departure status was 
lifted on February 8, 2005 for employees and adult 
family members.  In January 2006 there were renewed 
demonstrations in Abidjan and other areas, directed 
against the UN and French presence.  The Department of 
State has issued several travel warnings, the most 
recent dated March 3, 2006.  The Department of State 
continues to prohibit minor dependents from 
accompanying U.S. government employees assigned to the 
U.S. Embassy and urges Americans to defer non-essential 
travel.  Extreme caution is recommended at all times 
when traveling within the country.  Travelers to Cote 
d'Ivoire are encouraged to consult the travel warning 
prior to their arrival. 
 
Visas:  U.S. passport holders do not require visas for 
entry to Cote d'Ivoire for periods of less than 90 
days. 
 
Medical Requirements:  All travelers must have a yellow 
World Health Organizations booklet bearing a valid 
stamp for yellow fever inoculation or risk being denied 
entry until they can be inoculated.  For malaria 
prophylaxis, post recommends Mefloquine be started two 
weeks prior to arrival.  Mefloquine is contraindicated 
for individuals on beta-blockers or quinidine 
(heart/blood pressure medications) and those with a 
history of epilepsy or a significant psychiatric 
disorder. 
 
Excess Baggage Charges:  Travelers should be aware that 
airlines departing Abidjan tend to apply strict 
overweight charges for excess baggage.  Upgrade charges 
are routinely assessed.  If transiting through Europe 
and traveling overnight, bags will be rechecked and if 
weight exceeds the authorized 20kg, charges will be 
 
ABIDJAN 00000955  002 OF 002 
 
 
assessed. 
 
Airport Expediter Warning:  If requested, travelers 
will be met at the airport by an Embassy customs and 
immigration expediter.  It is strongly advised that, 
upon being met, the traveler verify the expediter's 
Embassy identification badge to avoid being confronted 
by unknown persons who claim to be Embassy-employed and 
offer expediter services for a fee. 
Custom Clearances for Equipment:  Travelers carrying 
toolboxes or full-size electronic devices such as 
computers may experience difficulty clearing customs. 
Please provide to the Embassy identification 
information (model, serial number, etc.) one week in 
advance of arrival to facilitate clearance.  Laptop 
computers currently post no entry problem. 
 
Electronic Devices:  Privately owned laptops, personal 
computers and thumb drives are prohibited in the 
embassy without pre-approval by the ISSO and RSO. 
Government owned laptops, thumb drives and other 
electronic devices must also have pre-approval and 
adhere to 03 STATE 286036. These devices should be 
clearly marked with the appropriate classification 
level.  Please forward the type of computer, thumb 
drive or electronic device and the serial number to 
your control officer prior to your arrival. This will 
facilitate your access to the building with these 
devices.  The Marine Security Guard has been instructed 
to not permit unapproved devices into the chancery. 
Questions concerning other types of electronic devices 
may be directed to the Information Management Office or 
Regional Security Office. 
 
Security Clearance: Please ensure your level of 
security clearance either appears on your travel orders 
or is otherwise passed to the regional security office 
upon arrival for a security update briefing. 
 
Transportation:  The demand for official vehicles often 
exceeds available vehicle resources.  The motorpool 
will provide transportation for official visitors both 
to and from the airport and between the office and 
place of lodging.  Visitors who have other 
transportation requirements either in Abidjan or 
outside the city should provide fiscal data and 
specific request for the use of a vehicle and driver at 
least five working days in advance. 
 
TDY Policy:  Each visitor, regardless of length  of 
stay, must bring/forward fiscal data to pay for direct 
costs of the visit.  Each agency, organization, or 
visiting delegation will be charged for the actual 
costs attributed to their visit.  Direct charge costs 
include, but are not limited to: American and LES staff 
overtime, field travel by Embassy employees, vehicle 
rentals, long distance telephone calls, equipment 
rentals, office supplies, and all other costs directly 
attributable to the visit.  Also, for TDYers over 
thirty days, there is a charge for ICASS support 
services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed up 
for ICASS services at post, please be prepared to sign 
an MOU for ICASS support services upon arrival.  The 
agency should provide post with a written 
communication, generated by the traveler's 
headquarters, that states who can authorize the 
availability of ICASS funds, confirms the agency will 
pay ICASS charges for the TDYer, provides the agency 
ICASS billing code, and authorizes the traveler to sign 
the ICASS invoice generated by the TDY module.  Where 
travel is urgent, TDYers should bring this 
documentation with them to ensure there are no 
interruptions in the provision of service.  Post will 
not provide any service to a TDYer staying in excess of 
thirty days without provision of this documentation 
before day 31 of the TDY. 
Hooks