06BRASILIA1787
SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 80
Thu Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO0293
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1787/01 2361905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241905Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6470
INFO RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4219
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 5705
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 4809
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 3139
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1946
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 3894
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5612
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 1114
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6420
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 1136
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 3400
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 5337
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 7855
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 2743
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DOE WASHDC
RUEHC/DOI WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DOJ WASHDC
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RUEANAT/NASA HQ WASHDC
RUCPDC/NOAA WASHDC
RUMIAAA/USCINCSO MIAMI FL
RUEHRC/USDA WASHDC
RUCPDO/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 BRASILIA 001787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USAID TO LAC/RSD, LAC/SAM, G/ENV, PPC/ENV 
TREASURY FOR USED IBRD AND IDB AND INTL/MDB 
USDA FOR FOREST SERVICE: LIZ MAHEW 
INTERIOR FOR DIR INT AFFAIRS: K WASHBURN 
INTERIOR FOR FWS: TOM RILEY 
INTERIOR PASS USGS FOR INTERNATIONAL: J WEAVER 
JUSTICE FOR ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES: JWEBB 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL: CAM HILL-MACON 
USDA FOR ARS/INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH: G FLANLEY 
NSF FOR INTERNATIONAL: HAROLD STOLBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR EAID TBIO ECON SOCI XR BR
SUBJECT: SOUTH AMERICA ESTH NEWS, NUMBER 80 
 
¶1.  The following is the eightieth in a series of newsletters, 
published by the Brasilia Regional Environmental Hub, covering 
environment, science and technology, and health news in South 
America.  The information below was gathered from news sources from 
across the region, and the views expressed do not necessarily 
reflect those of the Hub office or our constituent posts. 
Addressees who would like to receive a user-friendly email version 
of this newsletter should contact Larissa Stoner at 
stonerla@state.gov.  The e-mail version also contains a calendar of 
upcoming ESTH events in the region. 
 
¶2. Table of Contents 
 
Agriculture 
--(3)Coffee with a Conscientious Kick 
--(4)Venezuela's Chocolate Revolution 
 
Health 
--(5)Brazil to Boost Health Research Capacity in Angola 
 
Water Issues 
--(6)Workshop Discusses Regional View of the Amazon Basin 
 
Forests 
--(7)Brazil Arrests 46 in Logging Crackdown 
--(8)Selective Logging Leads to Clear-Cutting In Amazon 
 
Wildlife 
--(9)Study in Venezuela Shows: Single Fish Species Controls Health 
of Tropical River 
--(10)Chile Lacks Legislation Against Biopiracy 
 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
--(11)Brazil: A Traditional Fishery Flounders in the Wake of 
Technology 
--(12)Venezuela: Love for the Mangrove 
 
Science & Technology 
--(13)Brazil, Bolivia to Exchange Meteorological Data 
Pollution 
--(14)Peru: Indigenous Community to Take Oil Company to Court 
--(15)Three Northern Cities Contaminated By Petcoke 
--(16)Chile: Clean Release of the Last Oil-Contaminated Penguins 
 
Climate Change 
--(17)Cities, States Aren't Waiting For U.S. Action on Climate 
--(18)Greenland's Melting Ice Sheet May Speed Rise in Sea Level 
 
Energy 
--(19)Brazil: Innovative Hydrogen Buses 
 
General 
--(20)Brazil: Can a Road Save the Amazon? 
--(21)Brazil: Traditionals to Have Own Policies 
--(22)Argentina: Stop Atomic Credits 
--(23)Brazil: Controversial Tires 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  002 OF 011 
 
 
--(24)Brazil's New Environmental Court 
 
Update on Avian Influenza 
--(25)Brazilian Agriculture Ministry Issues Conflicting Information 
About Avian Flu Virus 
--(26)Avian Influenza in Venezuela: Dialogue, Outreach, and Post 
Preparedness 
 
----------- 
Agriculture 
----------- 
 
¶3. Coffee with a Conscientious Kick 
 
AUG. 15, 2006 - As consumers in the developed world become more 
interested in food origins and production conditions, certification 
systems hold out the promise of allowing retailers to source 
reasonably priced products - from timber and cotton to chocolate and 
bananas - that guarantee social and environmental standards in the 
poor countries in which they are produced.  While some analysts see 
Fairtrade as destined to remain more of a niche product, 
certifications such as Rainforest Alliance and Utz Kapeh - a Dutch 
organization supported by Ahold, the world's fourth-largest food 
retailer and distributor - are aimed at making certified coffee 
mainstream.  The strengths of each certification are different: 
Fairtrade aims to give producers more control over production, 
Rainforest Alliance stresses biodiversity and ecosystem protection, 
while Utz Kapeh focuses on traceability and food safety.  Peru is 
well placed to take advantage of all three.  Agricultural reform in 
the 1970s means its coffee sector is dominated by smallholders, many 
of whom are organic by default, having never been able to afford 
chemical fertilizers.  Coffee is Peru's most important agricultural 
crop, and the country is now the world's top organic producer, the 
top Fairtrade producer and in the next few years is on track to 
become the biggest source of Rainforest Alliance and Utz 
Kapeh-certified coffee. 
 
Source - Kindly shared by U.S. Embassy Bogota 
 
¶4. Venezuela's Chocolate Revolution 
 
AUG. 01, 2006 - The type of agriculture being used just outside the 
village of Ocumare de la Costa, is having a big impact on the 
farming community and its families.  Ocumare is just one of several 
communities in Venezuela to have switched from conventional to 
organic farming and they are now reaping the rewards.  [Producers] 
now earn about USD7 for a kilogram of cocoa beans, whereas they used 
to get paid just less than USD2 for conventional produce. Much of 
the funding to kickstart this new wave of organic farming came from 
the Venezuelan government, which has injected some USD10mi on 
research and training, as well as from the European Union via a 
local non-governmental organization called Tierra Viva.  Several 
Italian, French and American chocolate manufacturers are buying 
organic beans from Venezuela. 
 
Source - BBC 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  003 OF 011 
 
 
 
------ 
Health 
------ 
 
¶5. Brazil to Boost Health Research Capacity in Angola 
 
AUG. 07, 2006 - Brazil plans to launch a project to boost 
public-health research in Portuguese-speaking countries in Africa. 
The project will begin in Angola before being introduced to 
Mozambique and other nations.  Representatives of Angola's health 
ministry will visit Rio de Janeiro this month to finalize the plan's 
details during the 11th World Congress on Public Health (21-25 
August).  Under the plan, Brazilian researchers will teach a 
two-year masters course in public health at the Angola National 
School of Public Health in Luanda.  The first course will begin in 
October.  The Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), a leading research 
centre linked to Brazil's Ministry of Health, is coordinating the 
project with support from the Brazilian federal research funding 
agency, Capes, and the Angolan government.  Together, the three 
institutions are providing USD1,100,000 for the project. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
------------ 
Water Issues 
------------ 
 
¶6. Workshop Discusses Regional View of the Amazon Basin 
 
AUG. 10, 2006 - The Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization carried 
out a regional workshop (August 09 and 10) to discuss regional views 
on the Amazon River Basin within the context of the GEF project 
"Integrated and Sustainable Management in Transboundary Water 
Resources in the Amazon River Basin."  The event was attended by 
ACTO's Executive Director, the GEF-Amazon project coordinator, the 
coordinator of the General Vision component of the project, and 
representatives from each of the eight countries of the Amazon 
Basin.  At this current moment, each country is putting together a 
document which reflects a national vision of the Basin. 
 
Source - OTCA 
 
------- 
Forests 
------- 
 
¶7. Brazil Arrests 46 in Logging Crackdown 
 
AUG. 09, 2006 - Police arrested 46 people, including 16 agents of 
the federal environmental protection agency, for allegedly operating 
illegal logging operations in the Amazon rainforest and in southern 
Brazil.  The group is accused of selling an estimated 32 million 
cubic feet of illegally logged tropical hardwoods, worth an 
estimated USD25 million.  The environmental agents are accused of 
selling permits that allowed loggers to cut down and transport trees 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  004 OF 011 
 
 
while breaking Brazil's strict environmental laws.  Other members of 
the ring included loggers and lobbyists, the ministry said.  Federal 
police carried out arrests in four states.  Police were still 
searching for eight more suspects.  Police called it the 
second-largest operation to crack down on illegal logging. The 
biggest was in June, when federal police and environmental officials 
broke up a ring involving 74 suspects in five states.  Environment 
Minister Marina Silva said joint operations by the environment 
ministry and federal police had reduced deforestation by 31 percent 
in 2005 compared with the previous year. 
 
Source - NY Times 
 
¶8. Selective Logging Leads to Clear-Cutting In Amazon 
 
AUG. 01, 2006 - A study has shown for the first time that 
'selective' logging in the Brazilian Amazon increases the likelihood 
that an area of rainforest will be cleared at a later time. 
 Selective logging, which refers to the practice of felling only 
certain trees in a given area, is promoted as a sustainable 
alternative to clear-felling.  But the study published this week by 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that from 1999 
to 2004, 16 per cent of selectively logged areas were deforested 
within one year of logging, and one-third were cleared within four 
years.  Researchers led by Gregory Asner of the Carnegie Institution 
of Washington, United States, used high-resolution satellite images 
to measure the extent and intensity of logging across 46,000 square 
kilometers of the Brazilian Amazon.  Nearly all selective logging in 
this area took place within 25 kilometers of main roads.  The 
probability of deforestation for a selectively logged area was up to 
four times greater than for intact forests. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
-------- 
Wildlife 
-------- 
 
¶9. Study in Venezuela Shows: Single Fish Species Controls Health of 
Tropical River 
 
AUG. 11, 2006 - Removing just one fish species from a tropical river 
can have major effects on the ecosystem's health, according to 
research published in Science 11 August.  The finding contradicts 
the general belief that the greater abundance and diversity of other 
species would compensate for the loss.  Researchers removed the 
flannelmouth fish (Prochilodus mariae) from a stretch of Venezuela's 
Orinoco River and measured how this affected the level of carbon in 
the ecosystem.  The fish is the dominant species in many South 
American rivers, where it feeds on algae and detritus on the 
riverbed.  As the fish moves, feeds, and excretes waste, it plays a 
key role in the cycle of carbon synthesis and degradation.  It also 
removes particles that block the light needed by bacteria that 
process nitrogen in the ecosystem.  The researchers found that the 
river's carbon cycle was disrupted within 48 hours of them removing 
the fish. The effect lasted for at least 40 days. 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  005 OF 011 
 
 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
¶10. Chile Lacks Legislation Against Biopiracy 
 
AUG. 01, 2006 - Although nearly 80 per cent of all plants in Chile 
are native, the country does not have a legislation to protect them 
from bioprospection.  According to congress representative Jaime 
Quitana, more than 700 species in Chile were patented by private 
companies "without any type of financial return for the communities 
from which they came from."  Quintana states that Chile does not 
have a legislation as do other nations under the Andean Pact and 
Argentina and Brazil, which have safeguards for biogenetic 
investigations carried out in the country. 
 
Source - SciDev 
 
----------------------------- 
Fishing & Marine Conservation 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11. Brazil: A Traditional Fishery Flounders in the Wake of 
Technology 
 
AUG. 15, 2006 - Beto de Lima is a jangadeiro, captain of a jangada, 
a compact, storied sailing vessel that has been ferrying Brazilian 
fishermen to far away lobstering and fishing grounds since the 16th 
century.  Jangada fishing has always been grueling, dangerous work, 
pitting small craft and tough, ingenious sailors against a fickle 
and sometimes treacherous sea.  Of late, though, jangadeiros have 
faced obstacles far more fierce than the ocean: competition from 
motorized dive boats, often manned by poorly trained human divers. 
The boats use illegal fishing techniques that are stripping Brazil's 
fishing grounds of their stocks, and threatening to put an end to 
Brazil's historic jangada fleet.  Rather than following in the 
footsteps of their fathers, many of Prainha's youth are migrating to 
Brazil's cities to take jobs stocking supermarket shelves and 
sweeping hotel lobbies.  Others are risking their lives to earn fast 
cash in the disease-ridden gold mines of the Amazon.  What makes the 
jangadeiros' slow demise especially sad for many Brazilians is the 
central role the fishermen have played in national lore and 
political protest movements. 
 
Source - Wall Street Journal (no link) 
 
¶12. Venezuela: Love for the Mangrove 
 
AUG. 05, 2006 - The exposition "For Love of the Mangrove", organized 
by the National Center for Improvement of Science Education, will 
run through August at the Lia Bermudez Art Center in the western 
Venezuelan city of Maracaibo.  Videos and photographs by artists 
Audio Cepeda and Jean Cearlos Ramos illustrate the contributions 
made by mangrove trees. There will also be workshops on conservation 
in which residents of communities near mangrove forests will 
participate, says spokeswoman Adriana Vera.  The urgency of the 
effort to protect these trees lies in "the pressures from 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  006 OF 011 
 
 
development along Venezuela's coasts," which are implementing 
projects for natural gas, petroleum and coal there, says Jorge 
Hinestroza, professor of ecology at the University of Zulia in 
Maracaibo.  "Venezuela has 300,000 hectares of mangrove forests with 
the potential to generate up to three kilograms of organic material 
per square meter," he said. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
-------------------- 
Science & Technology 
-------------------- 
 
¶13. Brazil, Bolivia to Exchange Meteorological Data 
 
JULY 13, 2006 - An agreement signed between Brazil and Bolivia on 
July 12 will allow both countries to exchange meteorological and 
hydrologic data.  The monitoring systems SIPAM (Amazon Protection 
System) from Brazil and SENAMHI (National Meteorological System) 
from Bolivia will work together to help prevent natural disasters 
such as floods.  According to the press report, Peru has also 
demonstrated interest in closing a similar deal with Brazil. 
 
Source - SIPAM 
 
--------- 
Pollution 
--------- 
 
¶14. Peru: Indigenous Community to Take Oil Company to Court 
 
AUG. 17, 2006 - The Achuar people in the Corrientes River basin are 
about to become the first in Peru to take legal action, as it plans 
to file suit against the companies it blames for the damages.  Oil 
drilling on indigenous land began in the 1970s with the arrival of 
U.S.-based Occidental Petroleum Corporation (Oxy).  In 1996, 
Pluspetrol Norte, a local subsidiary ofArgentine-based Pluspetrol, 
began to operate in he upper basins of the Pastaza, Corrientes and 
Tgre rivers, and expanded its operational area in 200.  The 
government study of the quality of waterand biological testing 
among communities of the orrientes River basin was undertaken in 
responseto a FECONACO request.  Published in May, it repored the 
presence of heavy metals in the indigenou community, after 
analyzing samples from 199 peope, including 74 children aged 2 to 
¶17.  This, hoever, is problematic, because -- as stated in the 
Health Ministry report -- "Peru has no technical egulations to 
establish maximum concentration vaues for heavy metals, 
hydrocarbons and other elemnts in sediment." 
 
Source - IPS 
 
¶15. Three Norhern Cities Contaminated By Petcoke 
 
AUG. 07, 206 - A new tuy by the University of Chile's Publi 
Health Department found last month that three cties in northern 
Chile are heavily contaminated because of the use of petcoke, a 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  007 OF 011 
 
 
petroleum derivative that is burned to produce electricity.  The 
cities of Mejillones, Tocopilla, and Huasco all had above average 
levels of nickel, a known carcinogen, in the air.   Nickel, besides 
being generally harmful to the respiratory system, causes lung 
cancer and can lead to the growth of other kinds of tumors.  Chile's 
Toxic Substance and Sickness Agency (ATSDR) advises that the maximum 
exposure to nickel should be no greater than 90 nanograms of the 
metal per cubic meter of air (Ng/m3).  The study attributed the high 
nickel pollution to power generators in the region including the 
Electroandina, Edelnor, and Guacolda plants.  All plants refused to 
comment when Chile's La Tercera newspaper requested a response to 
the survey. 
 
Source - Santiago Times 
 
¶16. Chile: Clean Release of the Last Oil-Contaminated Penguins 
 
AUG. 05, 2006 - The Chilean government's National Forest Corporation 
(CONAF) has completed the recovery project for penguins contaminated 
with petroleum, rescuing 54 of these birds living in the extreme 
southern region of Magallanes, 3,000 km south of the capital.  CONAF 
veterinarian Alejandra Silva told Tierramerica that the source of 
the contamination discovered in April is not yet known.  On 
Magdalena Island, a natural sanctuary of penguins located in the 
Strait of Magellan, 76 penguins were found covered in petroleum.  At 
a CONAF forestry nursery, the birds were washed, dried, fed and 
treated with medications.  Of the penguins taken to the center, 22 
died of aspergillosis (a disease caused by fungus) and hydrocarbon 
poisoning. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
-------------- 
Climate Change 
-------------- 
 
¶17. Cities, States Aren't Waiting For U.S. Action on Climate 
 
AUG. 11, 2006 - With Washington lawmakers deadlocked on how best to 
curb global warming, state and local officials across the country 
are adopting ambitious policies and forming international alliances 
aimed at reducing greenhouse gases.  The initiatives, which include 
demands that utilities generate some of their energy using renewable 
sources and mandates for a reduction in emissions from motor 
vehicles, have emboldened clean-air advocates who hope they will 
form the basis for broader national action.  But in the meantime, 
some businesses say the local and state actions are creating a 
patchwork of regulations that they must contend with.  This flurry 
of action is part of a growing movement among state and local 
leaders who have given up hope that Congress and the administration 
will tackle major issues, and are launching their own initiatives on 
immigration, stem cell research and energy policy. 
 
Source - Washington Post 
 
¶18. Greenland's Melting Ice Sheet May Speed Rise in Sea Level 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  008 OF 011 
 
 
 
AUG. 11, 2006 - Two new scientific studies measuring Greenland's 
rapidly melting ice sheet and the pace of Antarctic snowfall suggest 
that the sea level may be rising faster than researchers previously 
assumed.  The papers, both published in the journal Science, provide 
the latest evidence of how climate change is transforming the global 
landscape.  University of Texas at Austin researchers, using twin 
satellites, determined that the Greenland ice sheet, Earth's 
second-largest reservoir of fresh water, is melting at three times 
the rate at which it had been melting over the previous five years. 
A separate study by 16 international scientists concluded that 
Antarctic snowfall accumulation has remained steady over the past 50 
years, with no increases that might have mitigated the melting of 
the ice shelf, as some researchers had assumed would occur.  Taken 
together, the two reports indicate that global sea level rise may 
increase more rapidly in the coming years, though the Greenland 
study is based on only 2 1/2 years of data. The melting of 57 cubic 
miles a year from Greenland's ice sheet could add 0.6 millimeters 
alone, which is higher than any previously published measurement for 
Greenland, according to University of Texas Center for Space 
Research scientist Jianli Chen. 
 
Source - Washington Post 
 
------ 
Energy 
------ 
 
¶19. Brazil: Innovative Hydrogen Buses 
 
AUG. 05, 2006 - Five buses fueled by hydrogen will circulate in Sao 
Paulo and four neighboring cities beginning in 2007, with 
innovations similar to those in industrialized countries.  The 
vehicles will incorporate the "hybrid concept," using electricity 
generated by hydrogen fuel cells and batteries, Marcio Schettino, 
coordinator of the project for the Metropolitan Enterprise of Urban 
Transportation, explained to Tierramerica.  The batteries accumulate 
the energy saved in moments that require little power -- as when the 
vehicle is traveling downhill -- and the energy generated by 
braking, which help to reduce costs. The great challenge is to 
ensure the economic viability to these buses, making them 
competitive with diesel-fueled buses, Schettino said.  The buses 
will be shown at the Electrical Vehicle Seminar and Exhibition, Aug. 
16-17 in Sao Paulo. The 12-meter-long buses with a passenger 
capacity of 90 people each will travel one million kilometers in 
four years of testing. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
------- 
General 
------- 
 
¶20. Brazil: Can a Road Save the Amazon? 
 
AUG. 14, 2006 - BR-163 is an unpaved highway located in Brazil's 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  009 OF 011 
 
 
Amazon Forest which leads from the city of Santarem, in the state of 
Para, to Cuiaba, Mato Grosso.  While abandoned for the past three 
decades, it has once again become a government priority for the 
development of that area.  The region is home to three large 
hydrographic basins, and is one of the most productive agricultural 
areas of the country, especially in terms of soybean production. 
However, the road provides a challenge for the GoB to demonstrate 
that it can sustainably develop the Amazon and mitigate the 
construction's potential environmental impacts.  To this end, they 
have created two new policies.  The first is known as the BR-163 
Sustainable Plan and involved the work of 17 Brazilian ministries. 
The plan's initial actions include putting into practice some 
emergency procedures to intensify the State's presence and public 
authority in the region.  Little of the Plan has, in fact, been put 
into practice, due to continued discussions concerning environmental 
impacts and potential complications.  Many communities and NGOs fear 
that the plan looks good on paper, but may never be implemented. 
Complementing the BR-163 Sustainable Plan is the Action Plan for 
Prevention and Control of Deforestation in the Legal Amazon, which 
promotes a new development model for the Amazon region based on 
social inclusion, cultural diversity and economic development. 
 
Source -  BRASILIA   00001667 
 
¶21. Brazil: Traditionals to Have Own Policies 
 
AUG. 12 - A national proposal that would benefit the 4.5 million 
members of Brazil's traditional peoples and communities will be 
drafted by a commission of 15 of their representatives and 15 
government delegates by the end of August.  The proposal will be up 
for discussion in September in workshops to be held in each of the 
country's five regions.  The effort includes defining policies that 
attend to the specific needs of these populations that live from 
their local natural resources and develop their own cultures and 
knowledge, Jorge Zimmermann, director of the Environment Ministry's 
department of sustainable development and agro-extractivism, told 
Tierramerica.  Encompassed in the proposal are isolated 
Afro-Brazilian communities, indigenous peoples, rubber tappers and 
extractors of other forest products, traditional fishing 
communities, gypsies and others -- most of whom do not hold land 
titles and who provide important services of biodiversity 
protection, acknowledge Brazil's environmental authorities. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶22. Argentina: Stop Atomic Credits 
 
AUG. 12, 2006 - Environmental, civil society and neighborhood 
organizations in the central Argentine province of Cordoba are 
calling on the World Bank to halt credits to the National Atomic 
Energy Commission, CNEA.  The forum, made up of 25 groups, was 
created by the CNEA to evaluate its projects for handling uranium 
waste at the former Los Gigantes mine and at the uranium dioxide 
factory Dioxitek, both in Cordoba. The forum was also required by 
the World Bank in order to lend CNEA 35 million dollars.  Jose 
Velez, forum member, told Tierramerica that despite repeated 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  010 OF 011 
 
 
requests, CNEA did not provide any information, and once the 
paperwork had been filed, deactivated the association of groups. 
"We suspect that the forum was utilized to justify the loan request. 
As such, we believe the World Bank should not provide the loan," 
said Velez. 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶23. Brazil: Controversial Tires 
 
AUG. 12, 2006 - Sept. 4 will be the second hearing of the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) for debate on the restrictions of imports 
of recycled tires in Brazil.  If Brazil wins, other countries could 
maintain similar legal measures and public policies for 
environmental protection.  "If the ruling is not in our favor, it 
would be a major reversal for the country's legislation, given that 
it would open a precedent for the import of waste like used 
computers," Maria Garcia de Lourdes Grossi, head of the Environment 
Ministry's environmental risk reduction project, explained to 
Tierramerica.  The defeat would not only be for Brazil, she said, 
because "it would also hurt developing countries that hope to 
restrict the entry of waste into their territories." 
 
Source - Tierramerica 
 
¶24. Brazil's New Environmental Court 
 
AUG. 04, 2006 - Despite being or potentially because of being one of 
the leading Brazilian-states in terms of environmental damages, Para 
(PA) has created the first Special Environmental Court in the 
country.  The court, located in Para's capital, Belem, will try 
small-scale environmental crimes; those that could be punished by up 
to two years in prison.  These include illegal hunting or fishing, 
cutting of forests and selling and transportation of wildlife 
species and plants.  The objective of the new court is to streamline 
the judicial process associated with environmental crime. 
Procedures that would take an average of a year and a half should 
now be solved in a maximum of ten days.  Since the crimes that will 
be analyzed are considered minor offences, the court can issue 
alternative penalties such as financing environmental programs or 
undertaking community service.  Although the new court will only be 
responsible for crimes that take place in Belem, the local 
government is already studying the possibility of implementing other 
Special Courts throughout the state. 
 
Source - BRASILIA 001581 
 
------------------------- 
Update on Avian Influenza 
------------------------- 
 
¶25. Brazilian Agriculture Ministry Issues Conflicting Information 
About Avian Flu Virus 
 
AUG. 21, 2006 - The Brazilian Health Ministry issued conflicting 
information about the finding of avian flu virus (H2, H3 and H4) in 
 
BRASILIA 00001787  011 OF 011 
 
 
migratory birds in the Northeastern states of Bahia, Pernambuco and 
Rio Grande do Norte, and in the Southern State of Rio Grande do Sul. 
 According to one news report, the Ministry's press office confirmed 
that birds with low viral loads were found in Pernambuco in March 
and in the other states in 2005, but the director of the Ministry's 
Animal Health Department announced last night that no such findings 
were confirmed. 
 
Source - U.S. Embassy Brasilia Public Affairs 
 
¶26. Avian Influenza in Venezuela: Dialogue, Outreach, and Post 
Preparedness 
 
AUG. 03, 2006 - On July 19, the Economic Section held an Avian 
Influenza Seminar in the Embassy [Caracas], which drew over 20 
participants from the poultry processing sector and the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MAT).  The Seminar provided a forum to better 
understand [Venezuela's] plans for Avian Influenza as well as to 
highlight the private sector's concerns.  So far, [Venezuela] has 
drafted a "procedure manual" based on FAO standards (not yet made 
public) and is looking to reach out to the private poultry 
producers, who were mostly unaware that [Venezuela] had any 
preparations at all.  Producers were especially concerned about 
biosecurity and compensation in the event of an outbreak.  Post has 
set up an AI listserve and is looking to hold DVCs with experts as 
part of an ongoing outreach strategy.  In addition, Post sent the 
MAT Animal Health Coordinator to the U.S. on a Voluntary Visitor 
(VolVis) program in April, and held an Embassy AI Emergency Action 
Subcommittee meeting in May. 
 
Source - CARACAS   00002295 
 
SOBEL