06CAIRO5011
EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS AUGUST 13, 2006
Mon Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #5011 2261142
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141142Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0548
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 005011 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ALBERTO FERNANDEZ, ROBIN SMITH AND DAVID BENZE 
R/PPR FOR GRETCHEN WELCH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL IS LE EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS AUGUST 13, 2006 
 
Ref:  Cairo 04918 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The day's headlines largely focused on the UNSC 
resolution, its potential for implementation on Monday, and Israel's 
planning of large military campaigns in anticipation.  In breaking 
news, during their afternoon press conference following a meeting 
with President Mubarak, Iranian Foreign Minister Mottaki and 
Egyptian Foreign Minister Aboul-Gheit did not publicly divulge their 
discussions about Hezbollah, but did address a ceasefire in Lebanon 
and Iran's nuclear program. Government-controlled daily Rose 
Al-Youssef announced over the weekend that a Lebanese journalist 
known to speak against Hezbollah will become a regular contributor. 
In the commentaries, writers reacted against President Bush's use of 
the term, "Islamic Fascists". End Summary. 
 
¶2.  In the headlines and front pages.  The potential for a ceasefire 
and Israel's continuing operations dominated the banner headlines. 
For example, in leading government-controlled daily Al-Ahram, with 
similar words in government-controlled daily Al-Akhbar, "Israel is 
Defying International Legitimacy by Expanding its Brutal Attacks on 
Lebanon."  Sub-headlines explained that Israel is "heading toward 
acceptance" of the resolution while, at the same time, it "assembles 
30,000 soldiers for land attacks."  Small circulation opposition 
papers sensationalized Israel's position with headlines such as 
Al-Wafd's "Israel Surrenders:  The Enemy Loses the War after Thirty 
Days," and Al-Ahrar's "Israel Refuses to End the War."  Also, 
Egypt's call for Israel to "...commit to an Immediate Ceasefire" was 
highlighted in government-controlled dailies, Al-Akhbar and 
Al-Gomhouriya, while independent dailies, Al-Masry Al-Yom and Nahdet 
Masr provided Foreign Minister Aboul-Gheit's demands for "full 
withdrawal" and "investigations into massacres" as "conditions for 
political settlement." Foreign Minister Aboul-Gheit's statement to 
the Middle East News Agency is available on opensource.gov. 
 
¶3.  Breaking News. Iranian Foreign Minister Mottaki and Egyptian 
Foreign Minister Aboul-Gheit gave an afternoon press conference 
following Minister Mottaki's meeting with President Mubarak.  As 
reported by the Middle East News Agency, both sides agreed that 
there should be an immediate ceasefire in Lebanon, an Israeli 
withdrawal from occupied territories and swift deployment of UNIFIL 
forces.  Minister Mottaki said that Iran would respect any decision 
of the Government of Lebanon and the will of the Lebanese people. 
As for the nuclear issue, he said that "the U.S. accusations toward 
Iran are natural as the U.S. believes only it can have nuclear 
weapons. The people of the region will not accept this nor will they 
accept being told what to do.  The U.S. has learned this lesson." 
Minister Aboul-Gheit said that Egypt is "not taking any mediation 
role" in this matter and its position "in favor of 
non-proliferation" is widely known.  He also said, "People have the 
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes."  According to 
Minister Aboul-Gheit, "The Iranian Foreign Minister listened to 
President Mubarak's vision about how to get out of the Lebanese 
crisis.  I believe the Iranian Foreign Minister understood this 
vision and analysis of the regional situation."  Finally, Minister 
Mottaki said they did not discuss Iranian influence on the stability 
of the Middle East. 
 
¶4.  In the commentaries.  While many of the commentaries focused on 
the UNSC resolution and provided recycled criticisms of Israel and 
the U.S. for perceived aggression and planning of the conflict, some 
commentators wrote about their reaction to the use of the term 
"Islamic fascism."  One senior columnist in opposition daily Al-Wafd 
criticized President Bush's use of the term, predicting it "will 
cause more wars."  As for the pro-government dailies, a columnist 
for Al-Akhbar argued that "fascism was never related to any religion 
... and President Bush has shown discrimination and hostility toward 
Islam and Muslims."  A columnist in government-controlled daily Rose 
al-Youssef criticized "President Bush's use of the term 'crusades' 
and now 'Islamic fascism.'" He likened "the American administration" 
to "Muslim extremists who seek to ignite strife with the west and 
Christians."  However, in the same paper, another columnist blamed 
"instigating speeches of some religious and leftist powers who 
exploit the Israeli aggression and American support to nourish 
extremism."  He concluded with a call for "an explanation of the 
objectives of the American and Israeli wars to the Egyptian 
public." 
 
¶5.  New developments.  As announced over the weekend in Rose Al 
Youssef, Khayrallah Khayrallah, a Lebanese journalist for "Innahar" 
newspaper as well as former chief editor and founder of regional 
daily Al-Hayat, will regularly contribute articles to Rose 
al-Youssef.  Mr. Khayrallah has spoken out publicly against 
Hezbollah.  As reported in reftel, Mr. Khayrallah appeared on Egypt 
Television's popular evening talk-show, El Beit Beitak (Your Home) 
on August 6, during which he spoke against any need for Hezbollah to 
be armed and denied claims of Hezbollah's popularity among 
Lebanese. 
RICCIARDONE