06DAMASCUS4237
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Syria/India,
Mon Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4237/01 2401400
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281400Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1257
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6231
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4067
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2627
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7258
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1257
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4640
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0853
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6992UNCLAS DAMASCUS 004237 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Syria/India, 
Syria/Cuba, Lebanon, Palestinian Territories, Iran (8/28) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported President Asad's meeting with 
US civil rights leader Jesse Jackson.  Talks focused on regional 
and international developments and the current situation in 
Lebanon, the Palestinian territories and Iraq, and views were 
exchanged about reviving the Middle East peace process and 
maintaining security and stability in the region.  Reverend 
Jackson briefed President Asad on the goals of his visit to the 
region and confirmed that Syria has a pivotal role in the Middle 
East and cannot be isolated.  Jackson also met with Foreign 
Minister Walid Mouallem and Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Faisal 
Miqdad.  At a news conference with Deputy Minister Miqdad, 
Jackson said he also brought up the subject of a prisoner swap in 
his discussions with Syrian leaders.  Jackson said that President 
Asad told him that Syria is ready to offer all humanitarian 
assistance to make Jackson's mission a success and to free 
captured Israeli soldiers and Arab prisoners.  Reverend Jackson 
pointed out that the main task of his delegation was to maintain 
the ceasefire and offer humanitarian aid and relief to those who 
were displaced and affected by the war in Lebanon, and to 
facilitate a prisoner exchange.  Dr. Miqdad reiterated the 
importance of dialogue and exchange of ideas and opinions to 
establish a just and comprehensive peace, adding that the use of 
force in this region or any other part of the world is not the 
way to bring about a just peace. 
Papers also reported Vice President Shara's and Foreign Minister 
Mouallem's meetings with C.R. Gary Khan, the Indian Primier's 
Special Envoy for the Middle East Peace Process, focusing on the 
latest developments in the region in the wake of the war in 
Lebanon and the adoption of UNSC Resolution 1701.  Gary Khan said 
in a statement to SANA that India has not taken any decision 
regarding withdrawal of its troops from UNIFIL, pending 
clarification from the UN on UNIFIL's mission following adoption 
of Resolution 1701. 
On Syrian-Cuban relations, papers reported Syrian Information 
Minister Bilal's visit to Cuba and his talks with Fernando 
Ramirez, Member of the Political Bureau of the Cuban Communist 
Party, and Marcos Rodriguez, Acting Foreign Minister.  Talks 
dealt with means of boosting bilateral relations, and ongoing 
preparations for the Non-Aligned Movement Summit in mid- 
September.  The Cuban side underscored the importance of Syria's 
participation in this summit due to its main role in serving 
causes of the NAM. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad discusses the latest developments in Lebanon, 
Palestine and Iraq and the possibility of boosting the peace 
process in the region, with Reverend Jesse Jackson, leader for 
Civil Rights for Black Americans in the USA.  Jackson:  Syria has 
a pivotal role in enhancing security and stability in the 
region.... Syria cannot be isolated" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
8/28) 
 
"Nasrallah, SecGen of Hizbollah:  Syria has been supporting the 
Resistance since 1982;  Syria can announce that it is a partner 
in the 2006 victory.  Nasrallah confirms:  Israel persists in 
violations of UNSC Resolution 1701.... The Resistance reserves 
the right to respond to any Israeli attack as long as occupation 
continues" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/28) 
 
"Syrian Vice-President Shara and Foreign Minister al-Mouallem 
discuss latest developments in the region following the Israeli 
aggression with Special Envoy of Indian Premier.... Stability 
depends on implementing international resolutions and ending 
occupation" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/28) 
 
"Cuba:  President Asad's participation in the Non-Aligned Summit 
is important.  Information Minister Bilal holds talks in Havana 
on enhancing bilateral relations and preparing for the NAM summit 
in September" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/28) 
 
"Syrian Ambassador in Washington:  President Bush's endeavors to 
isolate Syria have weakened US diplomacy" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 8/28) 
 
 
 
 
 
"Israel rejects lifting siege on Lebanon except on conditions. 
President Lahoud calls on UN SecGen Annan to uncover Israel's use 
of internationally banned weapons" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
8/28) 
"More than 10 Palestinians killed or injured in Israeli shelling 
of Gaza.  Occupation forces arrest Mahmoud Musleh, Chairman of 
the Palestinian Legislative Council" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
8/28) 
"Moscow confirms that Iranian nuclear program is peaceful.  Italy 
proposes to be a partner in the negotiations.  Tehran 
successfully test-fires a new submarine-to-surface missile, the 
Thaqeb" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/28) 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------- 
"Arabs Must Be Very Careful" 
 
--------------------------- 
An unsigned editorial in independent weekly magazine "Abiad wa 
Aswad" said (8/28):  "It is obvious that the US-Israeli scheme in 
the region was based on the following points:  First, US 
escalation against Iran on the pretext of Iran's endeavor to 
obtain nuclear weapons.  Second, maintaining Israel's security by 
hitting Hizbollah.  Third, making a deal with the Arabs during 
the period of escalation to isolate them in the forthcoming 
confrontation with Iran.... 
"But the recent war has foiled the US-Israeli scheme at an early 
stage.  Israel has failed to hit Hizbollah in Lebanon.  This had 
an adverse impact on the US and Israel, whose images have been 
shaken, at least in the Arab and Moslem region.... 
"As Arabs, we must be extremely careful in the next stage. 
Neither a strike nor a deal will not be in our interests.  We 
have to make political, military and diplomatic efforts day and 
night to avoid wasting this strategic victory achieved by 
Hizbollah and to build a truly new Middle East in which we have 
final say." 
----------------------------------------- 
"Care of Bolton and His Lebanese Friends" 
----------------------------------------- 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (8/28):  "The Israeli violations of Resolution 1701 are 
repeated daily while the international community is just 
watching, as if Israel were above the law.... 
"We wonder why the advocates of freedom and sovereignty in 
Lebanon, who welcomed the Resolution and moved to fulfill 
Lebanon's obligations under it, are not using their friendships 
with the United States and its representative to the United 
Nations, John Bolton, who was decorated with the Cedar Medal, to 
stop Israeli violations and prove that the Bush Administration 
does indeed respect them.... 
 
"The fact that these people are hiding suggests that they were 
instructed to remain silent about the Israeli violations and 
divert attention to other issues that would add a new crisis to 
serve Israel's interests.... 
 
"Doesn't the call unleashed by some of these people to deploy 
international forces on both sides of the Syrian-Lebanese border 
-- although Resolution 1701 does not stipulate this -- 
constitute a gratuitous service to Israel, whether intentional 
or not?  Don't the baseless claims by this team about the 
smuggling of weapons between Syria and Lebanon constitute a 
cover for the repeated Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace 
and Resolution 1701? 
 
"These practices by the anti-Syria camp in Lebanon are very 
dangerous to Lebanon's security and peace and also to the 
sovereignty for which they shed crocodile tears.... 
 
"The talk about deployment of international forces on the border 
with Syria paves the way for the complete cancellation of the 
Lebanese Army's role.  If this is not one of the missions of the 
national army, Lebanon will turn into another Gaza: [controlled 
by] Israel from the air, the sea, and the south, and the 
international forces from the east and north.  Is this how 
sovereignty is achieved and freedom is preserved...? 
 
"Some of the false advocates of sovereignty in Lebanon prove 
time after time that they are just tools in the American plan." 
 
------------------------- 
 
"Winds of Israeli Defeat" 
 
------------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, wrote (8/28):  "Europe, which during the aggression 
appeared unable to do anything in favor of Lebanon at the 
Security Council, is now using all its ground, naval and air 
power and its technical expertise to provide protection for 
Israel from a potential, not actual, danger.... 
 
"Europe decided to send about 7,000 soldiers to the UNIFIL force 
in South Lebanon;  that is, a soldier for every seven Lebanese 
citizens in the towns and villages south of the Litani River. 
Some European countries, like France, do not mind sending a 
soldier for every three Lebanese citizens.  For Israel's 
security requires taking such measures and more, and Israel's 
satisfaction is the ultimate objective of some European 
presidents and heads of government, who claim, day and night, to 
be friends of Lebanon.... 
 
"This European enthusiasm was a result of Israel's defeat in the 
war with Hizbollah.... The United States, Israel, and some 
Europeans want to circumvent UNSC Resolution 1701.  They claim 
that it authorizes them to disarm Hizbollah and control Lebanese 
security.  They coordinate with their team in Lebanon for this 
purpose.  This team, which hates the Resistance and which is 
connected with Israel, hopes that the international forces will 
deploy throughout Lebanon.  But UN Secretary General Kofi Annan 
shocked all of them when he stressed that Resolution 1701 does 
not allow this.... 
 
"All cards have been exposed.  The resistance option has been 
entrenched.  And the winds of the Israeli defeat have swept away 
the plans and dreams of the 14 March team." 
 
Corbin