06JAKARTA10047
INDONESIA ESTH HIGHLIGHTS - JULY 2006
Thu Aug 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO6369
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #0047/01 2220328
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100328Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8537
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 9821
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 3575
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 9967
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 3712
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE 3251UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JAKARTA 010047 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/IET, OES/IET, AND OES/ETC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TPHY TBIO EINV ID
SUBJECT: INDONESIA ESTH HIGHLIGHTS - JULY 2006 
 
 
¶1. Summary: On July 17, Governor of DKI Jakarta Sutiyoso 
warned Jakarta residents to conserve water due to a severe 
groundwater shortage.  The Alliance for Public Care (ALIP) 
publicly criticized a World Wildlife Fund (WWF) plan to 
relocate Javan rhinos to the Halimun Mountains in West Java. 
The Regional Coordinator for Natural Resources Conservation 
(BKSDA) of Rambut, Untung Jawa, and Bokor Islands Iswandi 
announced on July 15 that hunting and severe sea pollution 
is threatening remaining shell turtle (Eretmochelys 
imbricate) populations.  On July 12, Head of Jakarta 
Sanitation Office Rama Boedi reported that a recent law 
(Number 67/2005) requiring greater coordination between the 
government and state-owned companies is delaying 
construction of three Intermediate Treatment Facilities. 
Continuing timber requirements for Aceh reconstruction are 
placing pressure on Aceh forests especially in Leuser 
National Park in Aceh province, Sumatra.  A multinational 
team of experts collaborated on earthquake research while on 
an offshore research earthquake center vessel in Sumatra and 
Aceh from July 7- August 3, 2006.  The U.S. National 
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
participated in a coastal capacity management training 
workshop with the Indonesian Ministry of Marine Affairs 
(MMAF) in July. The workshop marked the first collaboration 
between NOAA and MMAF since the Indonesian MMAF program was 
graduated from support provided by USAID to direct country- 
to-country collaboration.  Indonesian students placed second 
among 86 competing countries in the 36th International 
Physics Olympiad hosted by Singapore on July 8-16.  End 
Summary. 
 
Jakarta Faces Annual Water Shortage in Dry Season 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. On July 17, Governor of DKI Jakarta Sutiyoso warned 
Jakarta residents of the need to conserve water due to 
projections that the city will face severe groundwater 
shortages in the coming months.  Jakarta officials expect 
nine areas, namely Matraman, Pulogadung, Duren Sawit, Pasar 
Rebo and Kampung Makasar, Kebayoran Lama, Tebet, Pasar 
Minggu and Jagakarsa to be particularly affected.  The City 
Mining Office reports that 41 percent of the city's 
population rely on groundwater for their daily supply, with 
the rest of the population using the city's drinking water 
supply.  In order to meet demand for groundwater and avoid a 
water crisis during the dry season, the Jakarta city 
administration plans to build additional catchment wells. 
However, the city estimates that it will need at least two 
million water catchment wells to meet demand, a number that 
far exceeds the city's current 13,579 wells. 
 
Residents Oppose Relocation Plan of Javan Rhinos 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3.  On July 8, the non-profit group Alliance for Public Care 
(ALIP) criticized the WWF plan to relocate severely 
endangered Javan rhinos from coastal Ujung Kulon National 
Park to the Halimun Mountains in West Java.  ALIP's 
coordinator Suhada noted that the plan was, "premature and 
could be disastrous."  Suhada questioned the suitability of 
the higher altitude Halimun Mountains for a rhino habitat 
and noted that more research by the WWF was needed.  There 
are only 60 remaining Javan rhinos in Ujung Kulon National 
Park, where numerous other species compete with the rhino 
population for food.  Environmentalists conceived the 
relocation plan in the 1980s in recognition of the low-lying 
penninsular park's scare food supply, proximity to the 
seismically active Sunda Strait and active Krakatoa volcano, 
and vulnerability to tsunamis.  Any of these factors could 
quickly wipe out entire rhino population.  After studying 
numerous options, the WWF continues to assert that the 
current relocation plan is the best strategy for safety of 
the rhino population and potentially increasing its numbers. 
The WWF has had not yet specified the date of the proposed 
relocation.  GOI officials at the Directorate General of 
Forest Protection and Nature Conservation of Ministry of 
Forestry must concur before such plan can move forward. 
 
Jakarta Environmental Degradation Threatens Turtle Life 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4. Regional Coordinator Natural Resources Conservation 
(BKSDA) of Rambut, Untung Jawa, and Bokor Islands Iswandi on 
July 15 announced that hunting and severe sea pollution are 
threatening the native shell turtle (Eretmochelys imbricate) 
 
JAKARTA 00010047  002 OF 003 
 
 
populations.  Only 2000-3000 of this protected species 
remain.  Tourist activities in the Thousand Islands, and raw 
sewage and industrial waste from Jakarta are increasing 
pollution and threatening the island ecosystem.  Iswandi 
admitted that the enforcement of Law No. 5 of 1990, with 
penalties of ten years in jail and a fine of Rp. 200 million 
(USD 22,000), is ineffective.  BKSDA monitors illegal turtle 
hunting activities, promotes turtle nesting grounds, and 
assists in the release of young turtles to the sea. 
 
Presidential Regulation Hampers 
Jakarta Waste Treatment Project 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. On July 12, the Head of Jakarta Sanitation Office Rama 
Boedi reported that his office faces significant 
difficulties building three Intermediate Treatment 
Facilities, located in Pulo Gebang (East Jakarta), Duri 
Kosambi (West Jakarta) and Ragunan (South Jakarta).  In 
addition to high costs, (the construction program is 
estimated to cost USD 300 million) the project is facing 
delays due to a Presidential Regulation No. 67/2005, which 
requires the plan go through a new tender process.  City 
administration officials signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with the investors before the regulation 
was issued and had planned to start construction in the 
beginning of 2006.  Rama reported that city officials will 
seek special exemption from the National Development 
Planning Board Agency (BAPPENAS), Department of Public Works 
so that the waste treatment facilities project can be 
expedited.  Note: Jakarta produces 6,000 tons per day but is 
unable to handle more than 50 percent of existing volume. 
The remainder flows untreated into Jakarta bay.  End Note. 
 
Aceh Reconstruction Raises 
Concerns about Leuser Ecosystem 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  On March 22, the Ministry of Forestry issued forest 
concession permits (HPH) to five companies to fulfill timber 
demand for Aceh reconstruction.  The concessions allow for 
clearing of at least 500,000 cubic meters of forest 
annually.  Claims by the Agency for Reconstruction and 
Rehabilitation of Aceh (BRR) and the Ministry of Forestry 
that timber from these concessions will fulfill the demand 
for reconstruction seems flawed.  The cost of making these 
concessions operational, (establishing road networks, etc) 
appears to be prohibitive.  Even if a concessionaire decides 
to invest in exploiting a HPH, by the time it becomes 
operational the bulk of timber needs for reconstruction will 
have been met through other means. This aside, the HPH areas 
could still be under threat from illegal loggers.  Although 
the concession permits are not for land specifically within 
the Leuser ecosystem, the permitted areas border the area, 
putting pressure on the protected zone.  The International 
Leuser Foundation (YLI) data showed that around 613,000 
hectares or a quarter of the total of Leuser region (2.6 
million hectares) has experienced severe environmental 
degradation since 1980.  On July 17, National Coordinator of 
Greenomics Indonesia Vanda Mutia Dewi announced that 
ratification of the new Law of Aceh Government by the 
Indonesian Parliament (DPR) should provide protection to the 
Leuser Ecosystem from exploitation.  The Law (Article 150, 
paragraph 2) bans the issuance of HPH permits in the Leuser 
ecosystem. 
 
Sumatra-Andaman Great Earthquake Research (SAGER) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶7. Professor Singh, the team coordinator from the Sumatra - 
Andaman Great Earthquake Research (SAGER) announced on July 
7 that the "Institute de Physique du Globe de Paris" (IPGP) 
was collaborating with the Indonesian Institute of Sciences 
(LIPI) to operate an offshore earthquake research project in 
Sumatra and Aceh from July 7-August 3, 2006.  Twenty-six 
scientists from four countries (France, the United Kingdom, 
India and Indonesia) participated in this five-week research 
project using the French research vessel Marion Defresne. 
LIPI, Bandung Institute of Technology (ITB), Department of 
Energy and Mineral Resources, and Department of Marine 
Affairs and Fisheries sent Indonesian research 
representatives. 
 
U.S. and Indonesia collaborate 
on Coastal Capacity Initiatives 
 
JAKARTA 00010047  003 OF 003 
 
 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  The U.S. National Oceanographic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) and the Florida Sea Grant Program 
participated in a coastal capacity management training 
workshop with the Indonesian Ministry of Marine Affairs 
(MMAF) in July.  The workshop was developed to transfer 
knowledge and techniques for managing coastal capacity to 
local Indonesian communities.  The workshop marked the first 
collaboration between NOAA and MMAF since the Indonesian 
MMAF program was graduated from support provided by USAID to 
direct country-to-country collaboration. 
 
Indonesia Students Shine in Physics Olympiad 2006 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9. Indonesian students placed second among 86 competing 
countries in the 36th International Physics Olympiad hosted 
by Singapore on July 8-16.  The five participating 
Indonesian students won four gold and Absolute Winner 
medals, trailing the Chinese team which won five.  The 
Indonesian Physics Olympiad Team (TOFI) trained the 
Indonesian participants to prepare for the competition. 
TOFI's next task is to prepare for the International Physics 
Olympiad in China 2007. 
 
PASCOE