06KHARTOUM2043
LRA Mediator: Justice Should be Universal
Tue Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3889
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2043 2411143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291143Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4313
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 0060
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0032UNCLAS KHARTOUM 002043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS UN UG SU
SUBJECT:  LRA Mediator: Justice Should be Universal 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 2038 and previous 
 
¶1.  (SBU) One of the leading mediators in the Lord's Resistance Army 
(LRA) talks believes this process is the only way to avoid real 
impunity.  He said that for justice to truly be served, all sides, 
including the Ugandan Government, must be held accountable for its 
actions.  Hizkias Assefa, Riek Machar's deputy in the mediation and 
the lead full-time, professional mediator, met with the Acting 
Consul General (A/CG) on August 28 and expressed largely the same 
views as the UN observer team (reftel).  However, he also warned 
that other solutions, especially a military solution, would send a 
message that the Ugandan Government is free to commit human rights 
abuses in northern Uganda as long as it remains the strongest and 
can win the war.  Assefa fears this would only encourage another 
group to follow the LRA, just as the LRA followed the rebellions 
before it.  Impunity, he explained, must go both ways. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The A/CG pointed out that one of the problems with using 
the LRA talks to address larger social issues is that it elevates 
the status of LRA leader Joseph Kony, a terrorist with no real 
political agenda, and it confuses the issues of the LRA with the 
problems in northern Uganda.  Assefa said Kony cares about the 
social issues, but conceded that it is not Kony's primary concern. 
Kony does not really understand the problems, only that there is 
marginalization.  Assefa said that the increased participation of 
civil society, religious leaders, and opposition parties as 
observers to the talks, now sanctioned by the Ugandan Government, 
should help bridge this gap.  The A/CG cautioned that even with 
their participation, it will still be difficult to truly address the 
root causes of marginalization while the talks are being driven by 
an unsophisticated negotiating team speaking for a cult-like 
leader. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Overall, Assefa said he was encouraged by the progress of 
the talks.  In contrast to what he described as a negative portrayal 
in the media, he said the relationship between the two parties at 
the table was changing and both sides were showing increased 
flexibility.  He said that at the beginning the LRA delegation would 
make demands and then threaten to walk out if the demands were not 
met.  On the Ugandan side, they also began as very rigid, and the 
meetings were attended by Ugandan generals in full dress uniforms. 
These military men would leave their sunglasses on and sit silently 
at the back of the room giving stern and disapproving looks.  Now, 
Assefa said, both sides show flexibility, and the generals come out 
of uniform and get engaged in the discussions.  The two sides even 
occasionally joke together and make conversation.  That said, Assefa 
went on to describe the talks as the most frustratingly 
unpredictable he had ever seen. 
 
¶4.  (U) Bio Date:  Assefa is an Ethiopian who is on the faculty of 
Eastern Mennonite University in Virginia, where he spends several 
months each year teaching intensive courses on conflict resolution. 
The rest of the year, he is based in Nairobi and works to mediate 
various conflicts in Africa.  He has been involved in LRA mediation 
efforts for over a decade, in association with Pax Christi.  Assefa 
was scheduled to travel to Nigeria in September to do some work in 
the Niger Delta region, but has been put on hold while these talks 
continue. 
 
HUME