06KIGALI836
KIGALI'S NEW MAYOR BANS MOTORCYCLE TAXIS
Tue Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0836 2411625
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291625Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3166
INFO RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KIGALI 000836 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PHUM RW
SUBJECT: KIGALI'S NEW MAYOR BANS MOTORCYCLE TAXIS 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Kigali city residents awoke on Monday, August 21 to 
an odd sight in central areas of the city: the complete 
absence of motorcycle taxis plying their trade on busy 
thoroughfares.  The Kigali City Council, led by its new 
Mayor, Aisa Kirabo Kacyira, banned commercial motorcycles 
(termed "bodaboda") from the central core of the city on 
public safety and security grounds.  The "bodaboda" 
operators, previously accustomed to nosing around all corners 
of the capital city, found themselves restricted to outlying 
suburbs. 
 
¶2.  (U) The devil-may-care attitude of many of the operators 
made their presence a constant nuisance on city streets, as 
they blithely ignored traffic regulations in zipping their 
customers to their destinations.  However, they also provided 
the cheapest mode of transportation for many ordinary 
residents of their city.  Their sudden absence from the 
streets, enforced by the National Police, created a crisis in 
low-cost transportation, as city buses and private mini-vans 
could not fill the void.  Additionally, many motorcycle 
owner/operators reportedly risk losing their principal asset, 
as they suddenly have no income stream to make payments on 
their micro-credit-financed motorcycles. Some of these 
operators are demobilized soldiers, now without gainful 
employment. 
 
¶3. (U) While municipal spokesmen sought to portray the ban as 
a reasoned response to traffic accidents and petty crime 
(with motorcycle purse-snatchings a common occurrence), city 
residents complied grudgingly.  Local radio call-in shows 
recorded much grumbling and tales of woe, as poorer residents 
found themselves paying more for transport, or going without. 
 Embassy staff reported household staff and security guards 
reporting late for work, as the workers either cued for 
scarce transport, or walked long distances.  Many of the 
motorcycle operators are reportedly demobilized soldiers, who 
may have their own complaints as their new trade 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Mayor in an August 29 meeting with emboff 
claimed extensive prior consultations with the motorcycle 
operator's union, as well as the ministries of 
Infrastructure, Internal Security, and Local Government.  She 
stood by the decision, saying the city had recorded 
measurable and very heartening drops in both traffic 
accidents and petty crime.  Acknowledging the strain the ban 
put on poorer residents, she said the city council hoped to 
reintroduce motorcycle taxis in ever-expanding areas of the 
city.  She expected firm commitments from the commercial 
motorcyclists, she said, and proper plans in place for a more 
orderly operation of two-wheel taxis.  Then they could begin 
to return to some of their usual city center routes. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Comment.  Despite the claims to extensive 
consultations, the motorcycle ban appeared to be put in place 
by the city with minimal prior announcement.  Like earlier 
decisions to ban itinerant fruit marketers and close the 
central market, the city government appeared to put 
orderliness above the needs of poorer residents.  While crime 
and traffic are real concerns, this is a basically a safe and 
peaceful city.  The ban on motorcycles makes life harder for 
those who can least afford to make alternate plans.  End 
Comment. 
 
 
ARIETTI