06PARIS5414
PRESIDENT CHIRAC'S AUGUST 9 REMARKS ON LEBANON
Thu Aug 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO6888
OO RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFR #5414/01 2221342
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101342Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0267
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES  IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PARIS 005414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL AEMR MARR CASC LE KHLS FR
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT CHIRAC'S AUGUST 9 REMARKS ON LEBANON 
 
REF: A. PARIS POINTS AUGUST 9 
 
     ¶B. PARIS POINTS AUGUST 10 
 
¶1. President Chirac chaired an extraordinary meeting of 
concerned Ministers on Lebanon August 9 in Toulon, France 
(near which Chirac is vacationing).  Prime Minister Dominique 
de Villepin, Minister of Foreign Affairs Philippe 
Douste-Blazy, and Minister of Defense Michle Alliot-Marie 
were all present.  Following the meeting, Chirac made a 
statement to the media and answered several questions. 
Chirac's comments were widely carried in local media. 
Complete English text of speech follows post's summary, below. 
 
¶2. (U) SUMMARY OF REMARKS: In his statement, President Chirac 
reconfirmed the fundamentals of France's position:  A 
cessation of hostilities must be achieved as soon as 
possible, followed by a political agreement, which would 
provide the basis for the dispatch of an international force. 
 Declining to provide specifics or exact timing, Chirac 
stated that France would participate in such a force -- if it 
were equipped with the right mandate and represented a "fair" 
composition of force contributors.  The U.S.-French draft 
resolution should be considered a "working basis" for 
continuing efforts in New York.  Those discussions have taken 
into account the Lebanese and Israeli reactions, and now must 
factor in the Lebanese cabinet's unanimous decision to deploy 
15,000 troops to the south, which Chirac saluted.  The entire 
effort, he emphasized, was to enable Lebanon to exercise its 
sovereignty over the entirety of its territory and to address 
Israel's security needs.  Responding to questions, Chirac 
stated that, despite "American reservations"  about certain 
Lebanese demands, he could not imagine the U.S. and France 
not reaching agreement because to do so would constitute an 
"immoral" path.  In response to a specific question on a 
possible US/France impasse over the text, Chirac said that in 
such a case the UNSC would debate the issue with each country 
affirming its position, including France "through her own 
resolution". Chirac took the occasion to adamantly confirm 
that the U.S. and France were working closely and remained in 
"permanent contact." 
 
¶3.  (U) Responding to reporters' questions, Chirac noted that 
Iran was an important power in the region.  It therefore made 
sense to consult with Tehran, or at least have contact with 
it.  Syria, however, is a different story.  Chirac recalled 
that Spanish Foreign Minister Moratinos' statement concerning 
Syria's interest in playing a constructive role had been 
disavowed by President Asad the day after Moratinos left 
Damascus.  That did not bode well, but Syria will have a 
chance to cooperate, in the context of demarcation of borders 
with Lebanon -- and the UN investigation of Rafik Hariri's 
assassination. END SUMMARY 
 
¶4. (U) MFA Official English text of French President Chirac's 
remarks following a meeting of concerned ministers on 
Lebanon, August 9, 2006. 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: I wanted today to take stock with the Prime 
Minister and defence and foreign ministers of the situation 
in Lebanon and northern Israel. Sadly, for several weeks, 
we've been witnessing in this region a tragic spiral of death 
and suffering together with countless acts of destruction. 
Every day brings fresh horrors and reinforces the feeling of 
incomprehension and distress among the civilians. 
In Lebanon, the basic infrastructures are all but totally 
destroyed and a million displaced people have lost 
everything. In Israel, people are suffering thousands of 
rocket attacks by Hezbollah. 
In the face of this crisis which is threatening the stability 
of a whole region, France immediately mobilized, with two 
priorities: 
- first, of course, to come to the aid of the stricken 
civilians and allow those of our compatriots living in 
Lebanon who wished to do so to come back to France. We did 
this by establishing sea and air links, which have enabled 
more than 10,000 French women and men to return to our 
country and also benefited a good many Lebanese who wanted to 
leave Lebanon. These arrangements are, moreover, still in 
place today and will remain so. We did this too by mounting a 
major humanitarian aid operation. 
- at the same time, we deployed all our efforts to get a 
ceasefire and a sustainable resolution to this tragic crisis. 
As France has affirmed from the outset, nothing will be 
resolved by force; any solution must come through a political 
agreement. 
This is why I asked first the Prime Minister and then the 
Foreign Minister, who went three times to the region, to 
listen to our partners and present our proposals. France has 
made active efforts at the Security Council to get the 
international community to find a solution to this crisis 
under United Nations auspices. I repeat, only dialogue can 
restore peace and security in the region. 
 
PARIS 00005414  002 OF 004 
 
 
The settlement we're working on today has, to my mind, to 
respect a twin imperative: 
- restoration of Lebanon's sovereignty over the whole of her 
territory; this is essential for the Lebanese; 
- and, of course, Israel's right to security. 
So we have envisaged, through a draft Security Council 
resolution, a two-phase mechanism which offers the two 
parties the necessary political and security guarantees. 
- the first phase consists of a complete and immediate 
cessation of hostilities, in any case, as soon as possible, 
since the people are enduring tragic suffering. On this 
basis, we have to establish the principles and elements of a 
permanent ceasefire and a long-term political solution, which 
has the agreement of both parties and bears in particular on 
the delineation of the border, including the Shebaa farms, 
the abducted Israeli soldiers and Lebanese prisoners. 
Once these conditions have been met, we'll move on to the 
second phase consisting of the deployment of an international 
force. This force's mandate will be defined on the basis of a 
political commitment by the two parties, verified by the 
United Nations. France will decide on her participation in 
this force depending on the mandate given to it and a fair 
sharing of its constituent contingents between the countries 
contributing to it. 
The draft Security Council resolution on which we came to an 
agreement with the United States is a working basis. Israel 
and Lebanon have reacted, and we have to take account of 
these reactions and, in particular, of Lebanon's interests, 
of her stability, unity, sovereignty and independence. 
The Lebanese government yesterday proposed deploying 15,000 
soldiers of her armed forces in southern Lebanon. I note that 
the government took this decision unanimously and we salute 
it, since it should allow the Lebanese government to exercise 
its sovereignty throughout its territory. There's no free and 
independent State which doesn't exercise its sovereignty over 
the whole of its territory. 
We have taken account of this major development in the 
proposals we're making in New York, in particular, in order 
to achieve a Security Council resolution as soon as possible. 
Our objective is to get a cessation of hostilities so that, I 
repeat, there's an end to the succession of deaths, suffering 
and destruction. This is our absolute priority. 
QUESTION: This morning we've learned that there's deadlock in 
the negotiations between the Americans and French on 
accepting the amendments the Lebanese had asked for in the 
resolution. We get the feeling that the Americans and 
Israelis are playing for time in order to pursue the 
fighting, the bombing you've described. What's France going 
to do if the fighting continues, if the Americans don't 
accept the French arguments for Lebanon's amendments? 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: The Lebanese government, which had made a 
proposal in the form of seven points, including several 
important ones, concerning Israel's withdrawal from its 
territory, the prisoners, and also the Shebaa farms, is 
entitled to defend Lebanon's position, a position of a State 
which wants its independence and stability. 
Let me add that the Arab League has approved and supports 
this position, as its three representatives, including the 
Secretary-General, affirmed when they went yesterday to New 
 
SIPDIS 
York, after the League's meeting in Beirut two days ago. 
Given this, I think it's normal for us to take into 
consideration the solutions which are being envisaged, 
particularly by the parties to the conflict. We have to take 
these into account and it's why, on the basis formed by 
France and the United States' agreement on a draft 
resolution, we've asked for this draft to take on board a 
number of these requests. 
Indeed, there seem to be American reservations about adopting 
this draft. I don't want to think of there not being a 
solution, since that would mean - which would be the most 
immoral of solutions - us accepting the present situation and 
giving up on the immediate ceasefire. So I don't want to 
think of the Americans or anyone else doing that. 
So we're going to see. If we arrive at a solution in line 
with the principles I reiterated just now - those of 
humanity, political, peaceful principles - so much the 
better. If we don't, obviously we'll have a debate at the 
Security Council and everyone will clearly state their 
positions there, including, of course, France, through her 
own resolution. 
QUESTION: Have you set a timetable for this? 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: I don't even want to talk about the idea of 
a timetable, because that would mean that we think the 
ceasefire, cessation of hostilities can be delayed. I don't 
want to think about the possibility of basing a policy on 
delaying the cessation of hostilities, especially in a 
country which has suffered the destruction, loss of life, 
injuries and displacement of people I was talking about just 
now. 
I think, in reality, that we have to state clearly the 
necessity of an immediate cessation of hostilities, it's the 
 
PARIS 00005414  003 OF 004 
 
 
United Nations' responsibility to affirm it. We must then 
very quickly achieve a political agreement which presupposes 
the two parties' agreement, so that they each find in it the 
guarantees they are entitled to express. 
If this happens, indeed, in a month for example, an 
international force, in one form or another, can be put in 
place. Some people have talked about an improved UNIFIL, 
others of an international force, it doesn't much matter. But 
in any case, an international force in which France will 
participate provided the force's mandate is clear, fulfills 
the imperatives I have just reiterated and whose mode of 
deployment is clearly laid down, and with the contributions 
of the different participating countries fairly balanced. 
QUESTION: Can you tell us what role Syria is playing in the 
negotiations? Is anyone talking to the Syrian government and 
also is anyone talking to Iran? And what's the atmosphere of 
the negotiations with those countries? 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: Everyone understands and is perfectly aware 
of the ties existing between Iran and Hezbollah. Given these, 
it's legitimate for Iran, an important power in the region, 
to be consulted, at any rate, for there to be contacts, 
relations, if only to determine what influence she can have 
on restoring peace in the Middle East. 
You ask me about Syria; everyone is also aware of her ties 
with Hezbollah. I'd say, to be totally frank, that experience 
has led me not to have total confidence. Moreover, I note 
that a few days ago, the Spanish Foreign Minister, Mr 
Moratinos, went to see the Syrian leaders; when he emerged 
from the meeting he clearly announced the result of the 
discussions saying that Syria was going to use all her 
influence to restore peace in the region. In the next half 
hour, the Syrian President totally refuted what Mr Moratinos 
had said. 
That doesn't really encourage the establishment of relations 
with a country with which we'll in any case have to 
negotiate, particularly on the delineation (of the Shebaa 
farms area): here too Syria has several times indicated her 
agreement on the Shebaa farms being Lebanese. But she has 
never agreed to do so in writing, knowing perfectly well that 
this is a normal, legal requirement so that the UN, the 
United Nations Security Council and the UN General 
Secretariat, can declare a modification, decide on a 
 
SIPDIS 
modification of the border. So I repeat, I'm not confident. 
Let me add that there is a major problem on which Syria could 
do something which would be a strong demonstration of her 
goodwill, and would facilitate things for the international 
Commission of Inquiry set up by the UN, which is led by Judge 
Brammertz and tasked with finding out the full truth on Rafiq 
Hariri's assassination. Here too, a strong demonstration of 
goodwill could strengthen that confidence. 
I've mentioned Rafiq Hariri's name. I'm a bit appalled to see 
that Lebanon, which had been through the wars everyone knows 
about and been totally rebuilt, and whose Prime Minister at 
the time had created an extremely important feeling of 
national unity in Lebanon, to see all that work, in a way, 
destroyed. Those who murdered Rafiq Hariri and those 
complicit in his murder, their accomplices, dealt Lebanon and 
the whole Lebanese people a very hard blow. I want to restate 
this here. 
QUESTION: This morning on "France Info" the Foreign Minister 
said: "now we have to find the balance between the Israeli 
forces' withdrawal and the deployment of the Lebanese army 
with UNIFIL, the UN force". Does this mean that France 
supports the idea of sending the Lebanese army with UNIFIL to 
southern Lebanon before the deployment of a multinational 
force? 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: What the minister said, rightly, is that 
the situation being what it is, progress can come only from 
an agreement. This agreement would include, on one hand, the 
Israeli army's withdrawal from the territory it's currently 
occupying in Lebanon, which has to be progressive, and, 
concurrently, the Lebanese army taking control of the 
territory from which the Israelis had withdrawn. So there's a 
problem of timing to be settled. 
And then, over there we have UNIFIL, which is today a bit 
paralysed, but which could be given back a bit of strength 
and robustness, and perhaps the capacity, if this is desired, 
if it's in the political agreement, to be able to observe or 
facilitate things. I'd see only advantages in that. 
QUESTION: Do you really believe that the Lebanese government 
is today capable of implementing UNSCR 1559, especially of 
disarming Hezbollah, and afterwards of disarming the 
Palestinian factions in Lebanon? Aren't you afraid that we're 
entering a spiral of violence? 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: It's for the Lebanese to answer that 
question. One simple thing has to be understood: historically 
there's never been a State which hasn't had authority over 
the whole of its territory. So wanting to claim that part of 
Lebanese territory is under the control of militias is 
incompatible with a stable Lebanon which is developing 
democratically. 
 
PARIS 00005414  004 OF 004 
 
 
So it's up to the Lebanese to realize this and the fact that 
those who are encouraging parties to opt for war, terrorist 
attacks, terrorism, are making a serious mistake. In the end 
it's all the Lebanese, whatever their faith - be they Sunnis, 
Shias, Druse or Christians -, who are picking up the pieces, 
as we're seeing. 
So if all the Lebanese suddenly realize that, if they want to 
live in a Lebanon which is a historic reality, going back 
several millennia, a democratic, peaceful Lebanon, they have 
to make this clear at the political level to those wanting to 
challenge a Lebanese government, one in fact formed as a 
result of free, democratic elections. So I can't urge the 
Lebanese too strongly to realize their political 
responsibility to encourage all the forces working for peace 
and stability in Lebanon and above all her unity, and affirm 
her sovereignty and independence. 
QUESTION: You haven't spoken to President Bush since St 
Petersburg? 
PRESIDENT CHIRAC: I apologize for interrupting you, the next 
bit of the question seems to me irrelevant since it 
postulates that there's no contact between the US and France, 
when in fact we're in contact at every level, daily. That 
doesn't mean we agree on everything, but contact is 
absolutely permanent. Thank you./. 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
STAPLETON