06STATE135733
PAROLE PROCESSING FOR CUBAN MEDICAL PERSONNEL
Thu Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 172237Z AUG 06
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 135733 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS CU SMIG
SUBJECT: PAROLE PROCESSING FOR CUBAN MEDICAL PERSONNEL 
 
¶1. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has announced 
that effective immediately it will consider Significant 
Public Benefit Parole (SPBP) requests from Cuban medical 
personnel who are currently conscripted to work or study 
in third countries under the direction of the Cuban 
Government and their accompanying spouses and minor 
children who wish to resettle in the United States.  Some 
officers have already been contacted by potential Cuban 
applicants, and the Department anticipates that others 
will likely be contacted about this program.  You should 
immediately begin accepting requests for parole from Cuban 
medical professionals present in your consular district. 
 
¶2. Cuban medical personnel wishing to request SPBP should 
be directed to the USCIS representative in country.  For 
countries that do not have a USCIS presence, the following 
procedure should be followed. Candidates for parole should 
fill out forms DS-156, DS-157, and DS-158.  Spouses and 
minor children who are accompanying Cuban medical 
personnel should also fill out these three forms and 
submit them to the consular section.  Officers should 
carefully review the forms for completeness and legibility 
and should ensure that information on family members in 
both Cuba and the United States is complete.  Even though 
no affidavit of support is required for parole, applicants 
should also indicate on the forms if they have potential 
sources of financial support or sponsorship in the United 
States, including addresses and telephone numbers if 
possible. 
 
¶3. You should make photocopies of the passport, any 
credentials that identify the individual as medical 
personnel, and any other documentation that could assist 
DHS in making a determination as to whether or not the 
individual qualifies for this parole.  You should ensure 
that you have local contact information for the 
individual. To the greatest extent possible, you should 
expedite acceptance of parole applications, by accepting 
walk-ins or rapidly scheduling any requests that you 
receive via phone/fax/e-mail. 
 
¶4. Once this data is collected, you should immediately 
send a VISAS EAGLE SAO cable through the INK system.  You 
should scan all documentation and e-mail the entire file 
to REFUGEEAFFAIRS@DHS.GOV and CubaIMM@state.gov.  Posts 
are not expected to make any recommendations on these 
cases.  Once you receive clearance on the SAO cable, you 
should forward that clearance to the same e-mail 
addresses. 
 
¶5. If the individual does not appear to qualify for SPBP 
as outlined above, you should explain to the applicant 
that while he or she may not qualify, their information 
will be accepted and sent to USCIS for consideration.  To 
repeat, consular officers should refer all cases to USCIS 
for adjudication even if the applicant does not appear to 
qualify. 
 
¶6. You should be aware that there may be some risk for 
individuals who wish to be considered for SPBP.  Where 
this is the case, officers from other mission sections may 
be able to assist individuals requesting parole in 
arranging delivery of parole documents in a way that 
reduces potential risks to parolees.  Potential parolees 
should be aware that they may encounter difficulties 
departing certain countries even though they have been 
granted parole in the United States.  Travel arrangements, 
costs, and exit permissions from third countries are the 
sole responsibility of the parolee.  Additionally, 
parolees with immediate family members in Cuba should be 
told that their families are likely to encounter extreme 
difficulties in receiving exit permission from the Cuban 
government. 
 
¶7. In the same announcement, DHS outlined a proposal for 
Cubans who are U.S. citizens or residents to apply for 
expedited entry for certain family members residing in 
Cuba.  Further guidance on this issue will follow as it 
becomes available. 
 
¶8. Officers with questions, please contact USCIS at 
REFUGEEAFFAIRS@DHS.GOV. 
RICE 
 
 
NNNN