06TELAVIV3399
INITIAL IMPACT OF ISRAEL-HIZBALLAH WAR ON ISRAEL
Fri Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tel Aviv
null
Leza L Olson  08/28/2006 01:41:33 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Leza L Olson

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
C O N F I D E N T I A L        TEL AVIV 03399

SIPDIS
CXTelA:
    ACTION: POL
    INFO:   IPSC PD ADM AID IMO CONS RES ECON DCM DAO AMB
            RSO

DISSEMINATION: POL
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: POL/C:NOLSEN
DRAFTED: POL:MCKEAYS
CLEARED: POL:NOLSEN, DAO:TWILLIAMSON

VZCZCTVI129
PP RUEHC RUEHXK RHEHNSC RUEKJCS RUEAIIA
DE RUEHTV #3399/01 2371132
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 251132Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5909
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 003399 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA (MAHER), PM 
PENTAGON FOR OSD ISRAEL DESK OFFICER (ANDERSON) 
NSC FOR LOGERFO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/22/2016 
TAGS: PREL MOPS PINR LE IS
SUBJECT: INITIAL IMPACT OF ISRAEL-HIZBALLAH WAR ON ISRAEL 
DEFENSE FORCES, MINISTRY OF DEFENSE 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Norm Olsen.  Reasons: 1.4 (b, d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) In the wake of the 34-day Israel-Hizballah War, the 
Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) are reviewing their performance 
across the board, and taking stock of achievements and 
mistakes with an eye towards assigning blame, where 
necessary, and gathering lessons learned for application in 
future such conflicts.  Israeli media reports have been 
largely negative, reporting on alleged logistical failures, 
equipment problems, and an absence of sound leadership 
throughout the conflict.  IDF Chief of Staff LTG Dan Halutz 
has been criticized, for instance, for selling his stocks in 
the early hours of the conflict, and then taking a few hours 
off to take care of family matters.  The replacement of the 
IDF's battlefield commander midway through the conflict was 
also the subject of intense media speculation.  Israel's 
political leadership -- reeling from the media attack and the 
apparent public concern for how the war was conducted and 
ended -- has called for the formation of a professional 
commission of inquiry.  At this stage, it is still too early 
to speculate on what effect the commission will have, if any. 
 Nevertheless, the IDF will not be able to proceed with 
business as usual -- especially as most Israelis expect that 
a second round with Hizballah is just around the corner.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
MOD, IDF TAKING STOCK OF ACHIEVEMENTS AND FAILURES 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. (C) Near the close of the Israel-Hizballah War, long-time 
embassy contacts within the MOD conveyed to emboffs upbeat 
assessments of the results of the war.  The MOD's POC for 
Strategic Dialogues, Rami Yungman, told poloff August 8 that 
he did not expect to see any shake-up within Israel's 
military intelligence community in the aftermath of the war. 
While Yungman could not clearly define an Israeli victory 
over Hizballah, he strained to point out that Israel had 
succeeded in degrading Hizballah's long-range rocket 
capability, and shown Hizballah that if it attacks Israel, it 
will pay a heavy price.  MOD Political-Military Bureau Head 
MGEN (Res.) Amos Gilad told CODEL Miller and emboffs August 9 
that "the results of the bloody war with Hizballah were 
better than they could have been.  Hizballah's long-range 
rockets have been destroyed," he claimed.  "Bunkers near the 
border have been destroyed.  It is a real intelligence 
victory."  Gilad added, "We have counted the Hizballah dead, 
name-by-name, as we have a list with at least 250 names on 
it.  We cannot release it due to sensitivity.  Meanwhile, 
Hizballah is hiding the corpses and not releasing the names." 
 
¶3. (C) More time to reflect after the war's cessation on 
August 14 has led to more sober assessments of the IDF's 
performance and Israel's achievements.  General Halutz 
reportedly claimed in an August 21 Cabinet meeting that 
Israel had won "not by a knock-out, but on points," and 
admitted to reservists with whom he met that failures had 
been made, and that his sale of stocks on the day the war 
began was an error in judgment.  Israeli Defense Intelligence 
(IDI) officers told a visiting Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee staffer August 24 that Israel succeeded in placing 
Hizballah in a "more inferior position than before," even if 
Hizballah has not been significantly degraded in a military 
sense.  The widespread destruction of Hizballah's offices in 
southern Beirut are seen by the IDI as a significant blow to 
the "state within a state" concept that Hizballah had 
successfully projected.  The IDI believes that Hizballah is 
concerned about the strengthening of Lebanon's statehood, the 
expansion of its sovereignty with the Lebanese Armed Forces' 
(LAF) deployment in the south, and the increasing involvement 
of the international community in Lebanon.  The IDI officers 
admitted that Hizballah had not been "knocked out," but 
claimed that many of its medium-to-long range rockets 
launchers had been destroyed, most of its bunkers and 
positions in the south had been demolished, and some 500 of 
its fighters had been killed.  On the other hand, the IDI 
officers noted that Hizballah retains a residual long-range 
missile capability, still possesses an estimated 6,000-8,000 
short-range rockets, maintained its command and control 
capability during and after the war, and is already 
rebuilding a number of its offices that the Israeli Air Force 
destroyed in bombing attacks on southern Beirut.  The IDI 
officers uniformly agreed that it is highly unlikely that the 
GOL or LAF will try to disarm or dismantle Hizballah. 
¶4. (C) The new MOD director general, MGEN (Ret.) Gabi 
Ashkenazi told the Ambassador August 24 that the IDF is still 
examining how it managed the war, and that it is too early to 
draw any specific conclusions.  Ashkenazi said, however, that 
it is clear that there were failures and that steps must be 
taken to ensure that they do not happen again.  According to 
the DG, IDF Chief of Staff LTG Dan Halutz has already drawn 
up a plan that will address problems with reservists, command 
and control, and Israel's level of readiness:  "We know what 
to do.  We need to provide more training to the reservists. 
We need to admit that our regular forces were more involved 
in executing operations in the West Bank and Gaza than they 
probably should have been."  "The biggest lesson learned," 
Ashkenazi added," is that the results could have and should 
have been better.  The military experts will specify the 
successes and failures in numerous areas.  A number of 
reasons have to do with how we began the war, what the 
targets were, and how to hit them."  Ashkenazi stressed that 
he believes that Hizballah has been hurt and that the GOL is 
taking on more responsibility:  "Still, we should prepare for 
a second round with Hizballah, and possibly Syria, because 
Syria must pay for its role in this war." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
MEDIA FOCUSES ON SUPPLY, EQUIPMENT AND LEADERSHIP FAILURES 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶5. (C) While the IDF is looking inward and compiling lessons 
learned, the Israeli media is giving voice to frustrated IDF 
soldiers and bereaved families that feel Israel's military 
performed poorly during the war.  One of the themes in the 
criticism concerns technology, with the assertion being that 
nothing should be too expensive when it comes to saving 
lives.  In mid-July, the Jerusalem Post ran an article 
alleging that several senior Armored Corps officers expressed 
their frustration over what they claimed was the defense 
establishment's refusal to pay for the installation of the 
Trophy active defense system on Israel's Merkava tanks.  The 
officers claimed that that Trophy system -- developed by 
Israeli defense industry giant Rafael -- is capable of 
neutralizing all anti-tank rockets in Hizballah's arsenal, 
and said that soldiers were being killed and wounded 
unnecessarily, paying the price for budget constraints. 
Ashkenazi told the Ambassador in their August 24 meeting that 
the MOD "stunned" PM Olmert when it presented its budget 
request on August 23:  "The figures are huge, but we need a 
budget.  It is the second priority for me after resolving the 
export control issue and putting it behind us." 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Israeli paper, Yedioth Ahronoth, recently 
reported of an August 20 meeting between IDF Chief of Staff 
Halutz and commanders of the Alexandroni Brigade -- a unit 
that fought in the western sector of southern Lebanon -- 
during which the commanders related how their junior officers 
no longer have confidence in the IDF's senior officers.  The 
commanders told Halutz about problems they faced with the 
supply of food and water to combat areas, missing equipment, 
and outdated tactical intelligence.  One officer reportedly 
complained that he received photos of a village his unit was 
to enter that were taken in 2002.  Two reservists from the 
Alexandroni Brigade noted their intent to start a protest 
march from the historic battle site of Castel, outside 
Jerusalem, to the Prime Minister's residence in Jerusalem. 
They said that once at the residence, they would stage a 
sit-in until Prime Minister Olmert resigns.  One of the 
soldiers told the newspaper, "We are at a turning point.  We 
have finished a campaign, and now Iran and Syria are waiting. 
 We have a strong army, but the leadership does not know what 
to do." 
 
¶7. (SBU) More recently, the Israeli Internet news outlet YNET 
reported on a petition submitted by reservists of the Galilee 
Division's 300th Brigade to their commander in which they 
claimed that their company commander refused to debrief the 
soldiers in order to gather lessons learned regarding 
battlefield operations, their equipment, and the manner of 
their release from duty.  In the petition, the soldiers state 
they do not intend to serve further in the IDF, and request 
that they not be called up for future active reserve duty. 
One of the petition-signers interviewed by YNET stated that 
his unit destroyed launchers and terrorist infrastructure in 
the western zone of southern Lebanon, but received poor 
treatment and faulty equipment, and suffered from supply 
problems.  Another of the signers complained that the amount 
of recovery time after their operations deep in Lebanon was 
insufficient.  When asked, unidentified IDF sources stated 
that they are looking into the complaints lodged in the 
petition.  Israeli commentators observe that this particular 
issue is resolvable, but -- if not handled correctly -- could 
lead to a situation in which members of the 300th Brigade 
move their protest to Jerusalem. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In another recent petition, IDF reservists assigned 
to the Spearhead Brigade in Lebanon vigorously protested to 
Israeli DefMin Peretz and General LTG Halutz what they termed 
indecisiveness and "cold feet" among Israel's leadership. 
They claim that the indecisiveness manifested itself in 
inaction, the failure to carry out operational plans, 
last-minute cancellation of missions, and prolonged stays in 
hostile territory.  The signers suggest that the war aims 
were not clearly defined and were changed during the course 
of the fighting, and that the leadership ultimately sought to 
avoid engagement with the enemy.  In light of this, the 
signers wonder why they were called up, and charge Israel's 
leadership with immorality and shamelessness, as well as 
irresponsibility in not preparing over the previous six years 
for the fight with Hizballah.  The signers assert that they 
will fulfill future call-ups, but also contend that the 
crisis of confidence affecting the IDF will not be resolved 
until there is a thorough investigation conducted that leads 
to conclusions concerning strategic planning, national 
security, and personal leadership. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Conveying a sense of pleasant surprise, the 
newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth reported extensively August 21 on 
remarks made by Chief Infantry and Paratroopers Officer BGEN 
Yossi Hyman at his own retirement ceremony.  According to the 
paper, Hyman acknowledged publicly his and many other 
officers' personal responsibility for the failure to prepare 
Israel's troops for war.  He attributed the collective 
failure and missed opportunities to "the sin of arrogance," a 
focus on achievements, deliberate efforts to cover up 
military ignorance, and a lack of understanding about the 
profession of arms.  Hyman stressed to all present that it is 
time for the IDF to "demonstrate quiet, honest, responsible 
and mature leadership," and investigate all the problems and 
failures that occurred.  He suggested that this is necessary 
to prepare for the next war -- a war with an enemy that is 
constantly improving itself and strengthening. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY TO INVESTIGATE ALLEGATIONS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10. (SBU) In a move that appears designed to head off 
mounting criticism -- but which is also in keeping with 
precedents set by the 1973 Yom Kippur War and the 1982 
Invasion of Lebanon -- DefMin Peretz announced August 16 that 
he would establish a committee of inquiry to examine the 
events of the Israel-Hizballah War.  Even though Peretz 
appointed a former IDF chief of staff, Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, 
to head the committee, Israeli media reports suggest that the 
announcement of the commission was met with harsh criticism 
from members of the IDF, defense establishment and the 
Knesset.  Unidentified military sources reportedly expressed 
skepticism that the committee could be critical of DefMin 
Peretz, as Lipkin-Shahak served on Peretz's team of external 
advisers during the war.  Meretz-Yahad MK Yossi Beilin 
cautioned that he would not accept Peretz's committee as a 
substitute for an independent state commission of inquiry. 
Likud MK Gideon Sa'ar stressed in his public comments that 
any such committee should investigate Israel's political 
leadership as well as the IDF.  National Union-NRP MK Uri 
Ariel compared Peretz's committee to a "spit in the face" of 
Israel's soldiers, contending that the general public and 
Israeli soldiers demand an independent commission that can 
examine the Defense Minister.  On August 21, Peretz's 
committee suspended its activities after one day of work, 
providing no reason to the public for the suspension.  Media 
analysts suggest two possible reasons:  that an independent 
state commission is being formed, and that the Justice 
Ministry is reviewing a demand by the IDF that testifying 
officers be provided immunity. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Two other investigative bodies are on track to 
examine the events prior to, during, and after the war.  The 
State Comptroller's Office is collecting data and documents 
for an investigation, details of which remain scarce.  The 
Knesset's powerful Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee has 
already conducted an investigation and is soon to provide an 
interim report of its findings.  Preliminary findings 
revealed to the press indicate that the report's authors will 
contend that there were serious flaws in the home front's 
preparedness for a war, and that Home Front Command had been 
in a state of only "partial operation" and did not call up 
its reserves.  The committee's report will also claim that 
the GOI never discussed evacuating people from the north, and 
that there was no entity to coordinate the activity of NGOs 
operating in the north during the war.  Such claims will 
likely encourage complaints from residents of northern 
Israel, many of whom contend that the GOI abandoned them 
early on in the war. 
 
¶12. (SBU) A majority of the Foreign Affairs and Defense 
Committee's members support the establishment of a state 
commission of inquiry.  Only Kadima members, including 
committee Chairman Tzachi Hanegbi, have opposed the formation 
of a state commission.  Arguing that there is no choice but 
to establish a state commission, Labor MK and former IDF 
Major General Matan Vilnai -- who lost out to Peretz for 
leadership of Labor and who sees himself as a future Prime 
Minister -- told the press, "We are in a crisis similar to 
that after the Yom Kippur War from the point of view of the 
behavior of the army and intelligence." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
ISRAELIS PROCESSING WAR'S RESULTS WHILE STILL IN SHOCK 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Amid all the accusations of incompetence from 
quarters critical of the IDF and DefMin Peretz, voices are 
also being heard from soldiers families.  Protests mounted by 
IDF reservists in Jerusalem August 21 were joined by family 
members of some of the more than 110 IDF soldiers killed in 
the Israel-Hizballah War.  One mother of an IDF sergeant 
killed in Lebanon told Ha'aretz journalists, "The leadership 
failed and it must go.  For that, we do not need inquiries." 
Other family members have called for the resignations of PM 
Olmert, DefMin Peretz, and General Halutz.  A group of 
mourning families have announced their intention to hold a 
protest march on August 25, and present a letter to PM Olmert 
demanding his resignation.  Israelis appear to be processing 
the results of the war while still in a state of shock from 
the war itself.  As one Israeli citizen commented to poloff, 
this is the first time Israel watched a war it was involved 
in real-time.  Israelis learned within hours about 
casualties, deaths and battlefield developments, whereas in 
previous wars (e.g., the Six Day War, the Yom Kippur War), 
they received packaged results days after those wars had ended 
 
********************************************* ******************** 
Visit Embassy Tel Aviv's Classified Website: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/telaviv 
 
You can also access this site through the State Department's 
Classified SIPRNET website. 
********************************************* ******************** 
JONES