06USUNNEWYORK1611
UNSC OPEN DEBATE ON MIDDLE EAST FOCUSES ON
Wed Aug 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO8073
OO RUEHAST
DE RUCNDT #1611/01 2350005
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 230005Z AUG 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9950
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J5/UNMA// IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 001611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO IS LE
SUBJECT: UNSC OPEN DEBATE ON MIDDLE EAST FOCUSES ON 
REVITALIZING PEACE PROCESS AND UNSCR 1701 
 
REF: USUN 1597 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001611  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Recalling recent UNSC focus on Lebanon, UN 
Department of Political Affairs (DPA) Under Secretary-General 
Ibrahim Gambari used a monthly UNSC public debate on the 
Middle East held on August 22 to call for a renewed 
international effort to advance the Israeli-Palestinian peace 
process.  Gambari urged revived action on the peace process 
that is "sanctioned and championed by the Council."  Arguing 
that the vision of an independent Palestine and Israel living 
side by side had "slipped further away during the past year," 
Gambari ascribed the deterioration in Israeli-Palestinian 
relations to the political positions of the parties, the 
degradation of the PA as a governing institution, continued 
violence perpetrated by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and 
Palestinian groups, as well as the continued establishment of 
"facts on the ground" that frustrate the realization of a 
long-term peace. 
 
¶2. (U) Summary, cont'd.  The 28 member states -- including 
the 15 members of the Security Council and other member 
states who participated the debate --  that took the floor 
after Gambari, however, addressed both the situation in 
Lebanon and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  While sevaral 
delegations either characterized Israel's August 19 raid in 
Lebanon's Bekaa Valley as a "violation" of UNSCR 1701 or 
called on all parties to exercise "maximum restraint" to 
avoid any violations, the UK, Denmark, France, Tanzania, 
Canada, and Argentina joined Ambassador Bolton in calling for 
respect for the arms embargo established by UNSCR 1701.  The 
UK, France, China, Qatar, and Finland (speaking for the EU), 
among others, called on Israel to lift its sea and air 
blockade of Lebanon.  While most delegations called for the 
release of IDF soldiers held in Lebanon and Gaza, the UK, 
France, China, Russia, France, Japan, Slovakia, and Qatar 
also called on Israel to release detained Palestinian 
officials.  Israel traded barbs with Syria and Iran, who both 
lambasted the USG for supporting Israel's military campaign 
in Lebanon.  The Palestinian PR welcomed Gambari's call for 
Council involvement in the peace process and recalled the 
Arab League decision to seek a UNSC ministerial during the 
UNGA.  The Syrian PR also endorsed the Arab League's proposal 
for UNSC action on the peace process, but held out 
"resistance" as an alternative.  End Summary. 
 
¶3. (U) The UNSC held its monthly public debate on the Middle 
East on August 22.  A transcript of the meeting can be found 
online at www.un.org/news/press/docs/2006/sc8813.doc.ht m. 
 
Gambari Focuses Exclusively on Peace Process 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Recalling the SYG's report on the first week of 
implementation of UNSCR 1701 and the closed UNSC 
consultations held to discuss the report on August 21 
(reftel), U/SYG Gambari said he would focus his remarks 
instead on developments in the Israeli-Palestinian track over 
the past year.  Noting that the vision of two states living 
side by side had "slipped further away during the past year," 
Gambari reported that the SYG had concluded that it was time 
to consider something more -- a renewed international effort 
in which the various crises in the region are addressed not 
in isolation or bilaterally, but as part of a holistic and 
comprehensive effort, "sanctioned and championed by the 
Council," to bring peace and stability to the region as a 
whole.  Gambari did not elaborate on the SYG's plans in this 
regard, nor did he explicitly link it to the Arab League 
proposal for an SC ministerial. 
 
¶5. (U) Gambari ascribed the deterioration in 
Israeli-Palestinian relations to four factors.  First, the 
political position of the parties, including Hamas's 
unwillingness to accept the principles that underpin the 
peace process as well as Israel's refusal to transfer USD 500 
million in tax revenue owed to the PA and its continued 
settlement activity.  Second, the degradation of the PA 
caused in part by revenue shortfalls and Israeli movement 
restrictions, which helped ensure a "mixed" PA performance in 
Gaza since Israel's disengagement.  Third, continuing death 
and destruction caused by IDF military operations in the 
occupied territories and Qassam rocket fire from Gaza into 
Israel as well as the PA's inability to secure the release of 
abducted IDF soldier Gilad Shalit.  Fourth, Gambari lamented 
"facts on the ground" such as Israeli settlement activity, 
the separation barrier, and the closure of the Rafah crossing 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001611  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
between Gaza and Israel. 
 
Ambassador Bolton Emphasizes Arms Embargo 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) During his intervention, Ambassador Bolton emphasized 
that the arms embargo established in UNSCR 1701 against arms 
transfers to Lebanon not authorized by the GOL must be 
strictly observed.  He expressed concern about the attitudes 
of Syria and Iran, whose leaders had repeatedly called for 
the destruction of Israel, and noted that the burden of 
abiding by the arms embargo fell especially on them.  It was 
essential, he argued, to put an end to Hizballah operating as 
a state within a state to achieve the goal of a lasting peace 
in the region.  He cautioned that the international community 
must not apply only a temporary band-aid solution to the 
problem and allow Hizballah to regroup and re-arm.  Recalling 
UNSCR 1701's call for an unconditional release of the 
abducted Israeli soldiers, Ambassador Bolton also averred 
that it was impossible to divorce this issue from the need 
for an end to violence.  Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict, Ambassador Bolton castigated the Hamas-led PA 
government for its failure to govern responsibly and for 
continuing to reject peace and embrace terrorism.  He noted 
the USG's decision to increase humanitarian assistance for 
the Palestinians to USD 270 million, including more than USD 
50 million for UNRWA's emergency appeal. 
 
Violations of UNSCR 1701 / Arms Embargo 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Several delegations, including Argentina, Peru, Qatar, 
Ghana, and Norway, explicitly characterized Israel's August 
19 raid in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley as a "violation" of UNSCR 
1701's call for a cessation of hostilities.  France noted 
that the August 19 raid was a "source of serious concern" but 
otherwise declined to characterize the incident.  Other 
countries, including France, Denmark, Japan, Slovakia, 
Finland (speaking for the EU), and Brazil, called on all 
parties to exercise "maximum restraint" to avoid any 
violations of UNSCR 1701. 
 
¶8. (U) The UK, Denmark, France, Tanzania, Canada, and 
Argentina joined Ambassador Bolton in calling for adherence 
to the arms embargo in UNSCR 1701.  Calling on all parties to 
respect UNSCRs 1559, 1680, and 1701, the UK singled out "the 
key provision of UNSCR 1701 that ensures an end to all arms 
shipments other than for the GOL."  Denmark highlighted the 
importance of ensuring that UNIFIL is given authority to 
enforce the arms embargo, while Canada tied respect for the 
arms embargo to the ultimate goal of ensuring Hizballah's 
disarmament. 
 
Calls on Israel to Lift Blockade 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) As they had done during closed consultations on August 
21 (reftel), the UK, France, China, and Ghana called on 
Israel to lift its air and sea blockade of Lebanon to allow 
humanitarian relief efforts to proceed.  Tanzania, Ghana, 
Finland (speaking for the EU), Pakistan, and Argentina 
supported this call.  Qatar, which described the continuing 
blockade as a violation of UNSCR 1701, called on the UNSC to 
take action to ensure that Israel lifts the blockade 
immediately. 
 
Release IDF and Palestinian Prisoners 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) Most delegations called for the release of the IDF 
soldiers held in Gaza and Lebanon, although not all used the 
terms "immediate and unconditional."  China, for example, 
called for the "early" release of the IDF soldiers, while 
Russia did not explicitly mention the IDF captives at all. 
Several delegations, including China, Russia, France, Japan, 
Slovakia, Qatar, and Congo, called for the release of 
Palestinian officials arrested by Israel.  The UK called on 
Israel to either charge or release these Palestinian 
detainees, while Denmark and Greece expressed concern about 
these arrests.  France characterized these arrests 
"counter-productive" and called on Israel to immediately free 
detained Palestinian politicians.  Several delegations 
referred to language from UNSCR 1701 to highlight the need to 
"settle" the issue of Lebanese prisoners in Israel. 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001611  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Israel Trades Barbs With Syria and Iran 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Characterizing Hamas, Hizballah, Iran, and Syria as 
the "quartet of terror," Israel warned of "catastrophic" 
consequences if Iran and Syria were allowed to succeed in 
their efforts to re-supply Hizballah.  It called on UNIFIL to 
deploy to Lebanon's ports and its border with Syria to ensure 
implementation of the arms embargo.  Referring to reports of 
Syrian and Iranian training of Hizballah fighters, Israeli PR 
Gillerman averred that the embargo also demands an end to 
interference by those countries in Lebanon.  Gillerman also 
urged UNSC members to ensure that their resolutions -- 
including 1559, 1690, and 1701 -- were fully implemented and 
to fulfill their responsibility to work for the release of 
captured IDF soldiers. 
 
¶12. (U) The Palestinian representative to the UN, Riyadh 
Mansour, spoke at length about the impact of Israeli actions 
on the Palestinian population.  He also embraced Gambari's 
proposal for Council action, seeking SC focus on the 
Palestinian situation analagous to its recent attention to 
Lebanon.  Mansour also recalled the decision of the Arab 
League to seek an SC ministerial on the peace process during 
the UNGA. 
 
¶13. (U) Iran and Syria joined Lebanon and the Palestinian 
observer in criticizing Israel for its purported crimes 
against humanity and for violating UNSCR 1701.  But the 
Iranian and Syrian representatives went further by 
specifically blaming the USG for joining in Israel's alleged 
effort to destroy Lebanon.  The Iranian representative 
referred to U.S. media reports to suggest that the USG and 
Israel had "pre-cooked a plan to transform a border shoot-out 
into a war."  Characterizing Israeli and USG claims about the 
IDF's August 19 raid as "preposterous," he argued that the 
operation was planned to "abduct" Lebanese officials.  The 
Syrian PR, calling Israel "the demon of international 
terrorism," quoted SARG President al-Asad's remark that if 
peace is not an option, resistance becomes the only 
alternative.  He endorsed the Arab League proposal for the 
UNSC to take action to revive the Middle East Peace Process 
and also called on the UNSC to address the issue of Israel's 
nuclear capability. 
BOLTON