05NEWDELHI74
INDIA TSUNAMI SITREP: JANUARY 4
Tue Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy New Delhi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS E F T O SECTION 01 OF 02 NEW DELHI 000074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SENSITIVE 
 
USDA/FAS/FAA/CALEXANDER/MCONLON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/03/2015 
TAGS: PREL CASC AEMR EAID MASS SOCI EAGR ID CE MV IN
SUBJECT: INDIA TSUNAMI SITREP: JANUARY 4 
 
REF: NEW DELHI 38 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert O. Blake, Jr.  Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: India Consular officers have been focusing 
on unaccounted for American citizens through an ongoing 
effort to respond to inquiries, and have been successful in 
resolving about 170 cases.  In a January 4 session with 
members of the local media, the Ambassador highlighted the US 
relief effort, and US-India cooperation during the disaster. 
The USAID/DART team has determined that the situation in 
India has become less of an immediate emergency.  GOI 
military assistance for Sri Lanka has reached a considerable 
level and has now moved beyond short-term relief.  The 
Ministry of Home Affairs acknowledged on January 3 that the 
number of Indian deaths is likely to grow with the addition 
of thousands of individuals currently counted as missing in 
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  End Summary. 
 
Consular Crunches the Numbers 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The consular section continues to search for 
unaccounted for American citizens in India where specific 
information is available.  Through a coordinated effort 
involving the Embassy and the three consulates, calls were 
made on January 3 and the morning of January 4 to persons in 
the US who had previously inquired about their loved ones in 
India.  As a result of this effort, the Mission resolved 
about 170 cases, bringing the number of open cases under 400. 
 Consular India will repeat the effort tonight, and hopes to 
achieve similar results. 
 
Ambassador's Press Conference 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) In a January 4 meeting with foreign affairs 
correspondents and editors, the Ambassador highlighted the 
immediate US response to the tsunami disaster and noted that 
the improved US-India relationship was evident in our 
coordinated relief effort.  The Ambassador appreciated New 
Delhi's lead role in foreign assistance for Sri Lanka and the 
broad scope of that effort.  He also explained that 
operational effectiveness based on need is one of the key 
criteria in allocating the USD 350 million that the USG has 
committed.  In response to several questions on a tsunami 
early warning system, the Ambassador emphasized the need for 
Washington and New Delhi to cooperate on developing one that 
meets India's needs. 
 
USAID 
----- 
 
¶4.  (U) USAID/DART India reports that as of January 4, the 
situation in the state of Tamil Nadu seems to be moving 
beyond the immediate emergency phase.  GOI and NGO efforts to 
provide life-saving water, sanitation, food, and shelter are 
underway.  USAID/DART is continuing assessments of needs in 
Tamil Nadu and has been receiving reports from ConGen 
Calcutta's FSN who is in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. 
 
India in Sri Lanka 
------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU//NOFORN) Indian relief efforts in Sri Lanka have 
been underway since the day of the tsunami.  The GOI has 
conducted the initial search and rescue, carried out recovery 
operations in difficult areas, ferried relief supplies, and 
continues to work directly with the GOSL to put help where it 
is needed most.  Six Indian ships, eight helicopters and 
numerous strategic air assets are working around the clock, 
and Indian pilots are flying 18-20 hours a day.  The Indian 
Navy survey ship at Galle took soundings after the tsunami 
and their divers and engineers have already restored two of 
three berths.  They will help the Sri Lankan Navy get all 
berths in Galle open.  The field hospital set up by the GOI 
in the east has reportedly treated 1300 patients, 500 or more 
of which were children, and medical teams are established in 
various provinces providing care on the spot. 
 
¶6.  (SBU//NOFORN) All these assets are being effectively 
coordinated from the Indian High Commission in Colombo.  The 
Ambassador and DAO hope to receive authorization to approach 
the GOI January 5 with a formal proposal for attaching an 
Indian coordinating element to US forces in the Bay of Bengal 
region. 
 
Indian Casualty Numbers 
----------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) The most recent Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) update 
indicated that on January 3, the total number of Indian 
deaths was 9,479 compared to 9,451 the day before.  The MHA 
also reported that the figure was likely to increase pending 
"confirmation regarding 5,681 missing/feared dead (as per the 
preliminary survey) in the Nicobar Group of Islands." 
According to that report, the total figure for missing 
persons India-wide was 5,796. 
MULFORD