06ASUNCION589
PARAGUAY: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS ASSESSMENT REPORT
Wed Jun 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Asuncion
VZCZCXYZ0016
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAC #0589/01 1581702
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071702Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY ASUNCION
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4352
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS ASUNCION 000589 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

WHA FOR MICHAEL PUCCETTI 
G/TIP 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KWMN SMIG PA
SUBJECT: PARAGUAY: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS ASSESSMENT REPORT 
AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

¶1. (U) This is an action request; see para 10. 

¶2. (U) SUMMARY: The USD 155K that post received in FY-2004 
has played an important role in helping Paraguay combat its 
TIP problem, particularly in the areas of prevention and 
protection. However, post anticipates these funds running 
out by the end of 2006. Working closely with U.S. experts 
and GOP officials, we have identified concrete requirements 
to strengthen Paraguay's ability to combat trafficking in the 
coming year. As part of a bilateral assistance project 
between the Embassy of the United States in Asuncion and the 
Government of Paraguay (GOP), the USG conducted a study of 
Paraguay,s system of immigration and border controls between 
July 23 through August 5, 2005, with a view to offering 
recommendations to the GOP that would assist it in combating 
the problem of trafficking in persons (TIP) by improving 
border controls. A team of Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) officials led the assessment. The DHS Team included 
agents from Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and 
Customs and Border Protection (CBP). Post requests an 
allocation of USD 310,000 in FY-2006 INL funds consistent 
with the DHS Team's recommendations and consultation with GOP 
officials to continue assisting the GOP in combating TIP. End 
Summary. 

-------------- 
The Assessment 
-------------- 

¶3. (U) Paraguay is a source country for trafficked women and 
children, many of whom are smuggled across Paraguay's borders 
into the neighboring countries of Brazil and Argentina. 
Paraguay's Department of Immigration is aware of the TIP 
problem and acknowledges the GOP must improve its border 
controls in order to prevent traffickers from transporting 
victims across its borders. 

¶4. (U) During the assessment, the team spoke with several 
Ministry and Secretariat officials in Asuncion, including the 
Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Customs, and Interior 
(Immigration Department), the Secretariats of Women, 
Repatriations, and Children and Adolescents. They also spoke 
to the Inter-American Development Bank and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) such as Grupo Luna Nueva, a local 
recovery center for victims. The team visited several land 
border inspection stations including Ciudad del Este, 
Encarnacion, Pedro Juan Caballero and Puerto Falcon. They 
also inspected the Silvio Pettirossi International Airport in 
Asuncion. 

------------------------- 
More Money, Fewer Problems 
------------------------- 

¶5. (U) The assessment report has been reviewed by all the 
stakeholders within AMEmbassy Asuncion and was translated 
into Spanish and provided to our GOP counterparts. The next 
phase of this project is to take action on the 
recommendations made by the Team. 

¶6. (U) In order to build on advances made by the GOP, Post 
has identified several areas that will assist the GOP better 
in its efforts to combat TIP. Our focus in the coming year 
is to expand training for officials, investigators, 
prosecutors and judges; assist the GOP to expand 
rehabilitation center services in government run shelters; 
enhance border controls; and establish and maintain a victim 
database to provide better services to the victims of TIP and 
prosecute perpetrators. However, the GOP will require 
outside funds to meet essential program requirements. 

---------- 
Prevention 
---------- 

7.(U) Prevention represents the weakest link in GOP efforts 
to combat trafficking. The GOP has taken some positive steps 
that we have supported - information pamphlets and radio 
spots along with a hotline -- but funding and prevention 
programs remain weak. Post recommends continued funding 
support for the Ministry of Womens Affairs outreach programs 
to prevent trafficking as well as the following: 

-- The DHS team recommends holding an annual border control 
symposium in Asuncion with the participation of all border 
control agencies. A symposium will provide the opportunity 
for agency administrators to clearly communicate the mission 
of the individual border control agencies, establish a 
national strategy as well as coordinate a unified border 
enforcement effort. In addition, this symposium would 
address the concerns heard by the DHS officers of many border 
control front line officials regarding a concern relating to 
a "disconnect" between Asuncion and frontline border crossing 
offices. Post would fund the first border patrol symposium. 

-- The DHS team recommends that a supervisory level U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection Officer be detailed to Paraguay 
for a 30-60 day period to provide advisory assistance at the 
various ports of entry to assist Paraguayan officials in 
implementing administrative and procedural changes. The Team 
feels that Paraguayan border control officials are capable of 
performing their duties but lack the proper training and 
guidance. A short-term advisor could assist in teaching them 
to conduct interviews, searches, observation techniques, etc. 

-- The DHS team recommends that selected Paraguayan officials 
with direct supervisory responsibilities at Paraguayan ports 
of entry be given the opportunity to travel to the U.S. and 
observe first-hand U.S. border management techniques and 
functions at specific U.S. ports of entry. 

---------- 
Protection 
---------- 

¶8. (U) The GOP has made some strides in providing support and 
protection to victims but resources are few. The Ministry of 
Repatriations seeks corporate funds to repatriate victims 
because the GOP cannot support adequately the ministries 
operations. In addition, the Ministry of Women's Affairs has 
ambitious plans to establish a shelter to provide victims a 
place to reside while in Asuncion once they are repatriated. 
Again, the lack of GOP resources has prevented the ministry 
from establishing a 50 bed facility. At this time, a 
Catholic monastry is providing beds to the Ministry of 
Women's Affairs. Usually the victims remain in Asuncion for 
approximately 2 or 3 months while they are receiving legal, 
medical, psychological and rehabilitative services. Once the 
women leave Asuncion, there is no follow-up or support 
program to assist victims in returning to their home town. 
Last year, post provided funds to assist the Women's Ministry 
in creating a rehabilitation center that provides trafficked 
women with services including psychological and job 
counseling. Post recommends identifying funds to support the 
establishment of a more permanent shelter to protect victims 
and assist them in making the transition to stability as well 
as efforts to expand GOP support for victims in the interior 
of the country.