06DAMASCUS2877
Damascus Media Reaction: Brammertz Report,
Sun Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2877/01 1691022
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181022Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9710
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6034
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3893
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2410
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7093
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1080
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4468
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0691
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6830UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002877 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Brammertz Report, 
Syria/Palestinians, Iraq, Lebanon (6/15) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported an address by Deputy Foreign 
Minister Faisal Miqdad to the UN Security Council at a session 
about the latest Brammertz report. Miqdad confirmed Syrian 
cooperation with the UN investigation into the killing of former 
Lebanese PM Rafik Hariri. Dr. Miqdad said, "we have been 
informed about the content of Mr. Brammertz' report and believe 
that it is distinguished by its objectivity and professionalism, 
and that it contains positive signs about Syria's efforts to 
cooperate with the committee and about Syria's response to all 
demands of the committee." Miqdad added that the report includes 
a provisional description and explanation of the technical 
efforts of the committee, with respect to the crime scene and 
those related to its instruments. Miqdad said he hoped the 
investigation, with its new face, would lead to revelation of 
the truth about the crime. "In this respect, we reiterate what 
we have mentioned previously, that the most dangerous thing this 
investigation faces is the attempt of parties inside and outside 
our region to exploit the process to jump to conclusions that 
are not based on firm proof and evidence," Miqdad said. 
 
Papers also reported that Vice-President Farouk Shara discussed 
with Farouk Qaddoumi, Secretary of the Fatah Movement, the 
latest developments in the Palestinian arena under mounting 
internal tension and foreign siege. Mr. Qaddoumi briefed Mr. 
Shara on the results of his meetings with the Palestinian 
leadership in Tunisia. The vice-President reiterated Syria's 
call for all the Palestinian factions to participate in a 
constructive national dialogue. In a press statement following 
his meeting with Shara, Mr. Qaddoumi said, "we discussed with 
Mr. Shara the Palestinian issue and the existing tension which 
has been exploited by Israel to escalate its aggression against 
the Palestinian people." He added that the steadfast Palestinian 
people inside the occupied Palestinian territories are 
discontented with the existing tensions between the two main 
Palestinian factions. The Palestinian official said: "We have to 
abandon everything that could disrupt inter-Palestinian 
relations." 
 
All papers reported a statement by The Civil Association for Lost 
Syrians in Lebanon that listed the names of 377 Syrians who have 
been exposed to intentional damage by Lebanese security entities, 
including assaults and arrests, noting at the same time to 
presence of 1079 lost Syrians in Lebanon. The association 
underlined that "some Syrian citizens have been exposed to 
physical and moral attacks by Lebanese security and some 
individuals, motivated by a few politicians, have turned their 
hate for Syria into a profession and have become instruments in 
the hands of foreign parties planning to spread chaos and 
instability in the Arab region."  The statement urged the 
Lebanese government "to play its role to protect Syrians in 
Lebanon according to international law and norms." The 
association called upon the Lebanese government to help pursue 
this issue before the Lebanese judiciary, in order to punish 
perpetrators. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"The UN Security Council debates Brammertz report. Miqdad: 
Syria's cooperation arises from full interest in exposing the 
truth. Syria's support accords with standards of international 
criminal investigation and examination of false testimony" 
(Government-owned Tishreen 6/15) 
 
"377 Syrians are exposed to physical and moral maltreatment in 
Lebanon" (Government-owned Tisrheen, 6/15) 
 
"In the wake of exposure of the Mossad network, Lebanese circles 
confirm: The failure of some Lebanese to regard Israel as an 
enemy paves the way for Mossad activities in Lebanon to prosper" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 6/15) 
 
"Al-Shara discusses developments in the Palestinian arena with 
Farouk al-Qaddoumi: Syria supports a Palestinian national 
dialogue" (Government-owned Tishreen, 6/15) 
 
 
"Olmert is received with protest demonstrations in Paris. Hamas 
is ready for a long-term ceasefire on condition of full Israeli 
pullout" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 6/15) 
 
"Al-Maliki unleashes a major security crackdown in Baghdad and 
expresses readiness to hold dialogue with insurgents. Bush 
ignores withdrawal and calls for 'an alliance for 
reconstruction'" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 6/15) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------- 
 
"No Place for Dispute" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (6/15): "We warn against the consequences of 
Palestinian rifts while Palestinians are suffering from siege 
and Israeli terrorism.... 
 
"The current situation in the occupied Arab territories is 
delicate and sensitive.... Palestinians must consolidate their 
national unity and cohesion of their political work in 
cooperation with the elected government. This should be the top 
priority for the Palestinian people.... 
 
"It is also important to exclude any contentious issue, such as 
the referendum, over which there is controversy, when there are 
many priorities on which all efforts must focus, such as ways to 
confront the siege, starvation, and Israeli incursions, and 
inform the world of the difficult situation and the conspiracy 
that seeks to uproot the Palestinians and torpedo the elements 
of their existence and the possibility of the establishment of 
an independent state...." 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"A Visit to Contain the Defeat" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Jamal al-Zu'bi, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
commented (6/15): "US President George Bush made his unexpected 
visit to Baghdad hours after the end of his war council in Camp 
David. He wanted to salute his 'brave' soldiers, who are skilled 
at the killing of women and children in Hadithah, Al-Ishaqi, 
Ba'qubah, and Al-Fallujah. But faced with a growing number of 
civilian deaths resulting from war crimes committed by troops 
with low morale, and with the risk of the infamous invasion 
igniting a civil war in Iraq, Bush will not be able to remove 
the shame he has brought upon his troops. No visit can contain 
the damage. For these crimes cannot be seen as isolated acts by 
a number of corrupt individuals.... 
 
"When the United States talks at great length about democracy 
and freedom in the world and claims to be concerned about them, 
it has in mind only one specific thing: the democracy that 
serves the interests of the United States and those who are 
loyal or subservient to it. But when it comes to any opposition 
force, it is acceptable, indeed essential, as far as the United 
States is concerned, to repress this force and violate its 
rights. The aim is to intimidate the world into accepting 
American hegemony...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
"Before and After 'The Dawn Surprise' Operation" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(6/15): "It was announced in Lebanon that a spy ring linked to 
the Israeli Mosad and involved in assassinations of Hizbollah 
 
and Palestinian figures in the past few years has been 
uncovered. Lebanese Army intelligence has the right to feel 
proud of this achievement because, through the discovery of the 
network, it has proved its high competence and, more 
importantly, saved the Lebanese from potential acts of terrorism 
and sabotage. 
 
"The discovery of the group came as a surprise to some who liked 
the game of hiding behind terrorist and criminal operations in 
Lebanon to harm Syria, tarnish its image, and make accusations 
against it.... It also came as a surprise to those who call for 
disarming the resistance and exposing Lebanon to Israeli 
aggression.... 
 
"Israeli spy networks have operated in Lebanon for a long 
time.... The Israeli factor must not be ignored in all the 
crimes that have been committed, from the assassination of Rafiq 
al-Hariri to this day...." 
 
Seche