06KABUL2765
PRT FARAH  FROM THREATENED CIVIL STRIFE TO
Sun Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO2626
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBUL #2765/01 1691217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 181217Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0901
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 002765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, S/CT, EUR/RPM 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFA-A, CG CJTF-76 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: PRT FARAH  FROM THREATENED CIVIL STRIFE TO 
OPTIMISM: A CASE OF IMPROVED PROVINCIAL GOVERNANCE 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Village elders from Gullistan District 
in northern Farah requested help from the Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) to resolve extortion, theft, and 
freedom of movement problems stemming from corrupt and 
abusive practices by Purchaman District Manager Salim 
Mobarez.  The elders visited provincial government offices 
but failed to receive help or attention.  They threatened 
armed action, but hoped the government would intervene on 
their behalf.  PRTOff requested provincial government 
leaders convene and resolve the situation.  They agreed to 
confront the district manager and take action to remove him 
if required.  They also agreed to quarterly visits to each 
district to listen to problems and help solve them.  If 
this course of action is followed, provincial government 
capability and reach will be greatly increased.  End 
summary. 
 
Allegations 
----------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ten village elders representing various villages 
in Gullistan requested support from PRT Farah June 8 to 
obtain their civil rights and avoid a violent 
confrontation.  Purchaman District Governor Salim Mobarez 
was accused of extortion, false imprisonment and ethnic 
bias.  The elders were from various tribes, but 
predominantly Pashtun, representing the majority tribe of 
the area.  All have business interests in Purchaman.  Many 
of them had lived in Purchaman but were forced to relocate 
to Gullistan because they were not of Mobarez Mogul tribe. 
Mobarez had come to the PRTs attention mid-May when he 
ousted District Police Chief Ramatullah Toawakly after 
confiscating opium and money in a possibly falsified drug 
raid.  Toawakly came to Farah City to claim his firing was 
a power play to rid the province of an honest police chief. 
He accused Mobarez of demanding monthly payments from 
citizens, requiring one out of every forty sheep from 
nomads, and one out of every ten kilos of wheat from 
farmers; he even burned a village elder who would not pay 
his taxes.  The elders claim Mobarez controls more than 
1,500 men who must be paid heavy taxes in order to allow 
them to travel, do business and harvest crops. 
 
Farahs Reaction 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Governor Wasifi insisted Mobarez come to Farah 
City to account for his actions.  Mobarez refused, claiming 
rival tribes would ambush him.  Wasifi created a provincial 
commission - including Farahs Deputy Governor, District 
Attorney, Assistant Director of Education, a judge, and 
e, and 
representatives from the governors office - to investigate 
misconduct in both Purchaman and Gullistan.  Wasifis 
reaction to initial rumors of citizens preparing for armed 
action was, Theyre a bunch of old women.  They wont do 
anything. 
 
Civil Strife Threatened 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Purchaman and Gullistan residents were not 
impressed with the official delegation and came to Farah 
City in hopes of GoA resolution.  They attempted to meet 
with Governor Wasifi three times, sent paperwork to the 
police chief, the NDS, Provincial Council and legal 
representatives.  They brought evidence to the PRT showing 
Mobarez appropriated over USD 400,000, three farms, and a 
motorcycle business.  They also claimed Mobarez stole 2005 
kilos of opium and sold it to Iran for machine guns, RPGs 
and heavy weapons.  They claim Governor Wasifi received at 
least USD 30,000 in bribes to take no action. 
 
Official Delegation Investigates 
-------------------------------- 
 
--- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Deputy Governor Juma Khan described the official 
results of the five-day investigation in both Purchaman and 
Gullistan.  They held several shuras in villages, 
 
KABUL 00002765  002 OF 002 
 
 
attracting from several hundred to approximately 1,500 
people.  Major complaints were inadequacy of the legal 
system and rampant corruption.  Most praised ousted Police 
Chief Ramatullah and noted Gullistan lacks effective 
governmental leadership.  They were particularly 
disgruntled over the perceived lack of criminal punishment. 
They said they felt very secure, however, from threats from 
Taliban or other insurgent attacks.  They are aware of 
Taliban and insurgent presence throughout the area, but 
have adopted a live and let live attitude. 
 
Agreement 
--------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Farah provincial government (Deputy Governor 
Guhlem Juma Kahn, new NDS chief Nazar Ali Wahidi, Chief of 
Police Sayed Agha , President of the Provincial Council 
Haji Basir, Chief of Provincial Mullahs, Mullah Rohami), 
, 
and PRTOffs met the afternoon of June 7.  Provincial actors 
agreed they have been ineffectual in managing district 
affairs and need to demonstrate more leadership. 
Recognizing the severity of the allegations against 
Mobarez, they pledged to confront him.  If he will not 
relinquish his post, the Deputy Governor intends to ask the 
central government for help.  The provincial officials 
asked that the PRT commander facilitate talks and that he 
request Mobarez to come to the PRT.  The village elders 
were gratified their situation was taken seriously and 
action could be forthcoming.  They agreed to not to engage 
in violence, but instead to work with the provincial 
government. They pledged to hold monthly or quarterly 
shuras in each district to solicit feedback on district 
issues.  They feel such actions will make the local 
populace more aware of their engagement, helping to avoid 
future problems and sending a message to potential 
insurgents that the government is capable and willing to 
take action in the districts. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment:  The provincial governments ability to 
recognize its own weakness and quickly agree upon a course 
of remedial action demonstrates a significant advancement 
in provincial governance.  Its willingness to cooperate 
with local community leaders, combined with a can-do 
attitude, bodes well for both increased governmental 
capacity and district leadership.  End comment. 
 
 
NEUMANN