06KIRKUK115
SULAY STUDENTS VIEW ELECTION THROUGH KURDISH EYES
Sun Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Kirkuk
VZCZCXRO7059
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL
DE RUEHKUK #0115 1551402
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 041402Z JUN 06
FM REO KIRKUK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0661
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0623
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHKUK/REO KIRKUK 0689UNCLAS KIRKUK 000115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
BAGHDAD FOR ECON, POL, NCT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PNAT IZ
SUBJECT: SULAY STUDENTS VIEW ELECTION THROUGH KURDISH EYES 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Students from Sulaymaniyah University met on 
May 24 with IPAO to share reactions to the formation of the 
national government.  The twenty-six students equally 
represented men, women, and both younger students from a variety 
of departments and older students attending graduate level 
courses in the evening program.  The majority believed Kurdistan 
should be independent and, drawing a parallel with recently 
independent Montenegro, welcomed federalism as a necessary 
first-step.  Students also praised Prime Minister Nuri 
al-Maliki's policy statement for raising the Kirkuk issue, and 
asked for clarification of the U.S. stance on the 2007 
referendum. Action request: see paragraph 8. End Summary. 
 
Students React with Nationalism, Hope, and Skepticism 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Of the twenty-six Sulaymaniyah University students IPAO 
met, the majority reacted to the new formation of the Iraqi 
national government in Kurdish-nationalistic terms.  One 
responded "How can we feel anything about the formation of the 
Iraqi government when we are not Iraqi - we're Kurds."   Another 
said: "We are obliged to live as part of Iraq however it is our 
simplest human right to be on our own if we want to be." 
 
¶3. (SBU) The majority of students echoed the independence 
sentiment, referencing the recent referendum in Montenegro as a 
model for Kurdistan to follow.  One student said that even as 
part of a federalist state, they do not consider themselves as 
part of Iraq.  She suggested that the U.N. and the U.S. should 
support Kurdistan as an independent state, providing protection 
from hostile states. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The students expressed distrust over the appointment of 
Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki, suggesting that as a member 
of the Dawa Party he would not support the needs of the Kurdish 
Region.  Several students asked for transparency on the part of 
the U.S. in regards to the U.S. stance on the Kirkuk issue and 
Kurdistan's independence. 
 
Federalism Provides Hope 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) An older Kurdish student from Baghdad said that 
although most Kurds believed they "deserved independence" 
because of their bitter experiences with the regime of Saddam 
Hussayn, he felt, however, that federalism was the best solution 
for Iraq at this time.  He said that Iraq was currently split 
into three regions with three separate agendas and the formation 
of the government was a positive step towards balancing them. 
 
¶6. (SBU) A political science student added that the Kurdish 
people had voiced their support for the new situation in Iraq by 
participating in the election.  Further, the KRG was benefiting 
from its relationship with Baghdad through pressure for greater 
transparency and freedom of the press.  He felt the Kurdish 
Coalition had successfully brought new Kurdish faces to Baghdad, 
particularly technocrats who could resolve the issue of Kirkuk 
to the satisfaction of the KRG.  For this, he reasoned most 
Kurds were optimistic about the new government and welcomed it. 
 
Kirkuk - Promising Resolution of Article 58 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Students praised Maliki's policy statement to the 
Council of Representative, which included a point asking for the 
resolution of Article 58, the referendum on Kirkuk in 2007. 
They asked to what extent the U.S. supported the return of 
Kirkuk to Kurdistan and expressed anger over the unchecked 
Arabization policies of the Sadr and Dawa parties.  They said 
Arabs who had left after Liberation were now being paid $2,000 
each to move back to Kirkuk and resettle, reverting the city 
back to pre-Liberation population ethnic divisions. 
 
Comment and Action Request: 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The level of Kurdish nationalism expressed by the 
students was to be expected, however much could be done to 
broaden perspectives on Iraqi politics.  The dialogue was very 
productive and the students freely discussed controversial 
opinions.  The student activist groups in the Kurdistan region 
are more likely to reflect popular beliefs and sentiments 
towards issues such as Kurdish independence or the U.S. presence 
in Iraq than Kurdish government officials, who have a vested 
interest in maintaining the status quo. Post requests Baghdad 
support in encouraging official visitors to the north to make 
visits to university students a priority.  End Comment and 
Action Request. 
 
BIGUS