06TELAVIV2220
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 TEL AVIV 002220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Al-Zarqawi Assassination 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
¶3.  US-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Major media (lead stories in Ha'aretz and Yediot) 
reported that last night in the southern Gaza Strip, 
Jamal Abu Samhadana, the commander of the Popular 
Resistance Committees (PRC), was killed alongside four 
or five of his militants in an IAF attack.  Yediot 
bannered: "Hamas Police Commander Eliminated."  Abu 
Samhadana, one of Israel's most wanted terrorists, was 
responsible for the killing of three American US 
Embassy employees in the northern Gaza Strip on October 
15, 2003.  Israel Radio reported that the PRC vowed to 
avenge Abu Samhadana's death and that associates of PA 
Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas strongly condemned 
the Israeli operation, saying that it did not serve 
peace.  The radio quoted Hamas's spokesman in the Gaza 
Strip as saying that all Palestinian organizations have 
the right to respond to the assassination. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that at his meeting with Jordan's 
King Abdullah II on Thursday, Olmert assured the 
Jordanian leader that Israel would prefer to reach a 
negotiated solution with the Palestinians and promised 
to meet with Abbas soon.  Olmert was quoted as saying 
that only if a negotiated solution proved impossible 
would Israel proceed with unilateral steps.   Ha'aretz 
quoted Israeli sources as saying that Olmert also told 
the King that if Jordan really wanted serious 
negotiations between the sides, it must work with the 
Egyptians and help to create a partner.  Olmert was 
quoted as saying: "Pressure the Palestinians to accept 
the Quartet's principles [recognizing Israel, 
abandoning terror and accepting previous Israeli- 
Palestinian agreements] and to implement the Roadmap, 
and we'll begin negotiations immediately."  Ha'aretz 
and The Jerusalem Post reported that Abdullah expressed 
grave concern about Olmert's plan to unilaterally draw 
Israel's border if efforts to resume peace talks 
failed.  Ha'aretz quoted the King as saying that such a 
move could undermine Jordan's stability by driving 
Palestinian refugees into Jordan or empowering Islamic 
militants inside the kingdom.   Ha'aretz wrote that 
Olmert tried to reassure the King by promising that any 
future moves regarding Israel's final borders would be 
made in consultation with Jordan, as well as with Egypt 
and the US, since Jordanian stability is also an 
Israeli interest.  Ha'aretz reported that the two 
leaders also discussed issues such as strategic 
cooperation between Israel and Jordan and the 
assassination of Al Qaida leader Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi. 
Ha'aretz cited the London-based Ash-Sharq Al-Awsat as 
saying Wednesday that Egypt and Jordan were promoting a 
new initiative, aimed at thwarting the convergence 
plan.  Ha'aretz noted that the Ash-Sharq Al-Awsat 
report stated that King Abdullah II had informed 
President Bush of the joint effort, which advocates 
resuming Israel-Palestinian negotiations on the basis 
of the Roadmap. 
 
All media highlighted the killing of Al-Zarqawi in Iraq 
Wednesday.  Maariv bannered" The End of a Terrorist." 
The media cited comments by President Bush and Defense 
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who warned that the war goes 
 
SIPDIS 
on.  Israel Radio reported that upon his return from 
Amman, PM Ehud Olmert called President Bush to 
congratulate him, saying this was the only way to fight 
terror.  Leading media noted Jordan's involvement in 
the operation.   The Jerusalem Post reported that Hamas 
in the Gaza Strip issued a written statement, saying it 
mourned the killing of the "martyr of the nation." 
Maariv and Israel Radio quoted Michael Berg, the father 
of Nicholas Berg, a Jewish American who was executed by 
Al-Qaida in Iraq, as saying that he was not gratified 
by the killing of Al-Zarqawi.  Maariv reported that in 
an interview with AP, Michael Berg expressed his 
opposition to the war in Iraq. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that PA Chairman 
[President] Mahmoud Abbas has set July 31 as the date 
for the referendum on the "prisoners' document."  The 
radio reported that Khaled Mashal, the head of Hamas's 
political bureau, is discussing with Fatah amendments 
of the document, particularly with the document's 
author Marwan Barghouti.  Palestinian PM Ismail Haniyeh 
was quoted as saying in an interview with Yediot that 
Hamas will win on the issue of international agreements 
to which the PA is a party. 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Russia recently sent 
messages to Israel through US intermediaries, voicing 
opposition to Iran's nuclear facilities.   Israel Radio 
reported that Iran has started a new stage of uranium 
enrichment. 
 
Maariv reported that quoted Tom Burbage, Executive Vice 
President at Lockheed Martin and director of the Joint 
Strike Fighter program, and Shalom Ben-Natan, deputy 
director of procurement for IAF and Intelligence 
affairs at the Defense Ministry, as saying Thursday 
that Israeli and American teams are joining efforts to 
adopt the JSF to the IAF's needs.  The Jerusalem Post, 
which filed a similar report, noted that Ben-Natan told 
reporters that the media had exaggerated the so-called 
"controversy." 
 
Ha'aretz reported that two of the three Palestinians 
killed by IDF gunfire along the Israel-Gaza border on 
Wednesday night were unarmed. 
 
Ha'aretz, Maariv, and Israel Radio reported that on 
Thursday, the Swiss government officially confirmed 
that authorities there had recently foiled an attempt 
by Islamic terrorists to attack an El Al plane in 
Geneva.  Ha'aretz cited a statement by the Federal 
Prosecutor's Office in Bern that 12 suspects from North 
African countries had been arrested in Basel and Zurich 
on May 12. 
 
Ha'aretz and Hatzofe reported that on Thursday, the 
High Court of Justice rejected a petition submitted by 
convicted spy Jonathan Pollard, which demanded that 
Israel take action to release him from a US prison. 
 
Ha'aretz (English Ed.) reported that last week a judge 
at the Nazareth Magistrate's Court convicted US-born 
Haifa University economist Steven Plaut of libeling a 
fellow academic, Neve Gordon of Ben Gurion University's 
Department of Politics and Government, a left-wing 
activist, and ordered to pay the plaintiff 80,000 
shekels (about USD 18,000) in compensation plus 15,000 
shekels (about USD 3,300) in legal fees.  Ha'aretz 
quoted the judge as saying that one of Plaut's 
articles, published in 2001 and still available on the 
Internet (conservativetruth.org), is entitled "Ha'aretz 
promotes the 'Jews for Hitler.'"    The judge ruled 
that the article's title clearly implies that Gordon is 
a "Jew for Hitler" and that this constitutes libel. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that on Wednesday, the 
Rabbinical Council of America (RCA), the Diaspora's 
largest (Orthodox) rabbinic organization, settled a 
dispute with the Israeli Chief Rabbinate over 
conversion procedures that had threatened to shed doubt 
on the validity of dozens, perhaps hundreds of converts 
to Orthodox Judaism.  The newspaper wrote that Israel's 
Chief Sephardi Rabbi Shlomo Amar and the RCA agreed to 
establish a joint commission that would draft a 
mutually agreed-upon list of rabbinic courts authorized 
to perform conversions. 
 
Ha'aretz (banner in Ha'aretz (English Ed.)) cited the 
results of a survey conducted by Prof. Camil Fuchs of 
the Amanet Group's Dialogue Institute, which found 
that: 
- Some 56 percent of Israelis oppose PM Olmert's 
convergence plan; only 37 percent of Israelis support 
the plan, while 7 percent are undecided. 
Unsurprisingly, most of the supporters were people who 
had voted for one of the two main coalition parties, 
Kadima and Labor.  But a whopping 83 percent of people 
who voted for Shas, the third-largest coalition party, 
said that they oppose the plan. 
-51 percent of the public nevertheless said that it 
believed that it would be implemented, compared to only 
32 percent who thought that it would not be carried 
out.  This belief was shared by both supporters and 
opponents of the plan.  17 percent were undecided. 
 
The Dialogue poll also found that: 
-35 percent of Israelis are satisfied with Olmert's 
performance; 35 percent are not satisfied. 
-53 percent of Israelis are satisfied with FM Tzipi 
Livni's performance; 17 percent are not satisfied. 
-31 percent of Israelis are satisfied with Defense 
Minister Amir Peretz's performance; 41 percent are not 
satisfied. 
 
Yediot cited the results of an annual poll conducted by 
Dr. Yehuda Ben-Meir for Tel Aviv University's Jaffee 
Center for Strategic Studies, which found that: 
-64 percent of Israelis support the evacuation of West 
Bank settlements in the context of a final-status 
solution; 36 percent are opposed. 
-60 percent of Israelis agree to Israel declaring that 
the separation fence will be Israel's permanent border; 
40 percent disagree. 
-"What influence will a military operation have on 
Palestinian terrorism?"  It will reduce it, but not 
eliminate it: 62 percent; it will eliminate terrorism: 
20 percent; it will have on influence: 11 percent; it 
will increase terrorism: 7 percent. 
-"What should Israel do to disarm Iran of its nuclear 
capability?"  Act, including with military means: 46 
percent; adopt the American umbrella: 19 percent; 
maintain the ambiguity policy: 14 percent; adopt a 
deterrent policy: 13 percent. 
 
----------------------------- 
¶1.  Al-Zarqawi Assassination: 
----------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
 
Intelligence affairs correspondent Yossi Melman wrote 
on page one of independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: " 
With respect to America's global war on terror, the 
assassination of Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi is even more 
significant than the assassination of Osama bin Laden 
would be." 
 
Defense and foreign affairs columnist Amir Oren wrote 
in Ha'aretz: "After almost five years in Afghanistan 
and more than three in Iraq, the Americans are learning 
to adapt their resources to their goals." 
 
Arab affairs correspondent Jackie Hoogie wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "Although the US 
accomplishment is very nice, the Americans could learn 
fairly quickly that Jordan and Israel, rather than 
themselves, are its main beneficiaries." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "Zarqawi is gone.... [But] the epicenter 
of the terror is Tehran." 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "For Israel, 
[Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's] assassination is more than a 
morale-boosting success against Palestinian terrorism. 
This man -- with his organization and his madness -- 
was on his way to us." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "More Important Than Bin Laden" 
 
Intelligence affairs correspondent Yossi Melman wrote 
on page one of independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(6/9): "With respect to America's global war on terror, 
the assassination of Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi is even more 
significant than the assassination of Osama bin Laden 
would be.  Zarqawi is the terrorist responsible for the 
greatest number of casualties in recent years, and 
therefore, his liquidation has operational 
significance.  Bin Laden's liquidation would have only 
moral significance.... More than being a symbol, 
[Zarqawi] was the world's most effective active 
terrorist, thanks to his organizational abilities, his 
ability to recruit devoted followers, and, primarily, 
his cruelty, which gave him the image of someone who 
stood boldly against the US occupation of Iraq and the 
West in general." 
 
II.  "Finally, the US Is Learning" 
 
Defense and foreign affairs columnist Amir Oren wrote 
in Ha'aretz (6/9): "The significance of the successful 
assassination of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi in Iraq is that 
the American army, ponderous though it often is, has 
slowly but surely learned what it needs to know.... 
After almost five years in Afghanistan and more than 
three in Iraq, the Americans are learning to adapt 
their resources to their goals.... The operational 
conclusion, which is still awaiting a political 
decision, is that the export of terror to Iraq -- on 
top of the home-grown variety -- will end only when 
military pressure, direct or indirect, is applied 
against Tehran and Damascus." 
 
III.  "The Gain Is All Ours" 
Arab affairs correspondent Jackie Hoogie wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (6/9): "The death of [Abu 
Musab Al-Zarqawi] promises a change in style.  Now we 
can expect that the strategy of coming closer to 
Israel, and also the octopus tentacles that he sent out 
to countries in the region, will be re-examined by his 
successors.  Abd el-Rahman al-Iraqi, who has taken 
Zarqawi's place, may confine the struggle to Iraq only. 
In that case, the gain will be all ours.  Although the 
US accomplishment is very nice, the Americans could 
learn fairly quickly that Jordan and Israel, rather 
than themselves, are its main beneficiaries." 
 
IV.  "Who's Sad About Zarqawi?" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized (6/9): "Zarqawi is gone, and we can only 
wish Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki success in 
fulfilling his pledge to take the same action against 
any terrorist successor.  Ultimately, it is hard to see 
how Iraq can win its war for democracy if its radical 
neighbor Iran obtains a nuclear umbrella that would 
allow it to increase support for terrorism throughout 
the region.  The bravery of the American, British, and 
other coalition soldiers fighting with Iraqis for 
democracy has yet to be matched by the determination of 
Western leaders to employ the ample economic and 
diplomatic, let alone military, means at their disposal 
to face down Iran.  The epicenter of the terror is 
Tehran." 
 
¶V.  "The Madness Was On Its Way To Us" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (6/9): "In 2004 
[Abu Musab al-Zarqawi] devoted himself to war against 
the Americans, but in recent months he began once again 
to take an interest in us.  Just a few weeks ago, 
people linked to his organization fired Katyusha 
rockets at Kiryat Shmona.   He also complained that 
Hizbullah was preventing his men from acting against 
Israel from the northern border.  The statements made 
by the Shin Bet director this week, about signs of 
establishing global Jihad cells in the West Bank, are 
also probably related to Zarqawi's organization.  For 
Israel, his assassination is more than a morale- 
boosting success against Palestinian terrorism.  This 
man -- with his organization and his madness -- was on 
his way to us." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner and diplomatic 
correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in independent, left- 
leaning Ha'aretz: "Israel, which is committed to close 
coordination with Washington, had no alternative but to 
support [the US offer of talks with Iran].  This is the 
price of Bush's promise 'to come to the aid of Israel 
if it is attacked.'" 
 
Former Editor-in-Chief Moshe Ishon wrote in the 
editorial of nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe: " Israel 
views itself as the principal element to be harmed by 
the rapprochement between Washington and Tehran, which 
is so hard to understand." 
 
Columnist Prof. Amnon Rubinstein, who served as 
(Meretz) education minister, wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "Israel should make use of its 
current status in Washington to join a defense 
alliance, preferably in the context of NATO." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Rethinking the Iranian Option" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner and diplomatic 
correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in independent, left- 
leaning Ha'aretz (6/9): "Bush told Olmert about the 
expected change in direction in US policy at their 
meeting on May 23.  The Prime Minister returned from 
Washington with the assessment that American 
representatives would join the talks.  The American 
condition for dialogue -- that Iran would stop the 
enrichment of uranium -- was also reported in advance 
to Jerusalem.... [Israeli government officials] in 
Jerusalem have expressed satisfaction with the Israeli 
success in persuading the Bush administration, and also 
less friendly governments, that there is not unlimited 
time for diplomatic efforts.  In any case Israel, which 
is committed to close coordination with Washington, had 
no alternative but to support the recent US step. This 
is the price of Bush's promise 'to come to the aid of 
Israel if it is attacked.'" 
 
 
II.  "Worrying Rapprochement Between Washington and 
Tehran" 
 
Former Editor-in-Chief Moshe Ishon wrote in the 
editorial of nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe (6/9): "The 
sudden about face in the US attitude toward Iran has 
raised deep concern in Israeli defense circles.... 
President Bush had so far represented a firm, 
uncompromising policy vis-a-vis a tyrant to human 
society in general and the Jewish people in 
particular.... There's no doubt that Israel views 
itself as the principal element to be harmed by the 
rapprochement between Washington and Tehran, which is 
so hard to understand." 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  "Iran Is Here" 
 
Columnist Prof. Amnon Rubinstein, who served as 
(Meretz) education minister, wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (6/9): "The [Israeli] government's 
rhetoric states that it is the international community 
that must provide the answer [to the Iranian threat], 
since a nuclear Iran would be a threat to the entire 
world.   This argument is correct, but we all know what 
the first, key target of [the Iranian] arming is.... 
[Besides building an adequate defense] Israel should 
make use of its current status in Washington to join a 
defense alliance, preferably in the context of NATO.. 
Such an alliance  might be a warning signal to the 
Tehran rulers.  Then, and only then, could the turn of 
a preventive step arrive -- not by Israel but by a 
coalition anxious about a nuclear Iran." 
 
------------------------ 
¶3.  US-Israel Relations: 
------------------------ 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (6/9): "The crisis between the 
American defense establishment and its Israeli 
counterpart ... is far from over." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"The Crisis Is At Its Climax" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (6/9): "Make no mistake.... The crisis 
between the American defense establishment and its 
Israeli counterpart ... is far from over.  Israel has 
not yet fulfilled its commitments.... The Americans are 
steaming.... They are freezing contacts on many other 
matters until Israel makes good on its promises.  The 
Israeli Ministry of Defense will deny this, give 
reassurances, and promise.  Reality -- the one that 
takes place deep inside the talks -- is totally 
different." 
 
JONES