02ANKARA8581
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 008581 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
                    ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Sezer: The headscarf cannot be accepted in public places - 
Hurriyet 
Cyprus issue in deadlock - Sabah 
Government urges Denktas to consider UN plan - Milliyet 
 
 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
The Last word on the headscarf comes from the President - 
Cumhuriyet 
President Sezer warns Government about headscarf issue - 
Zaman 
Seven drawbacks of Cyprus Plan - Cumhuriyet 
US trains volunteers for possible Iraq operation - Yeni 
Safak 
US News & World Report: Bush Administration plans a three- 
phase administration in Iraq - Radikal 
The Government will implement a new economic program - Zaman 
NGOs to meet at `Turkey Platform' in Brussels - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Business World: Government Program is promising - Dunya 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Headscarf issue: All papers and TV channels give extensive 
coverage to President Sezer's remarks on the headscarf 
issue.  Sunday's "Milliyet" reports that President Sezer was 
disturbed by the headscarf of Parliament Speaker Bulent 
Arinc's wife during protocol ceremonies at Esenboga Airport. 
Arinc and his wife had gone to see Sezer off to and welcome 
him back from Prague.  Today's papers draw attention to 
Sezer's harsh warnings on the headscarf issue.  In a meeting 
with a group of teachers in the presidential palace on 
Sunday, Sezer said that the headscarf cannot be used in 
public places, that it had been banned in the past, and that 
a new debate on the issue will only trigger unnecessary 
controversy and tension. "Cumhuriyet" notes that Sezer 
emphasized the importance of respect for secular principles. 
However, today's "Zaman" draws attention to the words of 
Deputy Prime Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin, who said that the 
government would resolve the headscarf issue in universities 
by carrying out certain constitutional amendments. 
 
 
Cyprus: Today's "Radikal" reports FM Yakis' visit to TRNC 
president Denktas in New York, during which Yakis reportedly 
urged Denktas to accept the UN plan as a basis for talks on 
Cyprus.  "Radikal" notes that this is the first pressure 
exerted on Denktas by Turkey.  "Milliyet" reports that 
Turkey is pressuring Denktas to begin discussions. 
"Cumhuriyet" draws attention to the remarks of Mumtaz 
Soysal, a Denktas advisor, that the Turkish side would not 
reject the UN Cyprus plan but use it as a reference point in 
direct peace talks.  Soysal also draws attention to seven 
drawbacks of the plan, which are: 1. The new state is 
founded through constitutional changes, but the Turkish side 
wants to make an interstate agreement; 2. The Turkish side 
says that to protect the Turkish Cypriots, the TRNC must be 
recognized shortly before the signing of an agreement; 3. 
Security guarantees in the UN document are worse than the 
ones in 1960; 4. Greek Cypriots who migrate to the Turkish 
side will damage political equality; 5. Territorial 
regulations in the Annan plan are unfair; 6. Demands for 
exchange of property will create tensions; 7. The maps will 
create huge security problems. 
 
 
Iraq: Today's "Radikal," citing US News and World Report, 
describes a Bush Administration plan for a three-stage 
administration in a post-Saddam Iraq.  In the first stage, 
Iraq will be administered by a US general for 6-12 months. 
In the second stage, the authority of Iraqi officials' will 
increase and the number of the US soldiers will be reduced. 
This phase will begin after two years.  In the third phase, 
the administration will be passed to a government that will 
represent all segments of the Iraqi population. 
"Cumhuriyet," citing the London-based Essark-ul Avsat 
newspaper, reports that the US is establishing a `Volunteer 
Army' against Saddam in Northern Iraq.  According to Essark- 
Ul Avsat, the US has begun training 5,000 volunteers in 
Northern Iraq.  In exchange, the volunteers are being 
promised 5,000 dollars in cash and a round-trip ticket to 
the US. 
 
 
EU: "Turkiye" reports that AKP leader Erdogan will begin a 
new EU tour today.  Starting from Portugal, Erdogan will 
visit Finland, Sweden, France, Luxembourg and the 
Netherlands.  Meanwhile, representatives of non-governmental 
organizations are also making preparations for an EU blitz. 
More than 200 businessmen will go to Brussels for a meeting 
of the "Turkish Platform," a consortium of NGOs. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
Turkey/Cyprus-EU-ESDI 
 
 
"Erdogan and foreign policy" 
Mehmet Ocaktan notes the change of foreign policy rhetoric 
with the new leadership in Islamic-intellectual Yeni Safak 
(11/25): "AKP leader Tayyip Erdogan has brought about a 
revolutionary change on foreign policy issues.  On the 
Cyprus issue, for instance, we have seen only unrealistic 
approaches from Turkish politicians until Erdogan dared to 
express the rather revolutionary suggestion that EU 
membership, ESDI and Cyprus be considered as a package. 
Erdogan emphasizes the fact that no much we may oppose this 
kind of approach, the EU countries are drawing a direct link 
between Cyprus and Turkey's EU membership.  Turkey should 
stop acting like an ostrich, Erdogan says, and pull its head 
out of the sand.  This new approach amounts to a deep 
philosophical change in Turkish foreign policy, which has 
been built under conflict and mistrust.  . And it demands a 
test of sincerity test both for Brussels and for certain 
power centers in Ankara." 
 
 
"Listen to the Cypriots" 
Erdal Guven noted in liberal-intellectual Radikal (11/24): 
"Denktas is certainly a part of the settlement process, but 
it would be wrong to reduce the entire Cyprus issue to the 
views of Denktas.  State policy so far has caused the Cyprus 
issue to become Turkey's number one problem because the 
policy envisioned a Denktas-MFA-Military triangle.  However, 
northern Cyprus has opposition parties, NGOs and unions, as 
well as media.  It would be very wrong to ignore what these 
groups have to say, as previous Turkish governments have 
done.  These groups are trying to express their support for 
a settlement and are asking that this historic opportunity 
not be missed."