02ANKARA8343
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Nov 15 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 008343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                    ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Gurel, the outgoing hawk - Milliyet 
Gurel: UN plan leaked to Greek Cypriots beforehand - 
Hurriyet 
Denktas cautious about Cyprus plan - Turkiye 
Verheugen: Too early for EU accession date - Sabah 
Erdogan's positive messages to Europe - Vatan 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Military has concerns about Annan's Cyprus plan - Cumhuriyet 
Last convulsion of the hawks: Gurel slams all - Radikal 
Gen. Ozkok: Won't let Turkey's rights be violated in Cyprus 
- Zaman 
Solana: We want Turkey close to the EU - Yeni Safak 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
AKP vows to continue structural reform - Dunya 
TRNC businessmen: Not ready for the EU - Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Erdogan: AKP leader Erdogan will be received by President 
Sezer on Friday for consultations on the new Prime Minister 
and cabinet members.  Erdogan will meet with TGS Chief 
General Ozkok Friday afternoon.  Papers remind that the 
"caretaker" Prime Minister appointed by Sezer will remain in 
office until Erdogan enters the parliament via by-elections 
before March.  Papers see AKP deputy chairman Abdullah Gul 
as the strongest candidate for the post of Prime Minister. 
Erdogan is due to travel to the TRNC this weekend, and will 
commence his European tour next week. 
 
 
Cyprus: Dailies report that UN Secretary General Annan has 
sent a letter to Cypriot leaders Denktas and Clerides, 
urging them to compromise before the EU Copenhagen Summit, 
and advising them to discuss `details of secondary 
importance' in February.  TGS Chief General Ozkok said 
Turkey would not allow developments that would threaten 
peace and tranquility in Cyprus, reports say.  Ozkok warned 
that Greek Cypriots' EU accession would harm peace and 
stability in the Eastern Mediterranean.  "Cumhuriyet" 
carries an extensive front-page article about TGS concerns 
about the  Cyprus plan: TGS believes that territorial 
concessions expected from the Turkish side are too big, that 
the settlement of Greek Cypriots in Turkish territory will 
gradually transform Cyprus into a Greek Cypriot island, and 
that the displacement of about 80,000 Turkish Cypriots will 
damage the social and economic structure of the island, 
Cumhuriyet stresses.  In a last minute `hawkish struggle,' 
outgoing Foreign Minister Gurel strongly criticized the UN 
Cyprus plan, saying that aspects of the plan dealing with 
territory and the return of displaced Cypriots were 
unacceptable, papers report.  Gurel blamed the UN for 
allegedly preparing the plan together with the Greek 
Cypriots.  "Sabah" finds such as  intervention by the 
outgoing government to be unacceptable. 
 
 
Iraq: Dailies report that the international community was 
`temporarily relieved' by Saddam Hussein's unconditional 
acceptance of UNSC Resolution 1441 for arms inspection in 
Iraq.  Papers report the UN inspection team headed by Hans 
Blix will go to Baghad on Monday to begin the `largest 
weapons inspection operation in history.'  Two Turkish 
officers will take part in the delegation, reports say. 
Meanwhile, dailies report that visiting Northern Iraqi 
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) leader Talabani was 
unable to get an appointment with AKP leader Erdogan and CHP 
leader Baykal.  "Cumhuriyet" reports  that KDP leader 
Barzani has turned down Ankara's invitation for 
consultations, saying he had a pre-scheduled program in 
Syria. 
 
 
Ambassador Pearson on TDN: The English daily Turkish Daily 
News (TDN) carries an op-ed by the U.S. Ambassador to 
Ankara, Robert Pearson on U.S.-Turkey relations.  In his 
article `American-Turkish relations after November 3: 
Continuity and partnership,'  Ambassador Pearson briefly 
outlines the evolution of bilateral relations, and discussed 
the key policy issues for Turkey such as the EU, Cyprus, 
Iraq, political and economic reforms, and human rights. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Cyprus Peace Plan 
 
 
"Kofi Annan's Cyprus Plan" 
Kamuran Ozbir wrote in nationalist Ortadogu (11/15): 
"Sources close to diplomatic circles tell us that the 
initial evaluation of Kofi Annan's Cyprus plan was deemed 
positive, particularly because of its recognition of the 
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.  There are, however, 
certain elements which cause serious concern, such as 
territorial concessions, property issues, and demographic 
movements.  . It seems that the Turkish Foreign Ministry 
will have to conduct a comprehensive study of the plan, 
which might take at least a couple of days, and leave the 
matter for a final decision at the upcoming National 
Security Council meeting at the end of November." 
 
 
"Style is important on the Cyprus issue" 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mass appeal Hurriyet (11/15): "The 
current situation calls for a diplomatic juggling act.  . 
The upcoming Copenhagen summit is not only going to evaluate 
the Cyprus situation in light of current developments, but 
also make more binding decisions for Turkey.  The EU's 
Accession Partnership Document clearly draws a direct link 
between Turkey's EU process and Cyprus issue. . We do not 
mean to say `let's give away Cyprus and get rid of this 
issue.'  Yet we don't have to reject efforts for a 
settlement with crude rhetoric either.  The Turkish side 
should announce its readiness to negotiate the Annan plan." 
 
 
"What is Ankara's position?" 
Sami Kohen wrote in mass appeal Milliyet (11/15): "There are 
certain parts to which the Turkish side would object, such 
as the territorial concessions and demographic movements. 
Yet the plan, very positively, verifies the equality and 
sovereignty of the two sides -- something that we have been 
working for years to achieve.  Now is the time to think 
realistically and act pragmatically.  Rejection of the plan 
will definitely work against the interests of Turkey as well 
as Turkish Cypriots."