03ANKARA2741
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, APRIL 28, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                    -------------------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
FM Gul: Turkish special teams in coordination with U.S. 
military - Turkiye 
Barzani: No need for Americans to stay - Hurriyet 
Barzani to U.S.: Leave when you are done - Turkiye 
U.S. troops order peshmerge to leave Mosul - Milliyet 
Americans disarming peshmerge - Aksam 
Saddam's family in Syria - Hurriyet 
Tarik Aziz sold Saddam for a luxurious residence in England 
- Sabah 
Americans quietly help the poor in Batman - Hurriyet 
Turkey's Baghdad embassy to reopen in May - Sabah 4/27 
Historic Easter in Cyprus - Vatan 
Greek Cypriots rush North for Easter - Milliyet 
Bush: Al-Sahaf was wonderful, a classic - Aksam 4/26 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Rumsfeld to `inspect' Baghdad - Cumhuriyet 
Iraqi exiles preparing to return, help the new 
administration - Radikal 4/27 
Iraqi civilians toughening against U.S. troops - Zaman 4/27 
Traces of chemical weapons in Iraq's north - Yeni  Safak 
Greek Cypriots ignore administration, go North - Zaman 4/26 
Thousands of Greek Cypriots attend mass in North - 
Cumhuriyet 
Greek Cypriots amazed by Turks' hospitality - Zaman 4/27 
Easter joy in Cyprus - Radikal 
Turks welcome Greeks in North with flowers, family photos - 
Cumhuriyet 4/27 
Council of Europe: Free passage a historic step in Cyprus - 
Radikal 4/26 
People, money flowing to North Cyprus - Cumhuriyet 4/26 
Bush did not mention `Genocide' - Milliyet 4/26 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Turkish firms invested $1 billion in Balkan countries in 
2002 - Dunya 
Government to pardon illegally-built tourist facilities  - 
Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: Weekend papers carry Foreign Minister Gul's denial of 
reports that a Turkish special forces unit was expelled from 
Northern Iraq for providing weapons to the Turkomen.  Gul 
said that special teams have merely accompanied humanitarian 
aid convoys, and added that the misunderstanding over the 
issue had been worked out with Americans.  However, 
Saturday's "Hurriyet" says that Ankara, upset that the 
Americans leaked the issue to the press, is expected to 
retaliate by disclosing some CIA operatives in Turkey. 
Saturday's papers also carry a `correction' by Boucher and 
Wolfowitz of Jay Garner's remarks about Kirkuk being a 
`Kurdish city.'  Monday's papers report that U.S. forces in 
Northern Iraq have ordered Kurdish peshmerge in Mosul and 
Kirkuk to cease armed patrols or face possible force by 
coalition units.  KDP leader Barzani reiterated his call for 
U.S. forces to leave Iraq once an interim government is 
formed.  Monday's "Hurriyet" reports that U.S. and Dutch 
troops that who had been in Batman to set up Patriot systems 
during the war distributed 7 tons of humanitarian aid to 
poor families before leaving town.  Batman's poor families 
voiced their appreciation to the press, saying it was 
considerate of the Americans and the Dutch to do the 
distribution quietly. 
 
 
President Bush's Armenian Day message: President Bush 
followed recent practice by refraining from use of the word 
`genocide' in his message to commemorate the Armenian Day, 
Saturdays' papers report.  Bush praised the dialogue between 
Turkish and Armenian groups in an effort to research their 
common history. 
 
 
Congressman Wexler in Turkey: Congressman Robert Wexler 
attended the Turkey- U.S. Business Council meeting in 
Istanbul on Sunday.  Wexler said during meetings with 
Turkish businessmen that the economy, not politics, should 
be given priority in Iraq's rebuilding process.  Wexler was 
positive about Turkish businessmen having a role in Iraq's 
reconstruction.  Wexler later proceeded to Ankara, where he 
will hold meetings with Turkey's political leaders on 
Monday. 
 
 
Cyprus: 15,000 Turkish Cypriots have made day trips to the 
south, and about 45,000 Greek Cypriots visited the north 
during the first five days of unrestricted travel on the 
island, all dailies report.  Greeks who visited the Turkish 
sector for the first time after leaving their homes in 1974 
were `astounded' by the Turks' hospitality.  Turks visiting 
the Greek sector were also given a warm welcome.  The 
unexpectedly high number of Greek Cypriots traveling to the 
north has given a considerable boost to the ailing tourism 
industry in the Turkish sector.  Weekend papers report that 
in an effort to preempt the Greek Cypriot administration's 
effort to facilitate bilateral trade, the Turkish Cypriot 
government is preparing to implement new measures to boost 
bilateral commercial activities.  The Turkish administration 
is considering allowing overnight stay for Greeks visiting 
the north on weekends.  Papers expect free trade to begin 
between the two sides on the island. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Post Saddam governance 
 
 
"Future of Iraq and Shiites" 
Yasemin Congar wrote in mass appeal Milliyet (4/28): 
"Washington plans for a transition democratic regime in Iraq 
to begin functioning by the end of May.  The Bush 
administration is aware that time is short, but is not 
pessimistic about achieving the goal. . Regarding the 
ongoing worry about an Iranian-type radicalism in Iraq, US 
officials are not singing with a single voice.  Secretary 
Rumsfeld clearly said that the US will not allow an Iranian- 
type of regime in Iraq.  Yet State Department officials 
acknowledge that the US continues to be in dialogue with the 
Shiites, and note that the Tehran-based Supreme Council of 
Islamic Revolution of Iraq (SCIRI) could play a positive 
role in the transition process.  Their message is `an 
Islamic-based regime in Iraq is a possibility if the 
majority of Iraqi people support it.'  . When I mentioned 
all of this to a US diplomat, the response was as follows: 
`It is up to the Iraqis to decide.  We will not let a new 
dictatorship emerge, but we are not going to impose a model 
either.  Yet I don't think that Iraq will adopt a Turkey- 
style secular model.'" 
 
 
"Turkey-Iran and the Turkmen" 
Asli Aydintasbas wrote in mass appeal Sabah (4/28): "The 
Turkish foreign policy mechanism has become isolated on the 
Iraq issue.  Even today, Turkish foreign policy makers 
continue to produce `worried' statements instead of 
producing new policies in the light of colossal developments 
in our immediate neighborhood.  . For instance, Jay Garner 
talked about Kirkuk as being a Kurdish city, and received a 
harsh reaction from Ankara, which resulted in Ambassador 
Pearson being summoned to the Foreign Ministry.  Ankara is 
right to react, and Garner's statement is certainly 
unpleasant.  However, Turkey has also failed to present an 
active policy on the Kirkuk issue, contenting itself instead 
with declaring `red lines.'  . While Turkey fails to be an 
active player in the game, Iran continues to push the 
limits.  During the Iraqi opposition meeting in Erbil, the 
Iranian presence was significant with its agents, 
journalists, and an official delegation.  Iranian influence 
is a fact, not only in the Shiite areas in the southern 
Iraq, but also in the north and in Baghdad. ... There was 
even an indirect negotiation between Iran and the US in 
order to give final shape to the statement at the Erbil 
meeting.  Iran is certainly one of the major players during 
the transition period of Iraq, and will remain so in the 
upcoming administration.  Meanwhile, Turkey is simply not 
seen at all." 
 
 
PEARSON