03ANKARA1567
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001567 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 12, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
The EU blackmail - Hurriyet 
Erdogan works to form his cabinet - Hurriyet 
Erdogan finds an EU warning on his first day - Sabah 
EU warns Turkey: What bad timing - Milliyet 
Turkey faces the threat of being called an invader - Aksam 
EU gives a harsh warning - Vatan 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
US military work is under tight supervision - Cumhuriyet 
The Cyprus nightmare begins - Radikal 
Erdogan's victory - Yeni Safak 
Cyprus settlement at a complete dead-end/EU threatens Turkey 
- Zaman 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
IMF conditionality for US economic aid - Dunya 
Chhibber retracts comments - Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
New government: Papers report that the new cabinet will be 
announced either today or tomorrow under the leadership of 
Tayyip Erdogan.  Erdogan was quoted as saying there would be 
`no significant change' in the cabinet, but the general 
expectation in the press is that a government reshuffle will 
reduce the total number of ministers from 25 to 23.  Newly- 
resigned Prime Minister Gul is expected to become Foreign 
Minister and Deputy PM in the 59th government. 
 
 
Iraq: Stories analyzes the Iraq issue from two angles.  The 
ongoing military work and build-up in southeast Turkey, and 
the possible timing of the authorization request from the 
parliament.  Television reports speculate that Erdogan will 
leave anti-war ministers out of the cabinet list, so that 
the parliament will have an easier time passing the 
resolution.  The general expectation is that the issue will 
be taken up first thing after the  new government takes 
charge.  "Hurriyet" notes that during the phone call from 
President Bush to Erdogan, the US asked permission for an 
air corridor, but Erdogan said such a decision would require 
parliamentary approval.  A story in "Radikal" notes that all 
of the ongoing US military activities is carried under the 
guidance and coordination of the Turkish military.  Using 
the Turkish General Staff as its source, the story 
highlights that the first authorization decree provided a 
certain degree of military activities for the US, and that 
the US has never gone beyond the authorized limits. 
Meanwhile "Yeni Safak" writes that due to insistence of some 
CHP parliamentarians, the TGS is going to send a group of 
military inspectors to the sites to ensure that US 
activities are within the framework of the agreement. 
Opposition leader Baykal sharply criticized the government 
for its handling of the Iraq issue.  Baykal accused the 
government of `making a promise for the second authorization 
decree behind the scenes.'  Otherwise, Baykal argues, there 
would be no large US military build-up in Turkey's border 
area. 
 
 
Cyprus: Failure of the Annan plan is a main highlight in 
today's Turkish press.  The front-page stories all note two 
warnings from the EU:  that Turkey will be viewed as an 
`occupying force' on EU territory, and that the failure of 
the Annan Plan will be an obstacle to Turkey's efforts to 
begin membership negotiations with the EU. Most newspapers 
interpret the EU warnings either blackmail or a threat. 
"Radikal" notes that the Cyprus issue is turning into a 
nightmare, while the nationalist "Ortadogu" applauds Denktas 
for being solid and strong against `internal and external 
traitors.' 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
a) Iraq/UN process 
b) Cyprus 
 
 
"The UN needs a reform" 
Yilmaz Oztuna opined in the mass appeal-conservative Turkiye 
(3/12): "Under its current structure, the United Nations is 
being used as a means to serve the interests of certain 
countries.  It has failed to present itself as above 
interests of individual states, and it has not been fully 
obeying its founding laws and principles.   The UN is 
urgently in need of a reform process in order not to turn it 
into a kind of `League of Nations.'  The restructuring also 
requires a change in UNSC membership.  . For example, oddly 
enough, Japan and India have never been a part of the 
Security Council.  Turkey, for instance, was never elected 
to the UNSC while three African nations, two of which are 
former French colonies, have membership.  The US, a driving 
force in both NATO and the UN, is well aware of the need for 
reform.  Although very few Turkish politicians are aware of 
this, the fact of the matter is that the US is in the 
process of establishing a new world order - a Pax 
Americana." 
 
 
"Cyprus issue requires a miracle" 
Erdal Guven analyzed the current status of the Cyprus issue 
in the liberal-intellectual Radikal (3/12): "Unfortunately, 
the Cyprus question has now fully consumed another 
settlement effort to no avail.  UNSG Annan has clearly given 
up on the plan he designed and continually referred to as a 
`last chance.'  The plan itself is still on the table, yet 
there is no authority any more to claim responsibility for 
it.  Without the UN's mediation, it will be a miracle if the 
two sides reach a settlement by themselves.  . I am afraid 
the Turkish Cypriot side is rapidly turning into another 
`East Germany.'" 
PEARSON