03ANKARA5227
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181236Z Aug 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005227 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Iraq's daily loss from oil pipeline sabotage $7 million - 
Hurriyet 
Second bomb attack hits Turkey oil pipeline - Aksam 
Reuters cameraman killed in Iraq by U.S. troops - Milliyet 
UK asks UN to lift sanctions on Libya - Turkiye 
Wanted: The Uzan Family - Sabah 
Democrats want Commander Wesley Clark against Bush - Sabah 
Hambali would have attacked APEC Summit - Aksam 8/17 
Lights back on in New York - Huriyet 8/17 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Sabotage paralyzes Iraqi economy - Radikal 
Shiites in Baghdad still furious at Americans - Zaman 
U.S. worried about Sunni-Shiite alliance - Radikal 
Annan wants roadmap for Iraq - Zaman 8/17 
Iraqi Kurds oppose Pakistani troops in Iraq - Milliyet 8/17 
Uzans not at home - Yeni Safak 
50 million Americans meet life without electricity, phone, 
water - Radikal 8/16 
New Yorkers slept on the streets - Zaman 8/16 
U.S. closes People's Mujahidiin's Washington office - 
Cumhuriyet 8/17 
Hoon to pay the price for Kelly suicide - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Turkish troops for Iraq peacekeeping: "Cumhuriyet" expects 
Washington to give a written response to Ankara regarding 
the deployment of Turkish troops in Iraq.  The Americans 
will await Turkey's political decision on the issue before 
holding discussions about Turkey's sensitivities concerning 
Iraq.  The GOT will ask the U.S. for a role in the political 
future of Iraq in order to guarantee AKP lawmakers' approval 
for deployment of troops in Iraq, "Cumhuriyet" adds. 
 
 
Weekend papers report that Ankara will send two separate 
delegations of parliamentarians along with MFA and 
intelligence officials to Iraq for talks with ethnic and 
religious communities there next week.  A delegation of 
Iraqi tribal chiefs will visit Ankara in the first week of 
September. 
 
 
The TGS has estimated the annual cost of sending troops to 
Iraq to be around $60 million, with a possible additional 
$20 million to cover `extraordinary developments.' 
"Hurriyet" reports that it remains to be decided whether 
Turkey or the United States will cover the cost of a Turkish 
deployment. 
 
 
PUK opposes a Turkish military presence in Iraq: During his 
recent visit to Japan, Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) 
leader Talabani voiced opposition to the deployment of 
Turkish troops in Iraq.  Talabani said he opposed 
deployments of forces not only from Turkey, but from all 
neighboring countries.  Sunday papers report that the U.S. 
Administration did not take Talabani seriously, and an 
unnamed Washington official said that Turkey should not pay 
attention to Talabani's remarks.  Meanwhile, the KDP denied 
press reports that the Kurds would deny access to Turkish 
troops in Iraq, and vowed to abide by the decision of the 
Iraqi central government. 
 
 
Sabotage on Iraqi pipeline: All Monday papers report about 
the paralyzing effect of recent bomb attacks against Iraq's 
oil pipeline between Kirkuk and Yumurtalik.  Paul Bremer, 
head of the Provisional Authority in Iraq, estaimated Iraq's 
daily losses from the attacks at $7 million daily.  The 
reports view the sabotage as a heavy blow on the Iraqi 
economy. 
 
 
U.S. Ambassador Edelman arrives in Ankara: The new U.S. 
Ambassador to Ankara, Eric Edelman, arrived with his family 
in the Turkish capital on Friday.  In a statement at 
Ankara's Esenboga Airport, Edelman touched on the 
significance of relations between the two countries. 
Ambassador Edelman also noted his personal connection to 
Turkey, noting that his mother was born in Istanbul, and 
that his uncle was a professor at the University of Ankara 
31 years ago. 
 
 
Ankara opposes Israel's Haram-al-Sharif decision: Ankara has 
asked Washington to put pressure on Israel to reverse an 
Israeli decision to open the Haram-al-Sharif shrine to non- 
Muslim tourists, Saturday's "Zaman" reports.  Ankara is 
concerned that a new conflict over Haram-al-Sharif might 
lead to anti-American protests in Turkey, which would 
eventually affect attitudes of Turkish lawmakers about the 
deployment of peacekeeping troops in Iraq. 
 
 
Arrest warrant for the Uzan family: The prosecutor's office 
has issued an arrest warrant for several Uzan family members 
and former administrators at Imarbank for their refusal to 
hand over documents to the Banking Supervisory Board (BDDK). 
Police raided eight of the Uzans' residences on Sunday, but 
could not find the family members.  Turkey's border gates 
and airports have been warned against possible attempts by 
family members to flee the country. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq 
 
 
"Troops to Iraq" 
Hasan Unal argued in the Islamist-intellectual Zaman (8/18): 
"Those who strongly advocate Turkey sending troops to Iraq 
are avoiding the fact that there are increasing signs that 
indicate more instability in the days ahead.  The US has 
made some mistakes along the way, which have served to 
aggravate the problems with the Shiites.  The Shiites have 
not started an armed struggle against the US, but things are 
headed that way.  . Given the current facts, it does not 
seem logical for Turkey to send its soldiers there unless a 
calendar is established for military engagement as well as 
political restructuring.  At this stage, a wait-and-see 
attitude seems like the most rational position for Turkey. 
We should gain some time to take into account the positions 
of other countries." 
 
 
"UN-Iraq and Turkey" 
Zafer Atay wrote in the economic-political Dunya (8/18): 
"The UNSC resolution is vague enough for various 
interpretations.  The gist of the decision is not about the 
establishment of a peacekeeping force, but it provides a 
basis for the Iraqi Governing Council to ask for troops from 
other countries. . The issue of a Turkish military presence 
in Iraq is subject to three different arguments here in 
Turkey.  There are those who strongly disagree with Turkish 
military participation in Iraq; others who strongly support 
Turkish soldiers being sent there imminently; and those who 
support Turkey's presence in Iraq as long as certain 
conditions are addressed.  Conditions could include a new UN 
decision, support from neighboring countries, and of course 
the approval of the Turkish parliament.  It seems that the 
AKP is not unified on the matter either.  Given the 
circumstances, Turkey is heading toward some very hectic 
days." 
 
 
DEUTSCH