04ANKARA1276
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, WEDNESDAY
Wed Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001276 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, WEDNESDAY 
MARCH 3, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
British FM Straw: Reforms in Turkey cannot be reversed - 
Hurriyet 
Erdogan acknowledges exploitation of religion was wrong - 
Hurriyet 
Shiite celebrations in Iraq overshadowed by bombs - Hurriyet 
Ashura disaster in Karbala - Sabah 
Al-Qaida in Karbala: 182 Dead - Milliyet 
Speaker of EU Parliament: Time to implement reforms - 
Turkiye 
Cox: Europe views Leyla Zana as a symbol - Aksam 
Grossman shows Turkey as a model - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Bloody day in Iraq: 182 Dead - Radikal 
Weston remarks on referenda upset Denktas - Radikal 
Bloody attacks in Iraq's Shiite region - Cumhuriyet 
Civil war brewing in Iraq -Yeni Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Grossman continues tour on Greater Middle East:  Dailies 
report that State Department Undersecretary Marc Grossman, 
during his visit to Egypt, said that Turkey could be an 
important model for the Arab world.  Grossman stressed the 
democratic and Muslim characteristics of Turkey, and drew 
attention to Turkey's strong ties with the West and the rest 
of the world.  "Zaman" reports, however, that Grossman 
failed to get from the Egyptians the support he had sought 
for the U.S. Greater Middle East initiative. 
 
 
MFA U/S Ziyal due in Israel:  MFA Undersecretary Ambassador 
Ugur Ziyal will be in Israel today and tomorrow for regular 
political consultations.  Papers speculate that Turkey's 
prospective role as mediator between Israel and Syria will 
be discussed.  "Radikal" notes the "coincidence" that Ziyal 
is going to Israel on the eve of Grossman's visit to Ankara. 
 
 
Cyprus:  The Cypriot sides continued discussions about a bi- 
zonal political structure during Tuesday's Cyprus talks, 
papers report, but the sides once again failed to reach 
agreement.  TRNC leader Denktas complained that the Greek 
Cypriots have rejected all proposals made by the Turkish 
side, claiming that the proposed changes are inconsistent 
with the Annan Plan.  Denktas criticized US Special Cyprus 
Coordinator Weston for warning Cypriots that those who would 
reject the plan in a referendum will "pay a heavy price." 
Denktas characterized Weston's comments as "unacceptable 
pressure and a threat."  Meanwhile, TRNC leaders Mehmet Ali 
Talat and Serdar Denktas were `summoned' to Ankara by the 
MFA on Tuesday.  Talat said that the Turkish side aimed at 
filling in all the blanks so that there are no issues left 
to be decided after Turkey and Greece join the negotiations 
on March 21.  Foreign Minister Gul said the people of Cyprus 
would make the final decision regarding the future of the 
island.  :Hurriyet" reports that the Turkish Cypriot side is 
working to disrupt Greek Cypriot `maneuvers' to stall the 
Cyprus talks until Greek Cyprus joins the EU on May 1. 
Meanwhile, "Sabah" claims that Prime Minister Erdogan is 
planning a `surprise' visit to Greece in the coming days. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIALS 
Greater Middle East Initiative; Cyprus 
 
 
"Turkey and GME project" 
Cuneyt Ulsever opined in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (3/3): 
"I don't think Turkey will be the most important part of the 
Greater Middle East initiative. .  It is true that Turkey is 
the most powerful country in the region, and that it stands 
close to the West, particularly to the US. .  Turkey is 
neither the center, nor a significant element of the GME 
project - an initiative which has been developed without the 
inclusion of Turkey.  The GME is a project launched for the 
Arab world.  That said, however, Turkey may contribute to 
some specific projects within the GME framework." 
 
 
"Turkey in the GME" 
Dr. Husnu Mahalli wrote in the pro-Islamic/opinion-maker 
"Yeni Safak" (3/3):  "FM Gul said on TV last Sunday that 
Turkey would neither be a tool, nor a contractor of the US 
Greater Middle East project.  He added that the GME 
initiative does not stand a chance unless the Palestine 
problem is resolved. .  PM Erdogan has recently said that 
the GME should be perceived as a project of cultures and 
civilizations, not merely a geographical initiative.  If not 
approved by countries in the region, the GME initiative has 
no chance, Erdogan stressed.  Erdogan strongly denounced the 
`Wall of Shame' put up by Israel. .  Despite efforts by 
Washington to make Turkey, together with Israel, the most 
important element of the GME project, Erdogan and Gul have 
not changed their well-known attitudes.  Those who think 
that the AK Party will turn a blind eye to the sufferings of 
the people of Palestine are wrong.  Ankara's attitude 
regarding the issue is more honorable than many Arab 
administrations. .  Turkey has a responsibility toward the 
people of Palestine. .  Turkey took a significant decision 
by rejecting the March 1 troops decree, and in doing so, 
Turkey has become the leader of its own GME initiative. 
Americans are aware of this fact, which is why they are 
anxious to make Turkey a player in the US GME project." 
 
 
"Greater Middle East" 
Hasan Cemal observed in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (3/3): 
"In 1997, a `Project for a New American Century' was 
launched in coordination with the Israeli lobby in 
Washington.  Written by Rumsfeld, Wolfowitz, Perle and the 
chief ideologue of the Neo-Cons, Bernard Lewis, the project 
was seeking an answer to the question of how the US could 
rule the world.  This group in the US Administration `pushed 
the button' on the project following the election of George 
Bush and the painful events of 9/11. .  Saddam was toppled 
and has been captured, but Iraq is still far from being 
stable.  There is no even a light at the end of the tunnel 
regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  How can the 
Greater Middle East project become a reality as long as 
these two problems exist?  How can the region's regimes and 
leaders, who regard regime changes, freedom and democracy as 
the biggest threats to their existence, ever accept the GME 
project while the situation in Iraq and Palestine remains 
the same? .  The project looks good on paper.  However, too 
many question marks rise if you delve more deeply into the 
issue." EDELMAN