04ANKARA731
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000731 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Denktas Hesitates: I'll probably go to NY - Hurriyet 
Papadopoulos will go to NY, but makes no promises - Hurriyet 
Annan urges Cypriot sides for referenda on April 21 - Vatan 
First Cyprus round on February 10 - Turkiye 
Denktas to NY, but with a `protest letter' in hand - 
Milliyet 
Boucher denies reports on US aspiration for base in Cyprus - 
Vatan 
Tenet acknowledges Iraq was not `imminent threat' - Sabah 
Shiite leader Sistani survives assassination attempt - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara strives to convince Denktas - Radikal 
Athens, Greek Cypriots ready for Cyprus talks - Zaman 
US demands military base in Cyprus - Cumhuriyet 
Tough warning from Barzani to Erbil attackers - Cumhuriyet 
Bremer pledges full cooperation with UN - Zaman 
US foresees new military role for Turkey in Middle East - 
Cumhuriyet 
Intelligence scandal shakes Blair - Radikal 
Reformists cave in Iran - Cumhuriyet 
Sharon questioned in bribery scandal - Zaman 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus:  UNSG Annan has invited Cypriot leaders Denktas and 
Papadopoulos to New York on February 10 for peace 
negotiations on Cyprus.  Annan urged the sides to go agree 
to a negotiation timetable that would lead to referenda on 
the UN blueprint on April 21.  Denktas continues to tbe 
bothered by the referendum condition, but will travel to New 
York for talks on the UN-sponsored peace plan for reunifying 
Cyprus.  "Milliyet" reports, however, that Denktas will show 
up in New York with a `protest paper' in hand.  Papers 
report that State Department Spokesman Boucher denied 
Turkish press stories claiming that the US aspires to set up 
a military base in Cyprus. 
 
 
Amnesty offer for terrorists expires:  The Turkish 
government's amnesty offer for defectors from terror 
organizations expires today.  The law was passed under 
American pressure, and the US had agreed to take political, 
economic and military action against the PKK following 
today's deadline, according to "Milliyet."  The TGS has set 
up a special unit headed by General Kalyoncu to push the 
Americans to take military action against the terror 
organization.  Ankara has reached an accord with Syria and 
Iran for prospective military operations against fleeing 
terrorists. 
 
 
US tailors new security role for Turkey:  The US is 
preparing Turkey to take an active role in its strategy of 
military intervention in the Middle East and its outposts, 
according to "Cumhuriyet."  Washington will consider ways to 
reinforce the military presence of NATO on the Ankara-Cairo 
axis.  With seven new members to join NATO at the Istanbul 
Summit in June, the 26-strong alliance will shift to the 
Morocco-Afghanistan axis.  Turkey will take a role similar 
to that of West Germany during the Cold War, but in a 
different geographical area, the paper claims. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq; Cyprus 
 
 
"The Aftermath of the Erbil Terror Attack" 
Sami Kohen wrote in the mass appeal Milliyet (2/6): "The 
recent terrorist attacks against KDP and PUK headquarters in 
northern Iraq have resulted in much speculation.  Among the 
various theories, the Al Qaida connection now seems most 
likely.  Nevertheless, more time and evidence are needed to 
verify Al Qaida's involvement and intentions.  For the 
larger picture, the Erbil attacks lead us to the following 
conclusions:  Northern Iraq had been the safest part of Iraq 
since the beginning of the war.  The Erbil incident marks a 
new beginning in this respect, making northern Iraq a more 
dangerous place where Pandora's box has been opened.  The 
terrorist attacks in Iraq so far have targeted the UN and 
the coalition partners, particularly the US.  Yet the recent 
attack shows that local institutions as well as local people 
have become new targets for terrorism. . The bloody 
incidents in Erbil have accelerated the nationalist tone 
among the Kurdish population.  Many Kurdish leaders are 
using the Erbil incident as a pretext to argue the urgent 
need for Kurdish autonomy. . If terrorist attacks in 
northern Iraq continue, they would pose a serious threat in 
the region, including for renewed ethnic conflict and the 
possibility of new PKK attacks." 
 
 
"Tough Decision for Denktas" 
Sedat Ergin noted in the mass appeal Hurriyet (2/6): 
"Denktas finds himself in a very crucial dilemma.  If he 
goes to New York, he will have to agree with the Annan Plan 
in its entirety.  If he does not, he will find himself 
blamed for undermining the solution process as well as 
burning his bridges with Turkey's AKP government.  Ankara 
has given UNSG Kofi Annan a `blank check' in the Cyprus 
negotiations and has been urging Denktas to go to New York. 
. It seems that Athens has taken sides with Ankara and 
accepted the UN conditions for the settlement procedure. 
The two key actors, Denktas and Papadopoulos, are still 
trying to see what the other will do.  According to Denktas, 
Papadopoulos will eventually agree to attend the New York 
meetings, because, as Denktas says, `the Annan Plan favors 
him.'  No matter what happens, this is the most critical 
period on the Cyprus issue." 
 
 
DEUTSCH