04ANKARA5751
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, OCTOBER 1-7, 2004
Thu Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 23 ANKARA 005751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, OCTOBER 1-7, 2004 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries about anti-TIP public 
information campaigns, post provides as examples the 
following TIP press reports.  Text of articles originally 
published in Turkish is provided through unofficial local 
FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published October 7 by Radio Free Europe: 
 
     TITLE: Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Tens of thousands of Moldovan women are 
     estimated to have fallen victim to human trafficking. 
     Most victims come from rural areas, where economic 
     hardships and ignorance turn young girls into easy prey 
     for traffickers. RFE/RL spoke with nongovernmental 
     organizations and government officials about measures 
     in place to help those who have fallen victim to such 
     trafficking, and to curb future abuses. 
 
     Chisinau, 6 October 2004 (RFE/RL) -- "I was sold for 
     $2,000. That's how much they asked for me. Once they 
     sold us somewhere, we would not go back. They sold us 
     for good." 
 
     Alina, a petite 23-year-old, was born in a village in 
     central Moldova. She says she wanted to earn money 
     working as a waitress in Turkey during the summer so 
     that she could afford to go to school in Chisinau. 
 
     Alina -- who asked that her real name not be used -- 
     was lured with promises of a job in a bar in Turkey. 
     The traffickers took care of her passport and visa -- 
     every document needed. Two days later, she says, she 
     was in Istanbul. 
 
     "When we would not have enough clients, they would beat 
     us up and lock us up until 9. When I did not want to 
     work, they kept me locked up for a week and beat me." 
 
     But Alina told RFE/RL that she ended up being a 
     prisoner forced to have sex with tourists in a hotel 
     near Istanbul. 
 
     "During the day, we were locked on the third floor of a 
     house with iron bars on the doors and windows. We did 
     not have a TV or a phone. It was very strict. At night, 
     they would take us to a hotel, which had guards and a 
     tall fence around it, so we could not get out. There 
     were people guarding us around the clock," Alina said. 
 
     Twenty-two-year-old Angela is a young woman from a poor 
     family in northern Moldova. She is tall and very thin 
     and is always staring at the floor. 
 
     Angela says she wanted to visit a cousin in Italy who 
     she thought could help her get a job there. But in 
     Chisinau, she contacted the wrong kind of people, 
     hoping they could help her get to Italy cheaply. 
 
     Angela ended up in the United Arab Emirates, via 
     Odessa. Once there, she says she was beaten by Moldovan 
     and Ukrainian pimps and forced to work as a prostitute 
     under the threat of death before being sold to other 
     traffickers. 
 
     "I did not want to go to work as a prostitute. I 
     started crying and said I wanted to go back home, and I 
     did not want to work. They told me, "If you don't work, 
     you'll end up dead and buried in sand in the desert." I 
     got scared, and I went with them. From 9 a.m. to 3 
     p.m., we had to work in a disco. All day long, we were 
     locked up in a house. When we would not have enough 
     clients, they would beat us up and lock us up until 9. 
     When I did not want to work, they kept me locked up for 
     a week and beat me. I got really scared, and I tried to 
     swallow pills to make them get me out of the house [to 
     a hospital]. But they simply sold me in another city," 
     Angela said. 
 
     Alina also says she was beaten. She told RFE/RL how she 
     was treated by traffickers in Turkey. 
 
     "The boss did not beat us himself, but his driver did. 
     I had a period when I felt very sick. I felt I couldn't 
     even walk, and I was trying to make him understand 
     that, "Please, I cannot. Understand me. I cannot work." 
     But he didn't care, and he hit me. He wouldn't pay 
     attention and would beat us, [telling us,] "Move, do 
     the job," and that was it," Alina said. 
     Ion Vizdoga is a lawyer who heads the Center for the 
     Prevention of Human Trafficking, a nongovernmental 
     organization in Moldova. He says traffickers often use 
     violence to force into prostitution girls who have left 
     the country legally, through employment agencies. 
 
     "Those girls who fall prey [to traffickers] are beaten, 
     blackmailed.... In case they refuse to obey, they are 
     also pressured psychologically. Traffickers gather 10 
     to 15 girls, and one of them is publicly beaten up in 
     front of the others. There were also cases when girls 
     were shot or tortured," Vizdoga said. 
     Both Angela and Alina come from rural Moldova, the 
     poorest parts of arguably the poorest country in 
     Europe. The average income in Moldova is estimated to 
     be under $100. But such trafficking in women also 
     afflicts other former communist countries, especially 
     Ukraine, Russia, Romania, and Bulgaria. 
 
     There is no firm information about how many Moldovan 
     women have been trafficked. But Vizdoga says statistics 
     from the International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
     show that 70 percent of the 1,300 women repatriated 
     over the past two years come from rural areas, and that 
     12 percent are minors. 
 
     Most Moldovan women are trafficked to Russia because 
     they don't need visas to enter the country, but also to 
     Turkey, the Gulf states and the Balkans. 
 
     Victims are usually young girls from poor families who 
     graduate from middle school without few, if any, 
     prospects for the future. 
 
     But older women can also fall prey to traffickers. 
 
     Twenty-nine-year-old Mariana is from a village in 
     northern Moldova and spent more than four years in 
     Macedonia after being sold to Serbian traffickers. 
 
     She thought she was being led into Italy, but instead, 
     this is what she says happened. 
 
     MARIANA: When we arrived in Macedonia, we were sent to 
     a policeman's house. The policeman bought girls and 
     then sold them to nightclubs. We spent one month and a 
     half at his place. I did not know where I was and asked 
     him when we were going to Italy. He said, "Italy is 
     here." Then he sold me to a club. 
 
     RFE/RL: Did you know his name? 
 
     MARIANA: Agron. He was an [ethnic] Albanian. [It was 
     in] Tetovo, Gostivar [regions] ... 
 
     RFE/RL: Is he still in business? 
 
     MARIANA: No, he is in prison now. 
 
     Mariana says Agron was regularly importing girls and 
     selling them to bars. During the day, she says, the 
     women were locked up and beaten if they refused to work 
     as prostitutes. 
 
     "The clients were people who came to night clubs, both 
     locals and foreigners, such as Italians, Germans, 
     Bulgarians. Clients would not pay us directly, but they 
     would negotiate with the club owner, who settled the 
     price -- 50 euros per hour, or 100 euros for a longer 
     time," Mariana said. 
 
     The three women -- Alina, Angela, and Mariana -- were 
     lucky to escape from their ordeals with the assistance 
     of NGOs. 
 
     Alina and Angela have been helped by the Center for the 
     Prevention of Human Trafficking. Mariana found support 
     through the International Center for Women's Rights 
     Protection and Promotion "La Strada." 
 
     La Strada has been active in Moldova since 2001, thanks 
     to financing from the Dutch Foreign Ministry and other 
     Western organizations. 
 
     La Strada operates in eight other countries in Central 
     and Eastern Europe -- Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
     Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Macedonia, Poland, and 
     Ukraine. 
 
     Viorelia Rusu, a La Strada activist, says the program 
     also runs a rehabilitation center, which was opened 
     with the help of the International Organization for 
     Migration: 
 
     "After we meet them at the airport, the women and 
     children are placed in asylums, where they get medical, 
     legal, and psychological assistance, as well as 
     assistance in furthering their education and learning a 
     profession. We also try to get them a secure job. Since 
     September 2001, La Strada offered repatriation and post- 
     repatriation assistance to some 200 women, out of whom 
     15 percent were minors, and also assisted more than 250 
     family members, such as children, since 25 percent of 
     human trafficking victims are single mothers," Rusu 
     said. 
 
     The Moldovan authorities have recently taken some long- 
     overdue steps to monitor migration and trafficking. 
     Moldova's Prime Minister Vasile Tarlev spoke with 
     RFE/RL. 
 
     "We took several measures. First of all, we created, 
     for the first time, a department for migration, which 
     began to put order into the data we had. Migration in 
     itself shouldn't be a problem. But [there is a problem] 
     with illegal migration, with human trafficking, with 
     other unwanted phenomena, which are causing obvious 
     complications not only for Moldovan citizens, but also 
     for other countries. The department for migration has 
     already been a success," Tarlev said. 
 
     The government also established a National Anti- 
     Trafficking Committee, which includes government 
     officials and representatives of both NGOs and the 
     Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
 
     Observers, however, question how effective the new 
     efforts will be. 
 
     As for the three victims -- Alina, Angela, and Mariana 
     -- they are now trying to put their lives back 
     together, step by step, although it is a painful 
     process. 
 
     With the help of La Strada and the Center for the 
     Prevention of Human Trafficking, they are studying so 
     they can get normal jobs in Moldova. 
 
     "I'd like to get my life back here in Moldova. I don't 
     want to ever have to go away to some foreign country," 
     Angela said. END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published October 7, 2004 by the Chennai Newindpress: 
 
   TITLE: Human trafficking racket busted in city 
 
   BEGIN TEXT: CHENNAI: The Bureau of Immigration busted an 
   international syndicate involved in human trafficking 
   and arrested its kingpin, Fernando, a Sri Lankan 
   national, here on Wednesday. 
 
   However, his associates in the city are absconding. 
   Sleuths of the City Central Crime Branch have started a 
   search for them. Fourteen Sri Lankans, who were staying 
   in various lodges in the city, hoping to get visas to 
   fly to Europe, were rounded up and deported to Colombo 
   by the Immigration officials on Wednesday afternoon. 
 
   When contacted, senior Immigration officials here said 
   it was during a routine monitoring of foreigners" 
   activities in the city 45 days ago that they got the tip- 
   off about the racket. Sleuths lay waiting till Wednesday 
   for the gang to resurface in the city. 
 
   Fernando's cover was so cleverly crafted that cops did 
   not sense anything unusual for nearly six months, during 
   which he managed to send more than two dozen job- 
   seekers, all of them Sri Lankans, to Europe. 
   Instead of tampering with the passports or visas (which 
   is the practice of other racketeers), he went about 
   forging supporting documents, like those testifying to 
   one's prospective employers. 
 
   He arranged forged letter-heads and other documents with 
   the help of M/s Mohan Brothers, a printing firm on 
   Pantheon Road, and fake rubber stamps of various 
   European companies with the help of M/s Century Plastic 
   Art on Mount Road. His company, Sha Travels and Tours, 
   located in Hill Street, Dehiwala, Sri Lanka did the 
   spade work for him back home. 
 
   Apparently the documents looked genuine, and invariably 
   applicants got their visas. 
 
   Several Sri Lankans approached the Turkish Embassy in 
   New Delhi with the fake documents supplied by Fernando 
   and got visas to go to Turkey. He had a pointman in 
   Delhi to get things done at the embassy. Lankans have to 
   come to India as Turkey does not have an Embassy in 
   Colombo. 
 
   After obtaining visas, they would return to Colombo via 
   Chennai. Later, using the Turkish visa, they would fly 
   to that country via Dubai. All through they would be 
   accompanied by Fernando's men to avoid their landing in 
   trouble. Since the passports and visas were original, 
   there was not much of a scope for the immigration 
   officials to detect the fraud. 
 
   From Turkey, the gateway to Europe, to escape to other 
   countries in the region, where jobs could be available, 
   is a relatively easy job, it is pointed out. Fernando 
   used to collect Rs. four lakh per visa from the 
   customers. 
 
   Only much later the Immigration Bureau woke up to what 
   he was doing, and when Fernando landed in Chennai last 
   week, the Immigration officials did not commit any 
   mistake. They waited for their quarry to assemble along 
   with those whom he was shipping abroad. 
 
   A large number of fake documents, seals and printers 
   were also seized from the syndicate's headquarters in 
   Barakath Mansion on Lingichetty Street in Mannadi, here. 
   Bureau of Immigration will now probe the international 
   ramifications of the racket. END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Published October 6, 2004 by the Turkish language 
Sabah News: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Police captured 193 Pakistanis in a 
     building in Istanbul's Ayazag district G-31 sokak no 16 
     in Sisli.  Fifty of the illegal immigrants managed to 
     escape by breaking the window.  Some of them said that 
     they wanted to go to Greece and some to Italy. 
     Meanwhile, 14 Iranians were captured in Istanbul's 
     Buyukcekmece district.  They were reportedly planning 
     to go to Greece.  They said that they paid 2 thousand 
     dollars per person.  Following interrogation, they were 
     deported. END TEXT. 
 
¶5. (U) Published October 6, 2004 by the International Office 
on Migration: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: SWITZERLAND - Human Trafficking in the 
     Balkans: "Increasing But Less Visible:" New Study - 
     Human trafficking is increasing, but has become less 
     visible as criminal organizations are changing the way 
     they operate in the Balkans, according to a major new 
     IOM study. 
 
     Trafficking for the sex industry has moved into private 
     apartments and growing use is being made of the 
     internet and telephones, says the study, which was 
     undertaken earlier this year and looks at developments 
     in Albania, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Kosovo, the FYR of 
     Macedonia and Moldova. 
 
     Exploitation of victims has become subtler through 
     small payments to avoid denunciation, and more women 
     are working as traffickers and pimps, according to the 
     report, which was funded by the Swedish International 
     Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA). 
     The report was commissioned in response to a marked 
     decline in the number of victims referred to IOM and 
     other agencies for protection and help, suggesting that 
     human trafficking was actually decreasing in the 
     Balkans. 
 
     But new trends noted by the report include increased 
     trafficking in children for sexual and other forms of 
     exploitation, greater use of legal travel documents to 
     circumvent interception, the emergence of organ 
     harvesting as a new objective for trafficking, and 
     greater corruption of government and diplomatic 
     officials. 
 
     International criminal organizations operating in human 
     trafficking have modified their strategies and methods 
     in response to measures taken by governments and 
     institutions, according to the study, which looks at 
     developments in assistance and protection of victims, 
     as well as the activities of law enforcement agencies 
     and organized crime in the five countries. 
 
     Human trafficking, mainly for prostitution, is a long 
     running area of concern in the Balkans, where IOM has 
     run counter trafficking programmes since 1999. IOM 
     programmes primarily focus on direct assistance return 
     and reintegration programmes for victims that operate 
     in close collaboration with governments, law 
     enforcement entities, NGOs and international 
     organizations. 
 
     The majority of identified international victims 
     trafficked to and within the Balkan states covered by 
     the report come from Moldova, Romania, Ukraine and 
     Bulgaria, with a minority of victims from other 
     countries in Eastern Europe or from within the Balkan 
     region. But the report also points to growing numbers 
     of victims from Turkey, Asia, the Middle East and 
     Africa trafficked through the Balkans, mainly via 
     Kosovo and Bosnia & Herzegovina, to different 
     destinations in Western and Central Europe. 
 
     The report can be downloaded from the IOM website at 
     www.iom.int.  For further information, please contact 
     Theodora Suter at IOM HQ. Email: tsuter@iom.int. Tel. 
     00 41 22 717 9407.  END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published October 5, 2004 by the Anatolian News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE: Turkey Hosted 2,125,083 Foreign Tourists In 
     September 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA - Turkey hosted 2,125,083 foreign 
     tourists in September 2004, Culture and Tourism 
     Ministry said on Tuesday. 
 
     A statement of the Ministry said that number of 
     foreigners visiting Turkey increased by 13.38 percent 
     in September 2004 when compared with the same period of 
     last year. 
 
     On the other hand, the Ministry announced that the 
     number of foreign tourists visiting Turkey increased by 
     27.25 percent, to reach 13,936,507 between January and 
     September 2004 when compared with the same period of 
     the previous year. 
 
     Germany, Russia and Britain were the first three 
     countries sending the highest number of tourists to 
     Turkey in September of 2004, the Ministry noted, adding 
     that tourists from the Netherlands, Bulgaria, Iran, 
     Belgium, France, Greece, Austria, Italy, Sweden, 
     Israel, Switzerland and Ukraine also visited Turkey in 
     the same period. (BRC-ULG) 05.10.2004 END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published October 3, 2004 by the Observer. 
 
     TITLE: Streets of despair PART I 
     BEGIN TEXT: Majlinda was just 13 when she was snatched 
     from her Albanian village and sold into the sex 
     industry. Ed Vulliamy meets some of the thousands of 
     children trafficked to the West every month 
 
     On the day her life changed, when she was 13 years old, 
     Majlinda was on the way to help her aunt with the 
     ironing of clothes in preparation for her cousin's 
     wedding in their village in northern Albania. She was a 
     little short of reaching the house when three strange 
     men stopped her. They grabbed her, bundled her into a 
     car, blindfolded, bound and gagged her; she was then 
     driven to the southern town of Gjirokastra. Not until 
     the men and Majlinda had crossed the border with Greece 
     and reached Corinth was she told: "Now you are going to 
     work." 
 
     "At first I did not know what they were talking about," 
     recalls Majlinda, "until they took me to a flat where 
     there were other women and told me: "You work here 
     now." When I refused, they said they knew my family, 
     and if I made trouble they would kill them. I thought 
     of the possibilities. I was afraid to stay, I was 
     afraid to leave, so I started to work - they forced me 
     to, with violence." 
 
     Beaten and raped into submission by her traffickers, 
     Majlinda began work, confined to a flat, from 8pm until 
     5am, obliged to meet a monetary quota entailing some 20 
     clients a night. "And even if I made enough money," she 
     says, "they usually found a reason to beat me when the 
     clients had finished for the night." 
 
     Majlinda is scarred around the eyes and forehead. She 
     talks at a shelter, back in Albania, to which she has 
     escaped and at which she is hiding from her 
     traffickers, trying to recover. Her expression is 
     subdued, dead-pan. Outside the sun shines, but the room 
     is leaden with her grief, and her story. 
 
     She was in Greece for a year, until "the police started 
     catching up with them. So we came back to Albania and 
     took a speedboat to Italy." Majlinda was sold on to 
     Florence for a price she doesn't know. By now, "there 
     were two new Albanians in the group running me, also 
     one remained from Greece." She was forced to work the 
     streets on the scrappy edges of the city, well hidden 
     from the beauty of its renaissance centre. After 
     dealing with her clients, Majlinda handed over the 
     proceeds, upon which "all three would violate me at the 
     end of my work. They would get high on drugs - 
     marijuana and cocaine - and come at me. And every night 
     they beat me - even if I made the _ 1,000 [685] they 
     insisted on, they always found an excuse." 
 
     Majlinda's captors were part of a syndicate - it was 
     clear to her that "they exploited many other women as 
     well as me, and had a number of houses, but would not 
     let us meet." 
 
     There were "good clients and bad clients," she says. 
     Good clients? "I mean the ones who just wanted to have 
     sex; the bad ones were the ones who beat me, or beat me 
     and stole my money, so I had to work harder to earn it 
     again." The traffickers, she says, would "compete 
     against one another with the money they made out of me 
     and the other women.  They would compete for who could 
     buy the flashiest car, or the best clothes." 
 
     After a year in Florence, Majlinda was moved by car to 
     Amsterdam. In the bustle, she says, "I was surrounded 
     by people, but completely alone. I could speak to no 
     one. I lost all hope. I thought there was no way out. I 
     was afraid that if I talked to anyone, the traffickers 
     would do something to my family." 
 
     Finally, a "good client" from Afghanistan "told me not 
     to be afraid, and encouraged me to escape with him. I 
     did, I trusted him, and became pregnant by him." For a 
     moment it seems that Melinda's story will achieve some 
     perverse redemption. "But I was wrong," she says, her 
     hands kneading one another as she speaks. "He wanted me 
     to work for him instead, and he also beat me all the 
     time. I gave birth to my child, and when that happened, 
     I decided... 
     "I told my story to a woman who used to come and see my 
     husband [which is how Majlinda describes the Afghan] 
     and she in turn told me about some Catholic nuns at 
     Utrecht who rescued prostitutes. And I went to them. 
     They helped me register my child and get a ticket back 
     to Albania." But still Majlinda stares down at the 
     table, and at her hands, as she speaks. 
 
     "I finally contacted my family and asked them to keep 
     my son, but they didn't even want to see me, they were 
     ashamed of me. My father said: "So far as we're 
     concerned, you are dead." Thus rejected, Majlinda and 
     her baby took refuge at a shelter in Albania's capital, 
     Tirana, but she was obliged to leave her child at a 
     place she will not discuss, and move on alone, after 
     the Afghan came looking for his quarry and his son. 
     "This place is my last chance," she says of the second 
     shelter to which she came. "But I am terrified he will 
     come. And that I will see the Albanian men before my 
     eyes once more." 
 
     Majlinda's enslavement lasted four years. "Men?" she 
     ponders, "I don't know what to say. All I know now is 
     that I don't ever want to see another man in my life. 
     All I want now is to be with my child, and to work. 
     There were moments," says Majlinda, now 17, "when I 
     thought I should not be alive, that I should be dead. 
     But then I thought: why not? You have to be brave to 
     survive. I have to be strong, otherwise I cannot get 
     out of this." And with that she smiles - the faint, 
     hollow smile of the survivor. 
 
     Majlinda is but one - bold and fortunate enough to have 
     escaped - among hundreds of thousands enslaved and 
     entrapped by a depraved and burgeoning crime, one of 
     the most lucrative and fastest-growing: trafficking in 
     young women and children for enforced prostitution. 
 
     In terms of the income it nets, trafficking is believed 
     to lie in third place behind drugs and arms. There is 
     evidence that criminal syndicates are switching from 
     drugs to women and girls, finding them easier to 
     transport than an assignment of cocaine or heroin. 
     Moreover, a woman can be sold and resold over and over, 
     while drugs can only be sold once. 
 
     The scale of the crime is impossible to quantify. The 
     US State Department this year said it believed between 
     600,000 and 800,000 people are trafficked across 
     borders each year; profits are estimated to be in the 
     billions of dollars. And of those hundreds of 
     thousands, an inestimable but high proportion are, 
     under international law, children - under 18 years of 
     age, and therefore entitled to special protection under 
     the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. 
 
     Documents produced by Unicef and Save the Children have 
     found up to 80 per cent of those trafficked from some 
     corners of Albania and Moldova to be children, with 
     reports showing "a decline in the average age of 
     children/women being trafficked for prostitution". 
 
     Trafficking is, crucially, distinct from people 
     smuggling or migration, with which it is often, 
     erroneously - and disastrously - confused by policy 
     makers. The pitiful business of smuggling occurs when a 
     syndicate is paid to take a group of people across 
     borders illegally but willingly, in search of work or 
     asylum. And although some people may elect to be taken 
     by their traffickers, a trafficked person does not sign 
     up for the purposes to which they are put. Trafficking 
     was defined by a UN convention in 2000 as meaning to 
     recruit and transport people "by means of threat or use 
     of force, or other forms of coercion", such as 
     abduction, fraud or deception, or, indeed, "abuse of 
     power or of a position of vulnerability". 
 
     "We would all like specific numbers," says Steve Ashby, 
     programme director for Save the Children in Albania. 
     "But they are simply not available. What we can safely 
     assume is that the numbers are high enough to warrant 
     very serious concern. It is impossible to over-stress 
     the level of oppression and brutality - the vicious 
     abuse of human rights being inflicted by these 
     traffickers. And the situation is going to get worse 
     before it gets better. 
 
     "The trafficker," says Ashby, "is invariably ahead of 
     the authorities. They are always finding alternative 
     means to carry on. The phenomenon is shifting all the 
     time. The trafficking problem outstrips all the efforts 
     being made to control it." 
 
     "This has become," says Giovanna Barberis, Unicef's 
     representative in Moldova - the main source of 
     trafficking for sexual exploitation in Europe - "a 
     matter for dramatic concern". 
 
     So far as Europe is concerned, the countries in which 
     communism collapsed tend to provide both traffickers 
     and trafficked. Moldova, Albania, Ukraine and Romania 
     are the main source countries from which women are 
     abducted. They are countries where social structures 
     have imploded, where large sections of the economy are 
     controlled by criminal syndicates and where communist 
     regimes have been replaced by corruption as a means of 
     political power. Trafficking has become integral to the 
     economies of these countries - it is the source for 
     fortunes, for cash to buy champagne and luxury cars, 
     for profits laundered into resorts and hotels. 
 
     The misery of women and children like Majlinda is a 
     foundation stone for many a new concrete tower in 
     Tirana or Chisinau. "All along the line," says Ashby, 
     "there is a chain of people involved in this trade, if 
     you can call it that. The traffickers themselves, 
     transporters, forgers of documents, safe houses, 
     speedboats that take them from Albania to Italy - a 
     great network of commercial interests engaged in the 
     business." 
 
     There are so-called "destination" countries in Eastern 
     Europe, too, but the vast, hidden and terrifying 
     "markets" are wider and elsewhere - across Western 
     Europe and, ever more, into Russia, Turkey, Israel, the 
     Middle East and the Gulf states. The victims, 
     invariably, are drafted from the vulnerable and 
     subjugated quarters of East European society - from 
     desperately poor villages, from rugged mountains, from 
     shanty slums. This is the new criminal power play in 
     the new Europe. 
 
     Albania is a land of dire poverty, fierce patriotism, 
     rugged mountains in the north, olive groves and vines 
     to the south - for decades cut off from the rest of 
     Europe and now opened up to a Western dream world with 
     which it is bombarded on television, to which its youth 
     aspires. It is a country whence tens of thousands of 
     girls are trafficked and through which women are 
     brought from other parts of Eastern Europe to Greece or 
     Italy, and thence across Europe. The same syndicates 
     are opening up new channels, after a clampdown on the 
     Adriatic sea route, through Serbia and the former 
     Yugoslav countries into the West. 
 
     "It is estimated," says a report commissioned by 
     Unicef, "that over the past 10 years, 100,000 Albanian 
     women and girls have been trafficked to Western Europe 
     and other Balkan countries. Albania is also one of the 
     main transit countries for the trafficking of women and 
     girls from central and Eastern Europe." In Albania, 
     fear of abduction by traffickers is so great that the 
     numbers of teenaged girls attending high school in 
     rural areas has fallen dramatically. In remote areas, 
     "as many as 90 per cent of girls no longer receive a 
     high-school education," says a report by Save the 
     Children. "Even here in Tirana, they are afraid," warns 
     Svetlana Roko, who runs a day centre for trafficked 
     children and children at risk in the capital. 
 
     "The Albanian pimp," says the report, "has a reputation 
     for extreme ruthlessness, and murder is not uncommon." 
     In one case in which a woman agreed to testify to the 
     police in Italy, her father returned home to find the 
     mutilated remains of his other daughter splattered 
     around the house. 
 
     Some women are simply kidnapped, others are lured by 
     promises of work. "It depends," says Vera Lesko, who 
     runs a shelter for trafficked women in Vlora, in the 
     Albanian south. "They could be promised a modeling 
     career, work in shops, serving in bars and, more 
     recently, they have been enticed by promises of 
     academic scholarships. However, when they come to me 
     they are totally destroyed, physically and 
     psychologically. What we try to do is give them back 
     their lives, tell them that their suffering is past, 
     that they should focus on their own value, on what they 
     have. We try to re-integrate them, to teach them 
     vocational skills. We send them to schools in Vlora, 
     with other women who do not know their background." 
 
     But in spite of all this, says Lesko, "The majority are 
     simply re-trafficked when they return. They have 
     nothing; they are annihilated. I had a woman who had 
     been trafficked and re-trafficked for 10 years. She did 
     not know how to live in a different way. Something 
     inside her had changed forever." 
 
     Traffickers, says Lesko, hang around police stations 
     waiting to pick up their prey as soon as they are 
     released. In many cases, there is collusion between 
     police and traffickers. However - in defence of her 
     work and in praise of those who come to her - "a not 
     insignificant number make it. They re-integrate, they 
     remake themselves, and that is when all this work seems 
     worthwhile." END TEXT. 
 
¶8. (U) Published October 3, 2004 by the Observer. 
 
     TITLE: Streets of despair PART II 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Katalina swaddles the baby she says gives 
     meaning to her life, once shattered. She is staying 
     with a family - which knows nothing of her past - in a 
     rain-swept village in the north of Moldova, but will 
     soon have a place of her own, she hopes. 
 
     At the beginning of this year, Katalina - who had grown 
     up in an orphanage - was abandoned by her boyfriend 
     after telling him she was pregnant. Soon afterwards, 
     she was invited by a Russian woman to a birthday party 
     in a local bar in her village near Moldova's second 
     city, Balti. There, Katalina was offered a future in 
     Moscow, with an option to work as a house painter or 
     line worker at a pasta factory. Katalina opted to give 
     it a try - why not? There was nothing for her in 
     Moldova. But events twisted strangely when she and her 
     Russian minder reached the Ukrainian border. 
 
     "A policeman met us and drove us across the frontier, 
     avoiding the crossings. The Russian paid the policeman 
     and we went to get false papers made." They then 
     proceeded by train to Moscow, where Katalina met 
     another girl from near Balti, who told her what was 
     expected. "You can't get away from here," said the 
     girl. "They will break your legs." 
 
     So began Katalina's life as an enslaved prostitute, 
     working a beat beneath a railway bridge, for which her 
     traffickers paid local police. "I was told never to say 
     that I was pregnant, else the clients would not want 
     me, and I would be beaten to pieces," recalls Katalina. 
     Some clients, she says, "kept me for a number of days, 
     and invited their friends. One man kept me for three or 
     four days in a basement and invited 20 men. When I 
     objected they told me I was a bitch. They had bought me 
     and could do whatever they liked to me. Another time, I 
     was on the 11th floor of a building with seven 
     Moldovans, all of them taking drugs. 
 
     After they had had their way, they insisted I smoke 
     some drugs, too. When I refused, they became violent, 
     and one of them opened a window and threatened to throw 
     me out. But there was one man less stoned than the 
     rest, who said, "You are just a dirty whore," and sent 
     me from the room." 
 
     Time passed in this way, until Katalina's pregnancy 
     could no longer be hidden. Clients, their sensibilities 
     offended, would beat and insult her, demanding their 
     money back. The Russian traffickers beat her, too, 
     saying they would lock Katalina away until she was due, 
     "and that they would sell my baby, when it came". 
 
     Katalina has an expression full of guile; it comes as 
     no surprise when she says that she elected to escape. 
     The flat in which she was kept by day was watched by 
     police officers on the pimp's behalf, to prevent the 
     girls from leaving. 
 
     But Katalina noted when the police watch went for its 
     daily lunch break. That was when she, and the other 
     girl from her area, made a run for it. 
 
     Laughter comes hard while talking about these things, 
     but now the artful Katalina has her company in unlikely 
     stitches. "We did a funny thing," she says. 
 
     "After running away from the flat, we took a trolleybus 
     to Red Square, thinking this is where the train to 
     Chisinau would go from. Just imagine, two escaped 
     Moldovan prostitutes lost in a tourist trap, asking 
     smart people how to get the train back to their little 
     village." Having found the station, they were picked up 
     by the railway police and sent home. 
 
     Moldova is Europe's poorest country and, says Unicef's 
     representative there, Giovanna Barberis, "one of the 
     main, if not the main source country for the 
     trafficking of women and children". 
 
     This is how a briefing paper drawn up by the Swedish 
     Foreign Ministry's aid wing Sida - which is active in 
     counter-trafficking projects in Eastern Europe - 
     describes the country: "Moldova has probably suffered 
     the most devastating peacetime decline in economic 
     performance and living standards of any country in 
     modern times. From a situation of relative prosperity, 
     GDP in this country has fallen by more than 70 per cent 
     within a decade - placing Moldova on a par with the 
     poorest countries in Asia and Africa. For most 
     Moldovans, life has become a daily struggle to satisfy 
     the most basic needs against increasingly uneven odds." 
 
     The bus station in Chisinau, Moldova's care-worn 
     capital, is a monument to the nation's reaction to its 
     fate - mass emigration. The population is officially 
     set at 4.5m, after a census in 1989, but, says 
     Barberis, "the reality is probably nearer 3.5m. 
 
     Hundreds of thousands have simply left, to find work, 
     legally or illegally, in the West." Every week, fleets 
     of heaving coaches leave this bus station - with its 
     mosaic showing a happy socialist life in factory and 
     field - bound for Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal. 
     As a result, thousands of children are left abandoned 
     by their parents, becoming prey to the trafficker's 
     eye. 
 
     Under communism, Moldova, with its fertile black soil, 
     was the orchard of the USSR, and its industry was 
     locked into the trans-Soviet infrastructure. Now, 
     Moldovan society has been ravaged by a corrupt neo- 
     communist political class and an economy beholden to 
     the profits of crime. The price of agricultural produce 
     is so low that much of it withers - literally - on the 
     vine. The average wage is $50 (28) per month. And the 
     generation now growing up with no memory of communism 
     or relative prosperity is prey to those engaged in 
     Moldova's rapidly growing and infamous export - human 
     beings. 
 
     "There are about 1m Moldovans living abroad," says 
     Barberis, "and among that 1m, a great many have left 
     illegally and are exposed to trafficking. They go in 
     different ways. The traffickers are getting more and 
     more sophisticated. There can be direct contact with a 
     relative, friend, or friend of a friend. There are 
     advertisements in the newspapers for fake jobs as 
     waitresses, babysitters or cooks. They are invariably 
     jobs advertised for women and it becomes an attractive 
     offer, given the fact that unemployment is extremely 
     high, given the fact that access to health care and 
     education is extremely low, given the fact that 
     domestic violence is deeply rooted." 
 
     There is a correlation between the subjugation of women 
     and children in Moldovan society and their 
     vulnerability to trafficking, says Daniela Popescu, who 
     runs the Amicul centre for "at risk" children in 
     Chisinau. Some 80 per cent of trafficking victims, she 
     says, have also been victims of domestic violence. 
 
     "There are old sayings passed on from grandparents," 
     she says: "they say an unbeaten woman is like an untidy 
     house, or beating his woman is a man's divine right." 
     Women are held in low esteem, have low self-esteem and 
     tend to accept things as they are, not to denounce 
     their men. They are accustomed to hard physical work, 
     so it is often the best and strongest of them who 
     decide they can be free from emotional and physical 
     abuse, and can handle hard work abroad. 
 
     "The traffickers are very much aware of these 
     subjugated conditions," she continues, "and, 
     ironically, will make promises such as, "You are 
     working at home and being beaten - why not work away 
     from the beating, and get good money?"" 
 
     The village of Biesti, an hour north of the capital, is 
     typical - the effect is unmistakable and striking. This 
     is a community where there are no adults; a place where 
     only children and old people walk the main street and 
     muddy tracks. The children have for the most part been 
     abandoned by their parents, and are thus vulnerable to 
     the traffickers. Angelina, aged 13, just about manages 
     on what her mother and father send back - she explains 
     that her parents left for Orvieto in Italy, leaving her 
     to look after her 10-year-old brother. 
 
     But unlike most villages of its kind, there is a quiet 
     revolution under way in Biesti - proving that where 
     there is initiative, the traffickers will not have it 
     all their own way. That with the right resources and 
     the will to battle the traffickers with knowledge, 
     there is reason for faint hope in this woebegone 
     landscape. For here is one of a network of day centres 
     funded by Unicef, devoted almost entirely to raising 
     awareness of trafficking and "life skills" in a world 
     without adults, or where adults do not care. Every 
     child in Biesti has, as a result, seen a film called 
     Lilja 4-ever by the director Lukas Moodysson, about a 
     Russian girl trafficked to Stockholm. "We all cried 
     when we saw it," says Veronica, aged 16. "We talked 
     about it, and wondered, what would we do?" 
 
     Veronica and her friend Aksenia are prime targets for 
     any trafficker, but both girls talk with disarming 
     maturity about the dangers, the film and its message. 
 
     "It is not enough just to have the information to be on 
     the lookout," says Aksenia, "it is a matter of having 
     the skills to act when and if you find that you are in 
     trouble." Everyone, however, wants to leave the 
     village, adds Veronica. 
 
     There are 63 "residential schools" for what are called 
     the "social orphans" of Moldova, where discarded 
     children learn and live. These are places like that in 
     which Katalina was raised, and in all, they hold some 
     13,000 children, any one of whom could be said to be 
     "at risk" to trafficking. In these places, too, Unicef 
     is working against the peril that awaits these children 
     once they try - as they will - to leave. At the 
     orphanage in Orhei, a group of 14-year-olds has also 
     seen Lilja 4-ever and rehearse a play they will perform 
     to the school and around town about social exclusion, 
     with its obvious message about the return of trafficked 
     victims. "We are learning that we must have them back," 
     says Svetlana, "even if they have HIV and Aids." 
 
     "It is amazing to me," says Barberis, "that this issue 
     of trafficking is simply not a matter for the 
     government in this country. Similarly, not only is 
     there no support for the victims of trafficking when 
     they return, but there is no effort to re-integrate 
     them, to rescue them from their non-future." 
 
     Viorica, a child of 17 from southern Moldova, cannot 
     finish her story. She wanted, she says, to go to music 
     school and improve her singing voice, "to learn to sing 
     and play". But life had other plans for her. Instead, 
     she was lured from her village by a distant cousin, to 
     Turkey, with a promise of work. When she arrived at the 
     coastal resort of Antalya, she "was told to put on some 
     clothes and get ready. "It"s time for you to work," 
     they said. I asked what work? They said I was going to 
     a hotel to be with men. When I objected," she 
     continues, "they said I would have to do this thing if 
     I ever wanted to see Moldova again. 
 
     They threatened me with a gun and made me get into a 
     car. We got to the hotel. The thing is, I'd never been 
     with a man before. I was a virgin, and that night, they 
     made me go with 11 men." At this point, Viorica stops 
     in the tracks of her tears and her words. It is a 
     terrible moment. 
 
     The psychologist treating Viorica, Ana Chirsanov, tells 
     me that the girl has tried to commit suicide. "Her soul 
     was destroyed that first night, with those 11 men," 
     explains Dr Chirsanov. "She used to resist, spitting 
     and pulling the clients" hair, but they thought it was 
     all part of some erotic game. She was crying out, "I 
     don't want to do this", and they just laughed at her, 
     amusing themselves. After which she got into thinking 
     that she was the one who was insane and that this was 
     what the world is like. That the people doing this to 
     her were normal and she was insane to be unhappy about 
     it." Most of the girls, when they return, says Dr 
     Chirsanov, "speak of their desire to die. We had a case 
     of one minor who had jumped from a sixth-floor 
     window... she survived, after six surgical operations." 
 
     There is a glaring problem in calling what happened to 
     Viorica, or any trafficked woman or girl, 
     "prostitution", since the word can imply a degree of 
     consent. "Here, there is absolutely no meaningful 
     consent at all," says Sian Jones, co-ordinator for the 
     Balkans at Amnesty International. "It is clear that if 
     you knowingly have sex with a woman who has been 
     trafficked, that is rape." 
 
     "There is no consent in sex with a trafficked woman," 
     says Denise Marshall, who runs the Poppy Project in 
     south London, Britain's only shelter for trafficked 
     women. "If a trafficked woman is forced to see 30 
     clients a day, so far as I am concerned, that is 30 
     rapes a day. The impact on the body and on the psyche 
     is the same as rape. It is the same level of violence 
     against that woman." 
 
     A website called www.punternet.com offers an insight 
     into these clients" heads. It invites entries from men 
     comparing notes on prostitutes. On occasions, there is 
     every indication that the woman visited is trafficked 
     and that the client knows this. "Worst shag of my 
     life," laments one entry, "the girl was a robot - felt 
     sorry for her - kept thinking why is she doing this? - 
     she said only a couple of words to me - gave me 10 mins 
     of hand job while looking the other way and jumping 
     when I tried to touch her - she lay down trying to 
     cover her tits - 15 mins with me trying to grab her ... 
     Why does she do it? I probably can guess." 
 
     When politicians turn their attention to trafficking 
     and prostitution - as the British Home Office is now 
     doing - little attention is paid to the "demand" side, 
     to the punters. 
 
     The debate is most advanced in Sweden, from where money 
     has been pumped into counter-trafficking abroad and 
     legislation enacted at home, in 1999, attempting to 
     fight trafficking by tackling all use of prostitutes. 
     "The problem of demand has been engaged here by 
     criminalising the buying of sexual services," says Nina 
     Strandberg, East Europe area manager for Sida. 
     "Basically, that means it is not illegal for a woman to 
     sell sex, but it is illegal for a man to buy it. It"s 
     an interesting position, introduced as something we 
     regard as integral to the battle against trafficking." 
     According to Stockholm police, the measure has cut by 
     more than two-thirds the number of prostitutes being 
     operated in the city, with 754 convictions from 1999 
     until this summer, and fines imposed. 
 
     "The Swedish law is controversial, but until countries 
     of destination for these women and girls have some kind 
     of legislation in place, we cannot begin to address the 
     matter of trafficking," says Steve Ashby. "Prosecution 
     of traffickers is not enough - another will always take 
     his place. But if there were tighter laws on demand, 
     then a lot of the so-called punters would think twice 
     before they accepted the risk." 
 
     "The Swedish measure would make a great difference if 
     it was more widespread," says Lesko. "It targets the 
     right people - not the girls who come back damaged, but 
     the people who damage them." 
 
     "This matter of trafficking," says Giovanna Barberis, 
     "is becoming of dramatic concern. And yet I do not see 
     governments in Western Europe wanting to address and 
     find solutions to this issue. In some places, there 
     does not appear to be any political will at all. There 
     are many countries in Europe which have not even 
     thought to undertake a serious assessment or analysis." 
 
     The 45 member states of the Council of Europe are 
     currently drafting a convention on trafficking, 
     providing an opportunity for binding minimum standards 
     for the protection of and support for trafficked 
     people. Most governments - including Britain's - tip- 
     toe, however, confusing the issue with smuggling and 
     migration, and are wary of the political liability in 
     any discourse on arrivals from Eastern Europe. Within 
     the Home Office, there are conflicting interests, 
     between immigration services, which put a priority on 
     removing people without proper documentation, and law 
     enforcement, which requires willing witnesses and 
     intelligence to prosecute traffickers. 
 
     A triumvirate of organisations - Unicef, Amnesty 
     International and Anti-Slavery International - campaign 
     for three basic standards to be met by the European 
     convention. They are: first, support, shelter and 
     safety provision for women who emerge as having been 
     trafficked. Second, a minimum period during which women 
     can decide whether they want to co-operate with police 
     investigations. (Protection at the Poppy Project, now 
     funded by the Home Office, is conditional on agreeing 
     to help the police. Italy has the most advanced 
     legislation to date, with a 90-day allowance for 
     reflection, and now suggests a six-month reflection 
     period.) Third, resident permits - temporary or 
     permanent - should be on offer in the country of 
     destination "whenever there is reasonable likelihood 
     that a trafficked person will be subject to re- 
     trafficking or other serious harm". Italy already has 
     such a system, which has proven effective not only in 
     terms of protecting victims, but also in prosecuting 
     traffickers. 
 
     Britain's record is different. In autumn 2003, London 
     and Tirana signed a bilateral agreement on repatriation 
     to Albania of girls or women found to have been 
     trafficked. "I cannot respect a policy of 
     repatriation," says Vera Lesko. "Since that year, I've 
     had 16 girls sent back from Britain, 14 of whom have 
     since been re-trafficked back into the system. Is it 
     really so hard for you to take 16 people?" 
 
     Mike Kaye of Anti-Slavery International argues that 
     "there is no conflict between protection and 
     prosecution". Quite apart from respect for the human 
     rights of a person who has had them destroyed, he says, 
     "Protection of trafficked people three distinct 
     advantages: it disrupts the trafficking system, because 
     they do not get re-trafficked; it favours intelligence, 
     because they are more likely to tell the support agency 
     how they were trafficked; and in the long or medium 
     term, it means that the trafficked person is more 
     likely to co-operate with the police." 
 
     "What really irritates me," says Denise Marshallat the 
     Poppy Project, "is that governments - not just the UK - 
     put the responsibility on to the country where these 
     women originate. The fact is this: if British men were 
     not wanting sex with trafficked women, then trafficked 
     women would not be here. I had a woman who was raped 88 
     times - no, not 18, 88 - on Christmas Day 2002. She is 
     completely annihilated. She is a religious woman who 
     dares not go to church. She has a child but does not 
     think she deserves to see that child. The men who did 
     that to her were British, and I think Britain has a 
     responsibility to provide her with at least sometime 
     and proper resources. There are no quick-fix solutions 
     for a woman like that." 
 
     Eva, from southern Albania, fell in love with the man 
     who took her to Naples, promising a wedding. But on 
     arrival, her fiance demanded that Eva work for him as a 
     prostitute. "When I protested, he said he would kill my 
     family and that his accomplices back home would do the 
     same thing to my sister." The trafficker worked 
     alongside a "group of his friends" while Eva and other 
     girls enslaved into their operation walked the streets 
     of Naples, taking up to 20 clients a night to meet her 
     quota, and, if lucky, avoid a beating. Most nights, 
     however, would end with her being violated and beaten 
     by her trafficker and his accomplices. 
 
     "I could see people living their normal lives," she 
     says, her eyes staring into mid-distance - "shopping, 
     going about their business. They had their families and 
     children with them, they had their lives, they had all 
     the things I wanted but could never have. It made my 
     heart cry to see them. Instead, I became accustomed to 
     being a slave, crying all the time, but always afraid 
     to leave him, because he knew my family, he knew my 
     sister. I was alone, I had no one." 
 
     Eva's trafficker was brother to one of Albania's 
     biggest dealers in drugs and women, who was killed in a 
     car crash. Eva duly managed to escape when her 
     trafficker returned to Tirana for the funeral, 
     successfully seeking out one of her brothers, living in 
     Venice. 
 
     Eva, who wears a cross around her neck, has two 
     distinct and different faces: the one she wears when 
     telling her story hitherto - bounden, staring blankly - 
     and another, which comes suddenly alive, effervescent, 
     when she gets to this point in her narrative. In 
     Savona, she met her sister-in-law, an evangelical 
     Christian, who took Eva to church and to see a film 
     about Mary Magdalene, the reformed prostitute. "She 
     saved my life," says Eva, "a certain peace came into 
     me. I began to think differently and became a believer. 
     My fear left me. I realised that people judge you, but 
     God can forgive everything." 
 
     Now living in hiding from reprisal, as does her sister, 
     Eva is clearly the life force of the shelter in which 
     she lives. "For the moment, I have what I want. I have 
     my sister with me, I tidy up, I plant flowers, I sew." 
     But Eva also urges her fellow victims and those still 
     captive, out there in the hell of enslavement, whence 
     she returned: "I tell them, do not be afraid to do what 
     is right. Go to the police. Testify against those who 
     exploit you, for they deserve to be punished." 
 
     All names of trafficked women and children in this 
     article have been changed for their own safety. END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶9. (U) Published October 3, 2004 by Radio Free Europe and 
Eurasianet.org: 
 
   TITLE:  TURKEY: EU REPORTS PAVE WAY FOR QUALIFIED 
   APPROVAL OF ENTRY TALKS; Ahto Lobjakas 
 
   BEGIN TEXT: Some form of go-ahead in the coming days by 
   the European Commission for Turkish entry talks now 
   appears a foregone conclusion. 
 
   However, two draft progress reports prepared by the 
   European Commission suggest that uncertainties abound, 
   and that any decision is likely to come with extensive 
   conditions and qualifications attached to allow more 
   skeptical member states to support it. 
 
   The European Commission's annual progress report on 
   Turkey praises democratic reforms undertaken since 1999 
   and accelerated in the past two years. However, it does 
   not clearly say Turkey now meets the so-called 
   Copenhagen entry criteria dealing with democracy, the 
   rule of law, and human rights. Instead, a number of 
   areas are identified where Turkey is clearly at odds 
   with what are described as "modern" European standards. 
 
   Thus, the recognition that constitutional reforms have 
   shifted the balance of civil-military relations toward 
   civilians comes with the caveat that conflicting legal 
   provisions allow the military to continue to enjoy a 
   degree of autonomy. 
 
   Turkey's new Penal Code, adopted a few days ago, 
   receives wide praise for abolishing the death penalty 
   and enshrining women's rights. 
 
   The Penal Code also outlaws torture. The report notes 
   there was a marked decline in reported instances of 
   torture in 2004 as compared with 2003. However, an 
   increase in claims of torture was recorded outside of 
   formal detention centers. 
 
   An EU fact-finding mission returned from Turkey in 
   September and concluded that Ankara is seriously 
   pursuing its policy of zero tolerance on torture. Again, 
   however, the mission reported that "numerous cases" of 
   torture and ill treatment of detainees still occur. 
 
   Similar conclusions are evident in other key judgments. 
   Reforms are praised, but continued contrary practices 
   are noted. 
 
   Thus, the report says there have been a significant 
   number of cases where nonviolent expression of opinion 
   is still prosecuted and punished. Books were still being 
   banned and writers put on trial in 2003. 
 
   In the field of human rights and the protection of 
   minorities, the report recognizes the introduction of 
   two constitutional reforms and eight legislative-reform 
   packages since 1999. Turkey has adopted a number of 
   human rights treaties since 1999. It executes some 
   judgments of the European Court of Human Rights, but -- 
   again -- not others. 
 
   Human-rights-monitoring bodies have been set up, as have 
   specialist training programs at the Interior and Justice 
   ministries, as well as police. However, implementation 
   of human rights reforms is said not to be uniform across 
   the country. 
 
   Turkey is criticized for not having signed the Framework 
   Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. It 
   receives praise for having allowed TV and radio 
   broadcasts in minority languages, such as Kurdish, 
   Arabic, Bosnian, and Circassian. However, it is noted 
   that harsh restrictions exist limiting their length. 
 
   The report notes that Turkey constitutionally guarantees 
   the freedom of religion, but adds that non-Muslim 
   communities continue to encounter difficulties. Thus, 
   Christians are said to occasionally still be subject to 
   police surveillance. 
 
   The second report analyzes the potential impact of 
   Turkish membership on the EU. It proceeds from the 
   assumption that Turkey would not join before 2014. That 
   date marks the start of the new EU multiannual budget 
   cycle. 
 
   The assessment appears to be that most of the Emus 
   current policies -- above all, farm support and regional 
   aid -- will need to be radically rethought so that they 
   do not prove ruinously costly. 
 
   The study says a Turkish accession would be different 
   from all previous enlargements because of the country's 
   population, size, and geographical location. 
 
   The annual cost of farm support to Turkey is estimated 
   to top 11 billion euros ($13.6 billion) - or more than 
   10 percent of the Emus current budget. 
 
   Long transitional periods are predicted for the free 
   movement of workers, and a potentially permanent 
   "safeguard" measure may become necessary to allow other 
   EU member states to lock out Turkish labor if their 
   markets suffer ill effects. 
 
   Another major challenge is said to be the future 
   management of the bloc's external borders, as well as 
   dealing with migration and asylum issues once Turkey 
   joins. Fighting organized crime, terrorism, and the 
   trafficking of human beings, drugs, and arms will also 
   present significant new challenges for the EU. 
 
   Turkey's membership in the visa-free Schengen area is 
   said not to be a "short-term" prospect after accession. 
   This means that border controls would remain in place. 
   Opportunities for the EU could arise in the form of 
   heightened security for the bloc's energy supplies. 
   Turkey would provide direct links to the Caspian 
   countries, as well as the Persian Gulf. 
 
   The clearest positive potential for the EU emerges in 
   the field of foreign policy. As a country with a Muslim 
   majority and a strategic position, Turkey could valuably 
   enhance the Emus role in the wider Middle East. It could 
   also serve as an important model for reform. 
 
   However, the report says that, in practical terms, 
   Turkish and EU policies are still often at variance 
   regarding Iraq, the Caucasus, and relations with the 
   Muslim world. 
 
   Turkey could also become a channel for stabilizing EU 
   influence in the South Caucasus. Much is said to depend 
   on Turkey's willingness, though. In particular relations 
   with Armenia will need to improve. The study says 
   reconciliation must be achieved over the mass killings 
   of Armenians in 1915 and 1916, which are widely called 
   genocide. Turkey must also contribute to the easing of 
   tensions in the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan 
   concerning Nagorno-Karabakh. 
 
   The study says Turkey could also help the EU to 
   stabilize Central Asia. END TEXT. 
 
¶10. (U) Published October 2, 2004 by the New York Times: 
 
     TITLE: European Public Uneasy Over Turkey's Bid to Join 
     Union; By ELAINE SCIOLINO 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: AMSTERDAM, Oct. 1 - There are no minarets 
     at the Ayasofya Mosque in Amsterdam, no marble atrium, 
     no crystal-chandeliered prayer room. The biggest 
     Turkish mosque here operates out of a dark, rusting 
     hulk of a warehouse that was once a car repair and 
     supply service. 
 
     It is a place more for meeting than for prayer. It 
     sells subsidized groceries and meals, advertises jobs 
     for pizza makers and factory cleaners, and offers its 
     floors as temporary sleeping space for new migrants. It 
     is, in other words, just the sort of place that makes 
     many Europeans view Turks as truly foreign. 
 
     On Wednesday, the 25-member European Union is poised to 
     take a small but important step toward deciding whether 
     Turkey will be the first Muslim country to join its 
     ranks.  The organization's executive committee will 
     vote on a report stating that Turkey has reformed 
     itself enough to merit entry talks. 
 
     If the committee's recommendation is accepted 
     unanimously by the member nations in December, there 
     will begin a negotiating process that could drag on for 
     a decade or more. Even then, it might not gain Turkey 
     full membership in the union, the world's largest 
     trading bloc. 
 
     But just the prospect of admitting a Muslim country of 
     71 million people - far larger than most members and 
     with a per capita income much lower than any member - 
     has set off a fierce, even ugly, debate over the nature 
     of European identity. 
 
     Polls throughout Europe suggest that many share the 
     fear first expressed by former President Valerie 
     Giscard d'Estaing of France that Turkey is not a 
     European country and that Turkish membership would mean 
     "the end of Europe." 
 
     A French opinion poll released Tuesday indicated that 
     56 percent of the French oppose Turkey's membership. 
     President Jacques Chirac said Friday that he would 
     require a national referendum on any future expansion. 
 
     While Chancellor Gerhard Schroder of Germany has 
     reacted favorably, a poll released Friday showed 57 
     percent of his country's population opposed. A poll 
     issued earlier this week stated that 62 percent of 
     Germans wanted the matter to be decided in a 
     referendum. 
 
     "There is a deep anti-Turkish feeling in the debate 
     over the E.U.," said Haci Karacaer, the director of 
     Ayasofya. "They say that Turkey is too big, too 
     Islamic, too poor, too undemocratic, too Asian to join 
     Europe." 
 
     His words echoed those of Frits Bolkestein, a Dutch 
     member of the European Union's executive committee. Mr. 
     Bolkestein warned in a speech last month that Europe 
     risked becoming "Islamized" if Turkey joined. If that 
     should happen, he added, the battle of Vienna in 1683 
     when Austrian, German and Polish troops pushed back the 
     Ottoman Turks, would 
     "have been in vain." 
 
     Europe, he concluded, "would implode." The fear 
     coincides with a rise in anti-Muslim feeling throughout 
     the continent, fueled in part by the train station 
     bombings in Madrid in March, which Spanish 
     investigators say were carried out by Islamic radicals 
     with ties to Al Qaeda; ongoing arrests of Muslims on 
     terrorist charges across Europe; and recent kidnappings 
     of European civilians by radical Muslim groups in Iraq. 
 
     "Even on the soccer field they yell at you and call you 
     "Turk" or "dirty foreigner," " said Yucel Gundogdu, a 
     Dutch-born employment counselor who plays midfield on 
     FC Turkiyemspor, once an all-Turkish amateur soccer 
     team and now the reigning amateur champion in the 
     Netherlands. 
 
     For him the European Union's decision is a kind of 
     litmus test for Europe. "If the E.U. refuses Turkey for 
     cultural or religious reasons, then it's racist," he 
     said. 
 
     The draft of a 54-page confidential report, which has 
     been leaking out to the European press and is to be 
     voted on by the European Union next week, largely 
     ignores the potential problems posed by Turkey's 
     cultural and religious heritage. 
 
     On the contrary, the report states, "Turkey would be an 
     important model of a country with a majority Muslim 
     population adhering to such fundamental principles as 
     liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and 
     fundamental freedoms and the rule of law." 
 
     If Turkey joins, the new border of the union will 
     extend to Iran, Iraq, Syria, Armenia, Azerbaijan and 
     Georgia. That would pose a "policy challenge and 
     require significant investment" to manage migration and 
     asylum, and fight organized crime, terrorism and 
     trafficking of human beings, drugs and illicit weapons, 
     the report warns. 
 
     It also acknowledges the high cost of farm aid to 
     Turkey if it joins, as well as charges that human 
     rights abuses and the influence of Turkey's military 
     are still a problem. But the report also concludes that 
     a long transition period could mitigate the impact of a 
     huge wave of migration, that Turkey's young population 
     could provide an important new labor source and that 
     the negotiating process itself would spur Turkey to 
     even more democratic reform. 
 
     Many opponents of Turkish membership point out that 
     about 90 percent of the country is geographically in 
     Asia, not Europe, and assert that the European Union as 
     an institution should not be sacrificed to solve the 
     geopolitical problems of the world. 
 
     Even the Vatican has entered the debate, although it is 
     split on the question. "Turkey has always represented 
     another continent in the course of history, in 
     permanent contrast to Europe," the Catholic Church's 
     top theologian, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, said in an 
     interview with Le Figaro Magazine in August, in 
     opposing Turkey's membership. 
 
     But on Thursday, Cardinal Angelo Sodano, the Vatican's 
     secretary of state, told reporters in Rome that the 
     Vatican "must remain neutral" on the matter. 
 
     The position of France has been particularly clever - 
     and calculated. 
 
     France knows well that no issue is more important for 
     Turkey than getting into the European Union. After 
     Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan swept into office 
     nearly two years ago, he listed membership in the union 
     as his government's highest priority, even before 
     improving Turkey's economy. 
 
     During a visit to Paris in July, Mr. Erdogan brought a 
     generous package of economic incentives, including the 
     purchase of 36 Airbus planes worth more than $1.5 
     billion. President Jacques Chirac responded with an 
     announcement that Turkey's candidacy was compatible 
     with "France's national interests." Now he has joined 
     three of his ministers, including Prime Minister Jean- 
     Pierre Raffarin, in calling for a referendum on the 
     question. 
 
     The opposition has frustrated many of the three million 
     Turks and Europeans of Turkish descent already living 
     in Europe beyond Turkey's borders. 
 
     "The European Union is playing with Turkey," said 
     Levent Karaus, 22, a Dutch-born airport worker, as he 
     played backgammon at a Turkish teahouse in western 
     Amsterdam.  "They say, "Come, come, come," and when 
     Turkey gets halfway across the bridge they say, "Stop." 
     " 
 
     At a nearby table, a group of young men of Turkish 
     descent playing cards said in chorus that Turkey should 
     not be allowed to join. 
 
     "They will flood into Europe," said Akag Acikgoz, 21, a 
     Dutch-born bouncer at a nightclub. "I don't want the 
     Turks to join, even if they are my people." 
 
     Firat Hokmanoglu, 18, a Dutch-born student, agreed, 
     saying: "Turkey is too poor to be in. Its getting in 
     doesn't really matter to me. I'm already here." 
 
     Helene Fouquet contributed reporting for this article. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶11. (U) Published October 1, 2004 by EUROFunding.com: 
 
     TITLE: European Commission simplifies funding of 
     external assistance 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The European Commission has decided today 
     to replace the existing range of financial instruments 
     for the delivery of external assistance with a simpler, 
     more efficient framework. 
 
     Instead of the current wide range of geographical and 
     thematic instruments that has grown up in an ad-hoc 
     manner over time, the new framework will comprise six 
     instruments only, four of them new. The four new 
     instruments are: an instrument for Pre-Accession 
     Assistance, a European Neighbourhood and Partnership 
     instrument, a Development Cooperation and Economic 
     Cooperation instrument, and an instrument for 
     stability. Two existing instruments, for Humanitarian 
     Aid, and for Macro Financial Assistance are not in need 
     of modification, and will be maintained. 
 
     MEDA, and a substantial number of thematic instruments, 
     for example the European Initiative for Democracy and 
     Human Rights. In the Mediterranean and Middle East 
     alone, co operation and assistance are managed through 
     no less than 13 regulations. All these Regulations have 
     significant differences in their programming and 
     implementation procedures. Managing the Community's 
     programmes on the basis of such a mixed and complex set 
     of instruments, in an efficient and coordinated way, 
     has become an increasingly difficult task. The 
     framework set out in this Communication radically 
     reduces these differences. 
 
     The Pre Accession Instrument will cover the candidate 
     countries (Turkey and Croatia) and the potential 
     candidate countries (the Western Balkans). It replaces 
     existing instruments PHARE, ISPA, SAPARD, CARDS as well 
     as a number of other regulations. 
 
     The European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument 
     will cover third countries participating in the 
     European Neighbourhood Policy i.e. the countries of the 
     south and eastern Mediterranean, Ukraine, Moldova and 
     Belarus, and the countries of the southern Caucasus, 
     thus replacing MEDA and part of TACIS. This instrument 
     will also support the Emus strategic partnership with 
     Russia. A specific and innovative feature of the 
     instrument is its cross-border co-operation component, 
     that brings together regions of Member States with 
     neighbouring countries sharing a common border. 
 
     The Development Cooperation and Economic Cooperation 
     Instrument will cover all countries territories and 
     regions that are not eligible for assistance under 
     either the Pre-Accession instrument or the European 
     Neighbourhood and Partnership instrument (replacing 
     ALA, EDF[1], etc.). 
 
     The Instrument for Stability is a new instrument to 
     tackle crises and instability in third countries and 
     address trans-border challenges including nuclear 
     safety and non-proliferation, the fight against 
     trafficking, organised crime and terrorism. 
 
     The Humanitarian Aid instrument and Macro Financial 
     Assistance will remain unchanged except that all Food 
     Aid of a humanitarian nature will be included under 
     Humanitarian Aid instead of being dealt with under a 
     separate Regulation. 
 
     Further information can be found in the "Communication 
     from the Commission to the Council and European 
     Parliament on the Instruments for External Assistance 
     under the Future Financial Perspective 2007-2013". END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶12. (U) Published October 1, 2004 by LE MONDE: 
 
     TITLE: France: Le Monde Examines Illegal Immigration 
     into Europe 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: France's major center-left daily Le Monde 
     recently has focused on trends in illegal immigration 
     to the European Union. The paper's online edition has 
     provided web-based Flash graphics detailing routes 
     taken by "clandestine" immigrants, their methods of 
     travel, and the adoption of recent legislative measures 
     throughout Europe to deal with the flow of illegal 
     immigrants. 
 
     German Intelligence services estimate that at least 
     500,000 illegal immigrants arrive each year in Europe 
     and receive about 5 billion euros in annual social 
     welfare benefits, a sum that ranks just behind drug 
     trafficking and arms smuggling receipts. 
 
     As of August 2004, there have been 9904 illegal 
     immigrants turned back at Europe's borders. 
     In the above diagram, yellow arrows represent routes 
     taken by illegal immigrants via sea, blue represents 
     land routes, and red represents air routes. 
 
     Immigration Routes from the Middle East The first 
     destination for illegal immigrants from Iran, Iraq, 
     Turkey, or Kurdistan is Istanbul, Turkey. From there, 
     they depart for either Brindisi or Bari, Italy or 
     Frankfurt, Germany, and then on to France, Spain, or 
     the United Kingdom. 
     Sea Routes From Istanbul, the route is by "zodiac" 
     boats with the immigrants leaving from the coasts of 
     the Aegean Sea. The cost of passage averages 1500 
     euros. 
 
     Air Routes Forged passports and tourist visas can be 
     bought in a travel agency for approximately 4,000 US 
     dollars with about eight days wait time. Air travel is 
     usually from Istanbul to Frankfurt, where an immigrant 
     seeks political asylum. 
 
     Land Routes Illegal immigrants traveling from Istanbul 
     to Germany -- usually by truck -- normally pass through 
     Greece, Bulgaria, and Romania. The Bulgarian border is 
     considered to be the most permeable. 
 
     Immigration Routes from East Africa Illegal immigrants 
     from East Africa travel via Istanbul, or Brindisi. Such 
     immigrants usually come from Sudan, Chad, Ethiopia, 
     Egypt, Somalia, Kenya, or Niger. 
 
     Via Italy Libya has become a major hub for illegal 
     African immigrants whose destinations are EU countries, 
     especially Italy, as Tripoli no longer requires a 
     transit visa for travelers from the "brother countries" 
     of continental Africa. 
 
     Via Turkey Departing from Sudan, frequently in cargo 
     ship containers originating in Eastern Europe, illegal 
     immigrants arrive in Turkey; they proceed on their way 
     to the Ukrainian port of Odessa, then via land route 
     through Moldavia, and on to Galati in southeast 
     Romania. 
 
     Immigration Routes from West Africa the typical route 
     for illegal immigrants is via Algeria, with Tamanrasset 
     as the first point of entry. Immigrants then travel 
     through Algeria by car or truck and cross the Moroccan 
     border at either Oujda or Nador. The goal is to reach 
     the enclave of Melilla, also known as "little Spain" or 
     Ceuta, on the Moroccan coast. Immigrants taking this 
     route are from Niger, Mali, Nigeria, Cameroun, Togo, 
     Ivory Coast, Ghana, Guinea, and Liberia. 
 
     The passage north to Gibraltar is usually made at night 
     in overcrowded boats called "pateras." Passage is 
     organized by traffickers who charge 600 to 2,000 euros 
     per person. Once in Spain, immigrants can travel to 
     other destinations within the EU. 
 
     Immigration Routes from Asia Illegal immigrants from 
     Asia, traveling by air or by land, come primarily from 
     China, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Sri 
     Lanka. Immigrants from Russia and the Federated 
     Republic of Chechnya travel primarily by land routes. 
 
     Air Routes Some Chinese immigrants fly directly to 
     Paris, using false Japanese or South Korean passports 
     that cost approximately 15,000 euros. 
 
     Land Routes Illegal immigrants from China cross the 
     Ukraine, Poland, and the Czech Republic by truck, 
     proceeding on foot across the Czech-German border into 
     Germany. Chinese immigrant networks are using Belgrade 
     as a hub. 
 
     From East to West Europe Illegal immigrants taking the 
     East-West route come mainly from Russia, Ukraine, 
     Moldavia, Belarus, Georgia, and the Caucasus. 
     Land Route Traveling by truck, car, and by foot, 
     illegal immigrants travel through Slovenia seeking to 
     reach Italy as their port of entry to the European 
     Union. Leaving from Chisinau, Moldova, they travel to 
     Italy by train, car, or by foot at night, crossing the 
     Romanian and Albanian borders. 
 
     Sea Route Illegal immigrants from Albania who arrive on 
     the Italian coast sail in small, flat, light-weight 
     boats called "scafi" that can travel below radar. Most 
     often, they arrive either in Lecce, in southern Italy, 
     in San Foca, a resort opposite the Albanian coast, or 
     in Bari, Brindisi, or Otranto. 
 
     European Legislation Countering Illegal Immigration 
     Current legislation being studied by the European 
     Commission includes the negotiation of a common asylum 
     rights policy; harmonization of penalties for those who 
     aid in human trafficking, those who aid or organize 
     coordinated transits through the EU, and penalizing 
     employers who overlook irregularities on work visas. 
     Sri Lanka, Macao, and Hong Kong have already signed 
     cooperation accords with the EU to combat illegal 
     immigration. The EU is negotiating with an additional 
     six countries -- Morocco, Ukraine, Russia, China, 
     Pakistan, and Algeria -- to sign agreements on 
     immigration policies. 
 
     The European Commission is also discussing the 
     implementation of a Europe wide database of all 
     temporary visas issued for the countries of the 
     Schengen zone and the creation of a European agency to 
     control borders. 
 
     The G5 Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and the UK meet 
     annually to discuss the undertaking of immigration 
     projects and legislation by the group such as: 
 
     -- Establishing a list of countries from which 
     immigrants to Europe are ineligible to claim asylum 
 
     -- Intensifying international cooperation to discover 
     and dismantle illegal immigrant and human trafficking 
     networks 
 
     -- Requiring airlines to provide passenger data before 
     arrival 
 
     UK Legislation In the United Kingdom, an illegal 
     immigrant can stay for an unlimited period while being 
     processed for political asylum. During this time, the 
     asylum seeker is provided with publicly-funded legal 
     services and housing. 
 
     Recent legislation includes a November 2002 law 
     providing for the reinforcement of border inspections 
     with France and Belgium, fines and penalties for 
     transportation companies caught carrying illegal 
     immigrants, wittingly or not, and the creation of 
     reception centers for asylum seekers. 
 
     -- The law also provides for the naturalization of some 
     50,000 immigrants who requested political asylum three 
     years or more prior to November 2002. The law also 
     enacted stricter penalties for asylum seekers who have 
     lost or misplaced their paperwork and made visas 
     obligatory for nationals of the 18 countries with the 
     highest number of immigrants to the UK. 
 
     According to the Home Office, the majority of asylum 
     seekers and illegal immigrants come from Somalia, 
     Afghanistan, Iraq, and Zimbabwe followed by China, 
     Iran, and Pakistan. It reported 61,050 requests for 
     asylum from undocumented and illegal immigrants in 
     ¶2003. While this is the highest number within the EU, 
     it is 43 percent less than the previous year, when the 
     new asylum law was enacted. 
 
     German Legislation At this time, an illegal immigrant 
     can remain in Germany for only 18 months while 
     processing for political asylum. 
 
     A law adopted on 9 July 2004 restricted even legal 
     immigration to Germany -- requiring an immigrant's 
     dossier to be re-examined after three years, providing 
     for the automatic expulsion of immigrants sentenced to 
     prison, the construction of deportation centers, and 
     the automatic expulsion of any immigrant deemed a 
     threat to national security. 
     According to the Interior Ministry, the majority of 
     illegal immigrants come from Turkey, Serbia and 
     Montenegro, Iraq, the Russian Federation and China. The 
     ministry reported that 50,600 immigrants in Germany 
     requested asylum in 2003. 
 
     Italian Legislation Italy allows an illegal immigrant 
     to remain in the country for only two months while 
     processing asylum documentation. 
 
     The "Bossi-Fini" law of 2002 required the 
     intensification of border patrols, digital 
     fingerprinting of all illegal immigrants, and immediate 
     expulsion of, or one year imprisonment for repeat 
     offenders. Although Italian employers classified 
     634,728 immigrants as documented workers in 2003, 
     residence permits will no longer be given to immigrants 
     not possessing valid work contracts. 
 
     Italy is currently negotiating an immigration treaty 
     with the Balkan countries (including Albania) and 
     Libya, under which Italy will have a fixed quota system 
     for immigrants. The countries, with which Italy is 
     negotiating, are being asked to institute mechanisms to 
     reintegrate returning illegal immigrants. 
 
     Italy saw a 40 percent decrease in reported cases of 
     illegal immigration in 2003 compared to the year prior 
     (14,331 vice 23,719). 
 
     According to the Interior Ministry, the majority of 
     illegal immigrants to Italy come from Sri Lanka, Iraq, 
     the former Yugoslavia, and Turkey. The Ministry 
     reported that 7,280 immigrants requested asylum in 
     ¶2002. 
 
     Spanish Legislation Spain allows 40 days for an illegal 
     immigrant to begin processing the documentation needed 
     to remain in country. However, the law of 29 October 
     2003 provided a statute of limitations on clandestine 
     immigration. The law provides local and federal police 
     the power, for up to 10 years, to bring charges against 
     a person who has entered the country illegally and 
     continues to reside within the country, even though he 
     or she may be a citizen at the time of prosecution. 
     Procedures are being negotiated to make it more 
     difficult for family members to rejoin each other once 
     asylum status has been granted to one member. There 
     will be severe penalties for immigrants caught trying 
     to enter the country illegally and for businesses that 
     knowingly employ illegal immigrants. In addition, 
     transportation companies, such as airlines, buses, and 
     trains, will be required to supply information on 
     passengers who do not use their return trip ticket on a 
     round trip purchase. 
 
     The Spanish and Moroccan police reportedly will 
     increase cooperative efforts to patrol the Straits of 
     Gibraltar and implement the Integrated Border Patrol 
     System (SIVE), a string of radar stations capable of 
     picking up the movement of small marine craft. 
 
     The Spanish Ministry of the Interior stated that of the 
     more than 70,000 immigrants deported in 2003, 16,000 
     entered Spain via clandestine coastal landings. In 
     2002, there were 6,179 requests for political asylum in 
     Spain from immigrants coming primarily from Morocco, 
     Algeria, Nigeria, Cuba, and Colombia. 
 
     Austrian Legislation Considered to be one of the most 
     extreme in the EU, a law adopted on 23 October 2003, 
     which allows only two months to begin processing for 
     residency status, does not permit demands for asylum to 
     be made at Austria's borders and bars additional 
     evidence to the court of appeal once the appellate 
     court has rendered its decision. An immigrant can also 
     be deported during the appellate process for any 
     reason. 
 
     The Austrian Ministry of the Interior reported 32,400 
     demands for asylum in 2003, with the majority of the 
     requestors originating from Russia, Turkey, India, 
     Serbia and Montenegro, and Afghanistan. END TEXT. 
EDELMAN