04ANKARA4698
MEDIA CLAIMS OF US SUPPORT FOR PKK COMPLICATE
Thu Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/SE, EUR/PPD, NEA/PPD, INR/R/MR 
 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PTER TU
SUBJECT: MEDIA CLAIMS OF US SUPPORT FOR PKK COMPLICATE 
MISSION EFFORT IN TURKEY 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
----------------------------- 
MEDIA SLAMS U.S. ON PKK ISSUE 
----------------------------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The PKK issue, and the perceived lack of action by 
the United States against PKK terrorists in northern Iraq, 
has become a chronic, negative story in Turkish media 
reporting on the U.S. and U.S.-Turkish relations.  The story 
contributes to widespread negative perceptions of the United 
States and the U.S. effort in Iraq, and makes it more 
difficult for the mission to highlight positive developments 
in the U.S.-Turkish relationship through the Turkish media. 
The following are some of the most recent examples of 
negative coverage that illustrate how the PKK issue is 
complicating our relationship with Turkey and our public 
diplomacy efforts. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
AMCONSUL ADANA ACCUSED OF SUPPORTING PKK 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Columns in two leading dailies, the staunchly secular 
"Milliyet" and "Cumhuriyet," on August 14 accused Amconsul 
Adana of supporting the PKK by visiting Diyarbakir Mayor 
Osman Baydemir.  Baydemir had come under heavy fire in the 
Turkish media in recent days for visiting the family of a 
PKK militant who was allegedly involved in the killing of a 
security guard and was later killed in a shootout with 
Turkish police.  "Milliyet" columnist Melih Asik wrote that 
"the goal of Adana Second Consul Alison's visit to 
Diyarbakir Mayor Osman Baydemir was to express support for 
the mayor, who had expressed his condolences to the family 
of a PKK militant."  "America is now playing its game 
openly," he continued.  "While protecting the PKK on Kandil 
Mountain and facilitating the terrorists' operations in 
Turkey, now it has taken the organization under its wing in 
this country," he concluded. 
 
¶3. (U) Columnist Ali Sirmen made a similar argument the same 
day in "Cumhuriyet."  Sirmen wrote that the Adana Consul 
justified her visit to Baydemir "to pass on condolences for 
the killing of a security guard and wounding of two 
policemen by the PKK/Kongra-Gel." (NOTE: this claim is 
factually incorrect. Amconsul Adana's visit to Baydemir was 
carefully considered and intended to convey a message to 
Baydemir on the need to maintain a clear distance from the 
PKK and to condemn PKK terrorism.  END NOTE.)  "But 
Baydemir's office isn't the right place to pass on such 
condolences," Sirmen argued.  "In fact, the Consul was using 
Baydemir as a vehicle for passing condolences to the family 
of the PKK terrorist," he continued.  "The United States is 
supporting Kurdish independence in Iraq and, despite its 
many promises to Turkey, has failed to take any initiative 
against the PKK," Sirmen concluded. 
 
----------------------------------- 
U.S. "DOUBLE STANDARD" ON TERRORISM 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) On the same day, a front-page story in "Cumhuriyet" 
titled "U.S. Embassy Double Standard on the PKK" criticized 
the embassy for sending a warning message to U.S. citizens 
on possible PKK attacks on August 15, anniversary date of 
the organization's first violent actions, "while the U.S. 
has failed to take a single action against 5,000 PKK 
militants in northern Iraq."  "Cumhuriyet" argues that the 
PKK has been "emboldened" by U.S. inaction.  The paper then 
notes that after Ambassador Edelman told reporters several 
months ago that "the U.S. will not take military action 
against PKK terrorists," the PKK announced that it would end 
its cease-fire and resume its attacks in Turkey.  (NOTE: In 
fact, the quote is incorrect, and the link with the end of 
the PKK cease-fire is misleading.  The Ambassador actually 
said that a U.S. military action "should not be expected in 
the near future."  The PKK had been saying for months before 
the Ambassador made that comment that it would end its 
"cease-fire" on June 1.  END NOTE.) 
-------------- 
AMERICA'S PKK! 
-------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The following day, "Sabah," one of Turkey's largest- 
circulation dailies, carried an extensive front-page story 
on the PKK under the headline "America's PKK!"  The article 
reports on the activities of jailed PKK leader Abdullah 
Ocalan's brother Osman, who has reportedly broken away from 
the PKK in northern Iraq and established a new political 
party.  Based on statements allegedly made by Abdullah 
Ocalan through his Turkish lawyers, "Sabah" implies that the 
U.S. is sheltering and supporting Osman Ocalan, and that 
U.S. officials may have passed "a sack of money" to Osman in 
exchange for his cooperation.  As further "evidence" of the 
bargain the U.S. has allegedly reached with Osman Ocalan, 
the paper cites a declaration by Osman's new party (the 
Patriotic Democratic Party) claiming to support the U.S. 
occupation in Iraq and calling on Kurds to cooperate with 
the United States.  The article concludes with Abdullah 
Ocalan criticizing his brother for "selling out the Kurds 
and the Middle East for a bowl of soup from the United 
States."  "The U.S. nurtured Saddam for a time as well, then 
attacked him," Abdullah Ocalan reportedly said, warning that 
"the same thing could happen to Osman." 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
EMBASSY FIGHTS BACK, BUT THE STORY CONTINUES 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Embassy Ankara issued a press release on August 16 in 
an effort to counter the speculation and misinformation 
generated by the PKK story over the weekend.  The embassy 
statement noted that our Adana Consul had given a 
consistent, uncompromising message against the PKK and PKK 
terrorism to all of her interlocutors in Diyarbakir last 
week.  It also noted that Turkey has had no better friend 
than the United States in its effort to combat PKK terrorism 
over the past 20 years.  The assumption that the U.S. is 
supporting the PKK or a PKK faction, however, has become 
accepted as conventional wisdom in the Turkish media.  A 
"Milliyet" report on August 18 repeats claims made by 
"Sabah" over the weekend that Osman Ocalan is under U.S. 
control and is being used by the U.S. to counter hard-line 
PKK elements.  (COMMENT: Ironically, some Turkish 
commentators have actually welcomed U.S. "support" for Osman 
Ocalan and interpreted this "support" as part of a carefully 
conceived U.S. strategy to fulfill its commitment to Turkey 
to eliminate the PKK threat.  END COMMENT.) 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The press ferment on the PKK reported here is just 
a snapshot taken from the long-running Turkish media serial 
on the alleged relationship between the U.S. and the PKK. 
Of course, many of the Turkish press claims are based on 
false information, innuendo, and flawed analysis.  But the 
problems they create for our relationship with Turkey, and 
particularly our public diplomacy efforts, are real.  The 
stories will undoubtedly continue until we can change the 
perception that the U.S. is unable or unwilling to fulfill 
its commitment to eliminate the PKK threat in Iraq. 
 
EDELMAN