04ANKARA5819
PROPOSED SUPPORT TO GAZIANTEP AMERICAN HOSPITAL
Wed Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131415Z Oct 04UNCLAS ANKARA 005819 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR USAID - DCHA/PVC - ASHA: GEORGE LIKE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID TU
SUBJECT: PROPOSED SUPPORT TO GAZIANTEP AMERICAN HOSPITAL 
 
REF: STATE 175490 
 
¶1.  Embassy Ankara strongly supports the reftel proposal to 
provide a $600,000 ASHA grant to Gaziantep American Hospital. 
 Embassy's evaluation of Gaziantep American Hospital is keyed 
to questions in reftel para 4. 
 
a and b) Gaziantep American Hospital has a long and 
well-known history as a symbol of American generosity and 
support for the people of Turkey, dating back to its founding 
in 1851.  During most of its history it has featured American 
doctors.  The former Regional Medical Officer (RMO) 
responsible for Turkey described the hospital as "a citadel 
of great potential for reaching out and serving a region of 
Turkey lacking in decent (western standard) health care." 
The hospital includes a medical education center and features 
extensive outreach programs. 
 
c) The former RMO conducted an extensive tour of the hospital 
in June 2004.  He was impressed by the physical layout of the 
hospital and the professionalism of the staff.  He was 
especially impressed by the hospital's medical director and 
demonstrated his confidence in the hospital by referring 
difficult cases to the hospital, including one medevac from 
Kirkuk, Iraq. 
 
d) Turkey's health care system provides uneven care and 
suffers from chronic underfinancing.  Southeast Turkey, where 
the Gaziantep American Hospital is located, is underdeveloped 
and medical care is poor.  Turkey's medical universities 
provide outstanding training for doctors and specialists, and 
medical services in the big cities and for middle and upper 
class Turks is generally very good.  However, medical care 
outside of the big cities and in the underdeveloped regions 
of Turkey is of poorer quality.  Providing modern medical 
technology for the Gaziantep American Hospital will 
demonstrate the long-term commitment of the United States to 
Turkey and its people.  Embassy would showcase the donation, 
perhaps including the participation of the Ambassador and the 
consulate in nearby Adana. 
 
¶2.  Embassy would be pleased to answer any questions.  POC is 
Economics Officer Kurt Donnelly.  donnellykd@state.gov. 
EDELMAN