04ANKARA6150
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, OCTOBER 14-31, 2004
Mon Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ANKARA 006150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, OCTOBER 14-31, 2004 
 
 
¶1.   (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
   international media sources published the following news 
   articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles originally 
   published in Turkish is provided through unofficial local 
   FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published October 31, 2004 by the Turkish Language 
Cumhuriyet News: 
 
     TITLE: NO VISA REQUIREMENT FOR GEORGIANS 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: A decision by the Artvin Governor now 
     allows Georgian citizens to stay in Turkey for 72 hours 
     without a visa if they submit their passports to the 
     police upon arriving in the port city of Hopa. 
 
     This implementation aims at increasing tourist and 
     commercial trips (to Turkey). 
 
     Artvin Governor Orhan Kirli said that after the 
     Georgian Government grants permission, Turkish 
     citizens, too, would be able to travel to Georgia for 
     short-term trips without a visa.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published October 31, 2004 by the Turkish Language 
Cumhuriyet News: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Jandarma captured 37 Bengalis on the road 
     to Bolu.  The 37 people had been in a truck for three 
     days.  The driver was detained.  The Jandarma offered 
     food and water to the starving Bengalis.  An 
     investigation is going on.  END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Broadcast October 28, 2004 by Pakistan-based GEO News 
Service in Urdu and English: 
 
     TITLE: 530 deportees reach home from Oman 
 
     TEXT: KARACHI: 530 Pakistanis arrested in Oman due to 
     illegal entry arrived in Karachi after deportation from 
     Muscat. 
 
     They belonged to various parts of the country and were 
     arrested during last two weeks while trying to enter 
     illegally via sea route in the Gulf state to seek 
     lucrative jobs. 
 
     People involved in the human trafficking racket fetched 
     thousands of rupees from these poor people and later 
     disappeared leaving them in quandary. Some of them were 
     caught while on their way because of strict security 
     whereas majority were arrested after illegal entry. 
 
     These Pakistani nationals were sent back through Al 
     Fajr-II boat. Ansar Burney welfare trust arranged food, 
     clothing and shoes for them at Ghas Bandar port. They 
     will be allowed to leave for home after Immigration 
     clearance. 
 
     Some of the deportees told that Mand area of 
     Balochistan became the international market of human 
     trafficking where different rates have been fixed for 
     Muscat, Dubai, Turkey, London and other countries. They 
     were also complained about inhuman treatment and 
     torture in jails. END TEXT. 
 
¶5. (U) Published October 26, 2004 by the Turkish Language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Sixteen of 23 defendants on trial for 
     holding 17 people including minors by force for 
     domestic and agricultural labor were released from 
     prison with charges pending in Kozan's heavy penal 
     court.  Their trial will continue though.  One suspect 
     (Omer Binici) is still at large.  An arrest warrant has 
     been issued for him. 
 
     Names of the defendants under arrest and released were 
     (16): Ahmet, Recai, Abdurrahman, Husamettin, Mustafa, 
     Feyzullah, Ibrahim, Ihsan, Sacit, Osman, Fatih, Isa, 
     Lutfi Topaloglu, Halis Ozkal, Asaf Mercan, Mustafa 
     Kutlu 
 
     Defendants who are not under arrest: 
 
     Ercan, Suleyman, Ibrahim, Cetin Topaloglu, Cumali 
     Mercan, Mumtaz Dil. END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published October 24, 2004 by the Detroit Free Press: 
 
     TITLE: MARTA SALIJ: Sex on the auction block 
     BY MARTA SALIJ, FREE PRESS BOOKS WRITER 
     BEGIN TEXT: "Every 10 minutes, a woman or child is 
     trafficked into the United States for forced labor,'" 
     begins Gilbert King's incendiary book, "Woman, Child 
     for Sale: The New Slave Trade in the 21st Century." 
     Yes, into the United States. Every 10 minutes. 
 
     About 50,000 slaves are brought into the United States 
     each year, the CIA estimated in 1999. Worldwide, about 
     27 million people are enslaved -- twice the number that 
     were victimized by the African slave trade. 
 
     The slaves are usually young women and children. They 
     come from Asia, Africa, Central America -- and in a 
     fourth wave that began about a decade ago -- from the 
     former republics of the Soviet Union. Some are enslaved 
     to work in factories or as domestics. 
 
     But a large and growing number are sex slaves, forced 
     to work as prostitutes in Europe, the Middle East, the 
     Far East -- and in the United States. 
 
     They are young women trapped in nations devastated by 
     economic collapse or war. Some are orphans. Then a 
     seeming godsend appears: A job in a foreign country as 
     a nanny, maid or waitress. Maybe the job is offered by 
     a neighbor or an administrator at the orphanage. The 
     girls sign up, sure that they can save themselves and 
     their families. 
 
     But once they are past their borders, they discover 
     that they have been sold into the sex industry. They 
     are taken to apartments in Germany, Israel and 
     elsewhere. They are raped, beaten, burned, starved. 
     They are locked in cellars or attics and warned that 
     they will be killed if they try to escape. 
 
     Then they are turned out to work bars and brothels and 
     roadsides. Some are forced to service UN peacekeeping 
     forces or U.S. contractors in various hotspots. Some 
     are bought and sold yet again. 
 
     If they try to go to the police, they are not believed. 
     The police are often their clients or chums of the 
     thugs who hold them. 
 
     If they somehow escape, they are chased down and 
     murdered -- sometimes even months after, when they've 
     made it home. 
 
     Some die of disease or of abortions or in childbirth. 
     Some, of course, kill themselves. 
 
 
     In this day and age 
 
     This is all very hard to believe, I know. We are 
     civilized people. Aren't we? This is the 21st Century. 
     Isn't it? 
 
     That is what I believed, until I read King's book and 
     the even more furious work by Canadian journalist 
     Victor Malarek, "The Natashas: Inside the New Global 
     Sex Trade." 
 
     No other books that I've read in my five years as a 
     critic have demoralized me so much or have given me so 
     little hope for humankind. The victimization is so 
     complete that I despair at what can be done. 
 
     But it is precisely books like King's and Malarek's 
     that we civilized and free people must read and act 
     upon because the evil is so great. 
 
     Begin with Malarek's book, "The Natashas" because it is 
     more visceral. Malarek concentrates on the trafficking 
     of women from the former Soviet Union, particularly 
     Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova. His title comes 
     from what the Israeli johns call the new prostitutes: 
     Natasha the Russian. 
     What makes Malarek's book a first must-read is the 
     heartbreaking detail he gives. He has traveled 
     throughout the Middle East and Europe, talking to the 
     women, as well as to officials who are trying to stop 
     the traffic -- and sometimes to officials who are not 
     trying. 
     In a chapter that will turn your stomach, Malarek 
     describes his October 2001 visit to Pristina, the 
     capital of Kosovo. He accompanied members of the UN 
     Trafficking in Prostitution Investigation Unit on raids 
     through the U.S.-controlled sector. 
 
     Malarek meets a Texas lawman, John Randolph, who works 
     for DynCorp, the U.S. firm that recruits American 
     police officers to work as international cops for the 
     United Nations. Randolph tells Malarek about a raid the 
     week before that rescued seven teenage sex slaves in a 
     nearby town, all of whom told him that Americans had 
     been their customers. 
 
     Then Randolph's bosses at DynCorp learn about Malarek 
     and things turn strange. A series of secret UN raids on 
     other bars is suddenly scrapped by the U.S. military 
     commander. Then, a UN internal affairs investigation 
     into the aborted raids goes nowhere. Coincidence? 
     Malarek can find out no more. 
 
     Lucrative commodities 
 
     Humans are now the third most lucrative commodity 
     traded illegally, after drugs and guns, international 
     law enforcement officials estimate. King's book, 
     "Woman, Child for Sale,"' includes all the statistics 
     and background you could wish to have, including a 
     catalog of what the world has tried, with little 
     success, to do about it. 
 
     How does the trade flourish? The basic fuel is the 
     essential wickedness of people to persist in seeing 
     other people as not human. 
 
     Sexism and racism factor in, too. Malarek interviews 
     the pimps and customers who argue that men cannot be 
     expected to control their sex drives, so prostitution - 
     - even using slaves -- is a social good. Others argue 
     that if it weren't for the foreign slaves -- who are, 
     by definition, subhuman -- men would brutalize their 
     own women. Better theirs than ours, in other words. 
 
     And -- I can barely type this -- some argue that they 
     are helping the slaves by giving them food and shelter 
     they couldn't get at home. 
 
     There is plenty of money to be made, so greed is 
     another fuel. And whatever greed cannot sustain, the 
     well-machined brutality of the purveyors can. And who 
     are these purveyors? The Russian mob, the Italian 
     Mafia, Colombian drug cartels, the Chinese Triads and 
     the Japanese Yakuza -- as well as gangs from the United 
     States, Ukraine, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, 
     Turkey, Serbia, Israel and Albania. 
 
     Another fuel is the persistent belief by otherwise 
     enlightened people that prostitution and other sex 
     industries involve consenting adults. This is the fuel 
     that proves most dangerous to the enslaved women. 
 
     "To the casual observer," Malarek writes, "they blend 
     in seamlessly with the women who have chosen to 
     exchange money for sex. In their cheap makeup, sleazy 
     outfits and stiletto heels, they walk the same walk and 
     talk the same talk. They smile, they wink, they pose 
     and they strut, but they do it because they know what 
     will happen if they don't." 
 
     And now, we civilized and free people have no excuse 
     for not knowing, too. END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published October 22, 2004 by the London Telegraph: 
 
     It's OK for men to hit us, says wives' poll in Turkey 
     More than a third of Turkish women believe they deserve 
     to be beaten if they argue with their husbands, deny 
     them sex, neglect children or burn a meal, according to 
     a survey reported by the Anatolia news agency 
     yesterday. The survey found that 39 per cent of women 
     said their husbands were right to beat them. In rural 
     areas, the figure rose to 57 per cent. 
 
     As many as half of all Turkish women are estimated to 
     be victims of physical violence in their families. 
 
     The survey and report come at a crucial moment as the 
     European Union, which Turkey is seeking to join, has 
     put pressure on the government to protect women. 
 
     In the Anatolia poll, arguing with one's husband topped 
     the list of justified reasons for domestic violence, 
     followed by spending too much and neglecting children. 
 
     The poll of 8,075 married women by Hacettepe 
     University, Ankara, was funded by the EU and the 
     Turkish government. 
 
     "A culture of violence in Turkey is putting women in 
     double jeopardy. Not only are many not safe in their 
     own homes, but they also are denied access to justice," 
     said William Schulz, executive director of Amnesty 
     International USA. 
 
     Some acts of violence involve traditional practices, 
     including so-called honour crimes and forced marriage. 
     A study in east and southeast Turkey found that 45.7 
     per cent of women were not consulted about the choice 
     of husband and 50.8 per cent were married without their 
     consent. Women who refuse their family's choice are at 
     risk of violence and even death. END TEXT. 
 
¶8. (U) Published October 21, 2004 by the Turkish-language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
     TITLE: SECURITY FORCES ARREST 16 ILLEGAL MIGRANTS IN 
     AYVALIK 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: BALIKESIR (A.A) - Security forces arrested 
     16 migrants in Ayvalik town of northwestern city of 
     Balikesir on Thursday as they were about to set sail 
     for Greek island of Lesbos. 
 
     The migrants of Somalian and Mauritanian origin were 
     taken into custody for violating Turkish borders and 
     passport law. 
 
     Security forces also arrested five persons for aiding 
     and abetting to the illegal migrants. 
 
     The migrants will be deported once the legal 
     proceedings are completed. END TEXT. 
 
¶9. (U) Published October 21, 2004 by the Turkish-language 
Anatolian News Agency: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: A Turkish citizen was sentenced by a Sisam 
     Island court in Greece to 6 years and 9 months 
     imprisonment and fined 29 thousand Euros for 
     involvement in human trafficking. 
 
     According to the Greek ANA news agency Vural Yavuz 
     Selim was captured yesterday by the Coast Guard in 
     Sisam after he took 13 Afghan citizens to that island. 
 
     He will be sent to jail on Sakiz Island. 
 
     He can apply to the appeals court but because of the 
     type of crime he committed, he would still remain in 
     jail until the appeals court reaches a decision. END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶10. (U) Published by the Scotsman News on October 17, 2004 
with excerpts published in the Turkish-language Cumhuriyet 
News and Turkish-language Sabah News. 
 
     TITLE: The tough battle against Europe's sex traffic 
     shame 
 
     BY CHRIS STEPHEN IN MOLDOVA 
     BEGIN TEXT: ANNA'S nose is red from the cold. She has 
     decided to tell her great secret while standing outside 
     her farmhouse in a bleak part of southern Moldova, 
     while her family eat dinner inside. 
     Braced against the wind, she tells of when she realised 
     she had become a sex slave. 
     Last year, with her small farm bankrupt and her husband 
     laid-off, she joined the huge stream of migrants 
     leaving Moldova, heading for what she thought was 
     domestic work in a family house in Turkey. 
 
     She had seen TV commercials warning of the dangers of 
     the sex trade but assumed she, as a married woman, 
     would not be a target and, anyway, the agent who 
     recruited her was a friend from the same village. 
 
     She was desperate and the 100 a month she would earn 
     would at least put food on the family table back home. 
 
     After a few weeks of cleaning work, the woman of the 
     house took the children away to visit relatives, and 
     her boss invited friends around for a late night game 
     of cards. Anna was told to stay late serving drinks. 
 
     The card session grew more boisterous, the players more 
     drunk, and Anna was puzzled - there seemed to be no 
     money changing hands in the frenzied game. Then her 
     boss broke the news. She was the prize. Later that 
     night she was raped by one of her boss's friends. In 
     the morning, her boss told her there would be more of 
     the same. "He told me if I did not do as he said he 
     would kill me," she said, her brown eyes watering. 
 
     "He told me who would know? I was not registered with 
     the police, I was not registered with anybody, I could 
     simply disappear." 
 
     Anna had become a victim of sexual trafficking, Eastern 
     Europe's most notorious growth industry. 
 
     Estimates by the United States put the number of girls 
     and women trafficked for sex as more than half a 
     million worldwide. Moldova, the poorest country in 
     Europe, leads the way. More than 600,000 of the three 
     million population are out of the country at any one 
     time, most employed illegally. 
 
     Belatedly, the Council of Europe is trying to stem the 
     flow. Work began this month on an ambitious cross- 
     border convention against trafficking, but many here in 
     Moldova doubt it will stem the tide. 
 
     "Rules will not be enough, the traffickers will always 
     find a way through," Anna tells me. "Look around you. 
     While conditions here stay as they are, women will 
     always run away. There is nothing here for them." 
 
     Her home village, kept secret at her request, lies in 
     the heart of Gagauzia, a Turkish-speaking province once 
     rich in agriculture. 
 
     But eastern markets have dried up and the European 
     Union, struggling with its Wine Lake, is not about to 
     start importing Moldovan wine. 
 
     The result is grinding poverty and a huge flow of 
     migrants. While politicians wring their hands, the 
     traffickers are getting smarter. In the past, they 
     would smuggle women and girls on forged documents. Now 
     they have hit on a much better idea - bribery. Women 
     now pass borders on legal documents, visas and permits. 
 
     "Trafficking could not exist without the complicity of 
     Moldovan government officials at some level," says Alan 
     Freedman, head of the Moldovan office of the 
     International Organisation for Migration (IOM). "You 
     cannot move this number of people across the border 
     without corruption." 
     Moldovan president Vladimir Voronin has promised tough 
     action, but with his bureaucrats also impoverished, it 
     is a tall order. And even if corruption can be tackled, 
     the root problem of poverty remains. 
 
     "You have a Moldovan girl of 16 in a village, her 
     prospects are of earning $25 a month in a canning 
     factory," says Mr Freedman. "Frankly, the migration 
     argument is extremely persuasive." He adds: "The best 
     way to prevent trafficking is to create healthy 
     communities." 
 
     Some women, even when they realise the sexual slavery 
     facing them, decide to stay, rather than return home to 
     their bleak villages. 
 
     In the West, there seems to be no shortage of men 
     willing to pay for what amounts to rape. "Sometimes 
     what they do is called prostitution, but what these 
     women endure is not prostitution," says Tatiana 
     Allamuradova of local support group, Contact. "These 
     women are enduring slavery." 
 
     Anna endured rape and occasional beatings in Istanbul 
     for several months, then had a breakdown and fled home. 
 
     Her story has a happy ending. She was given a small 
     grant by IOM to buy livestock for her empty farm. She 
     has turned the farm into a thriving business, and her 
     husband now works for her as the book keeper. 
 
     But she worries over whether to tell her husband, who 
     assumes that she returned from a regular cleaning job. 
 
     "I cannot take the chance," she says. "This place has 
     old rules. Some women have done this, and the husbands 
     have divorced them, and I don't want to be alone." END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶11. (U) Published October 14, 2004 by the Turkish language 
Sabah News: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: 100 illegal immigrants, including 88 
     Pakistanis, were captured in the Bahcelievler and Fatih 
     districts of Istanbul. 
 
     The Pakistanis in bahcelievler reportedly were brought 
     to Istanbul through Dogubeyazit and Van.  They 
     reportedly were hoping to go to Greece in return for 
     $7000. 
 
     Those captured in Fatih were six Afghanis, four 
     Iranians and two Iraqis.  Some other illegal immigrants 
     managed to escape. END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN