04ANKARA3156
MOD'S DEFENSE BUDGET STATEMENT MIFFS TGS
Tue Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 003156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/08/2029 
TAGS: MARR PREL PGOV TU GR
SUBJECT: MOD'S DEFENSE BUDGET STATEMENT MIFFS TGS 
 
 
REF: A. FBIS GMP20040518000178 
     ¶B. ANKARA 2791 
     ¶C. ANKARA 3059 AND PREVIOUS 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reasons 1.4 (b) and 
(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  MOD Gonul surprised TGS with his statement 
to the Greek MOD that Turkey would slash its defense spending 
by $10 billion.  TGS believes this was in part an attempt by 
the government to allocate resources to domestic priorities 
at the military's expense.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Minister of Defense Vecdi Gonul told his Greek 
counterpart, Spilios Spiliotopoulos, that Turkey had decided 
to cut its defense spending by $10 billion when the two met 
on the margins of an EU defense ministerial in Brussels May 
17, according to press reports that we have confirmed.  Gonul 
reportedly said that this amount included the three major 
procurement programs worth $6 billion that the Defense 
Industry Executive Committee decided to cancel three days 
earlier (ref b).  Turkish newspapers reported that the 
reduction would occur over 5 years and that Greece would 
respond with a 25% defense spending reduction over the same 
period. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Turkish General Staff (TGS) J5 Greece/Cyprus Director 
RADM Mucahit Sislioglu told polmilcouns June 3 that Gonul's 
statement was completely uncoordinated and unexpected.  Gonul 
participated in the May 14 Executive Committee meeting, 
Sislioglu observed; there was no way he could forget that it 
was the tenders--not the programs--that were canceled.  In 
all three cases, the requirements remained and some 
procurement action would move forward.  Sislioglu feared that 
the Greeks would take Gonul's words as a commitment, despite 
the limited budgetary role played by the Ministry of National 
Defense.  (Note: TGS generally negotiates most of the 
military's budget directly with the government.)  The admiral 
opined that Gonul's statement appeared to be an attempt to 
limit defense spending as a gesture to the EU, to engender 
goodwill with Greece, and to free up resources for domestic 
programs.  That was the opinion he sent up his chain of 
command, he said.  Officials at TGS had asked MND Plans and 
Principles Director General RADM Serdar Dulger why he had not 
stopped the minister from making this commitment, but Dulger 
claimed he had not known what Gonul was going to say and that 
there was no way to intervene during the meeting, according 
to Sislioglu. 
 
 
¶4. (U) TGS DCHOD GEN Ilker Basbug contradicted Gonul's 
characterization that the canceled tenders constituted a 
budget cut in his opening remarks at a May 27-28 symposium on 
Turkish security in Istanbul:  In order to meet Turkish Armed 
Forces transformation goals, "the ratio of the defense budget 
allocated...is 2.4% of GNP" and 6.6% of the national budget. 
Regarding the decision to "change the models of procurement 
for modern tank, attack helicopter and unmanned aerial 
vehicle projects," he said, "the mentioned requirements of 
the Turkish Armed Forces are still valid." 
 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: Even before Gonul's remark, rumors had been 
circulating in Ankara that one reason for the May 14 decision 
to terminate the tenders on the three major defense programs 
was an AK Party plot to slash defense spending.  We cannot 
imagine CHOD GEN Hilmi Ozkok, a voting member of the 
Executive Committee, would have gone along with such a plan. 
That said, coming on the heels of the Imam-Hatip controversy 
(ref c), Gonul's surprising comment has fed already 
deep-seated suspicion within the Turkish military about the 
AK's intentions.  End comment. 
EDELMAN