04ANKARA6314
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006314 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
US troops target Fallujah - Hurriyet 11/7 
Americans call on civilians to evacuate Fallujah - Sabah 
11/7 
Bloody day in Samarra: 37 killed - Aksam 11/7 
Israel prepares Gaza for Arafat burial - Aksam 
Macedonia anger in Thessaloniki - Milliyet 
Greek Cypriots want Turkey vetoed at EU summit - Milliyet 
Greek daily: US will recognize `TRNC' - Sabah 
Bush `trauma': Democrat, 25, commits suicide - Hurriyet 
Americans flee Bush for New Zealand, Australia, Canada - 
Aksam 11/7 
Thousands of Americans flee Bush - Milliyet 11/7 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
34 policemen killed in Iraq, government declares emergency 
rule - Zaman 
Iraq declares emergency rule - Cumhuriyet 
Violence on rise in Iraq - Radikal 11/7 
Half of Greek Cypriots oppose EU entry talks with Turkey - 
Zaman 
Angry at Bush, Democrat youth commits suicide - Cumhuriyet 
Arafat's situation ambiguous - Yeni Safak 
Arafat's situation neither good, nor bad - Cumhuriyet 11/7 
300 Palestinian children in detention - Cumhuriyet 
Yerevan softens tone on `genocide' - Zaman 11/7 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ambassador Schnabel on US/Turkey, EU:  US Ambassador to the 
EU, Rockwell Schnabel, said in an exclusive with the Turkish 
daily "Zaman" prior to his visit to Ankara on November 9 
that the Bush Administration has changed its tactic in 
supporting Turkey's EU drive.  `Membership is an internal 
issue of the EU, so at this point we are pursuing quieter 
policy in support of Turkey's goal,' Schnabel said. 
Turkey's prospective EU membership will bring about a `win- 
win' situation, Schanbel noted, dismissing charges that the 
US aims to `dilute' the EU by pushing Turkey inside the 
European bloc.  Ambassador Schnabel said the US prefers a 
stronger Europe.  `We share the same values as Europe, but 
we sometimes express ourselves differently,' he emphasized. 
Europe's old and outdated economic elements will be 
revitalized by the competition Turkey's membership will 
bring, Schnabel stressed.  President Bush's second term in 
office will bring steps forward in an effort to put our 
relations with Europe on track, he added.  Schnabel also 
pointed to the significant role Turkey is expected to play 
in the Greater Middle East (GME) initiative.  Schnabel 
denied claims about US intentions to control the Middle East 
through the GME project, saying the US wanted to help 
transparent and democratic regimes to emerge in the region. 
 
Greek Cypriots oppose Turkey's EU drive:  A majority of 
Greek Cypriots want Nicosia to veto the opening of accession 
talks between Turkey and the European Union, according to a 
poll published on  Sunday.  52 percent of Greek Cypriots 
said they want Nicosia to exercise its veto right, while 
just 15 percent disagreed.  Greek Cypriot opposition to 
accession talks with Turkey has increased since a similar 
poll in July, according to the survey released by the 
Cypriot daily "Politis."  At that time, 45 percent of Greek 
Cypriots said they would support any decision by President 
Papadopoulos to veto the start of Turkish entry talks. 
Papadopoulos has set a series of conditions, including 
diplomatic recognition by Ankara, before the EU grants 
Turkey a date for membership negotiations. 
Nicosia concerned by possible US recognition of `TRNC': 
Greek Cypriots are worried that the US, following its 
decision to recognize the name Macedonia, will recognize the 
breakaway Turkish statelet in north Cyprus, weekend papers 
report.  Greek Cypriot papers also claim that American 
Airlines (AA) and Turkish Airlines (THY) have signed an 
agreement to begin international flights to Ercan Airport in 
the north. 
 
Yerevan changes foreign policy priorities:  For the first 
time, the Armenian government said in its 2005 budget 
proposal discussed at the parliament that Yerevan gives 
priority to the improvement of relations with Turkey.  In 
its 2005 budget discussions, the Armenian government has not 
asked for allocation of funds for propagating Armenian 
charges of  `genocide' carried out by Turks in 1915. 
Yerevan also said it aimed to continue cooperation with 
international organizations set up in the region in the post- 
Soviet era, and to `integrate' with Russia, the US, and the 
EU.  The Azerbaijani press portrayed the decision by the 
Armenian government as an `historic' step.  Ankara welcomed 
the opening by Yerevan with `cautious optimism,' according 
to high-level Turkish sources.  Armenia should also end its 
occupation of Nagorno-Karabakh, and officially renounce its 
territorial claims on Turkey, sources told "Hurriyet." 
Turkish and Armenian diplomats are to meet in Istanbul next 
week. 
 
Syrian FM due in Turkey:  Syrian FM Faruk al-Sara will be in 
Ankara Monday for a two-day working visit.  Sara will meet 
with Foreign Minister Gul and President Sezer to discuss the 
upcoming conference of Iraq's neighbors to be held in Egypt 
in late November.  The two sides will also discuss the 
Middle East peace process and other regional issues. 
 
Turkish truckers killed in Iraq:  A Turkish truck driver 
transporting goods for US soldiers stationed around Baghdad 
was found Sunday shot dead in Samarra, north of the Iraqi 
capital.  Another Turk was killed Saturday when his fuel 
truck convoy was attacked near Mosul. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Bush Re-Election 
 
"The Second Bush Era" 
Gazanfer Gur wrote in the mass appeal-sensational "Posta" 
(11/8): "The reelection of George Bush resulted in 
disappointment and concern around the world.  The worry 
apparently stems from the prospects for the future of world 
peace.  I do not agree with the prevailing view.  Given the 
current chaos in the Middle East and Iraq, I believe it is 
in everyone's interest to see the continuation of the 
current administration in Washington.  This time, I hope 
that President Bush will be able to revise his policies and 
enter into more international cooperation. This would pave 
the way for establishing lasting peace and stability in this 
region." 
 
"Four More Years" 
Asli Aydintasbas wrote in the mass appeal "Sabah" (11/8): 
"The second Bush administration is taking shape, but there 
is still no clarity on Washington's Iran and Iraq policies. 
Speculation about `a new era in Iraq' has started 
circulating following the resignation of Bush's top Iraq 
policy adviser, Robert Blackwill.  The US experienced an 
incredible failure in Iraq during Blackwill's leadership. 
The current situation in Iraq, the impending attack on 
Fallujah, and the US efforts to promote Allawi  reflect the 
continuation of the former unsuccessful policy line. . If 
there is a delay in the Iraqi elections, or if US tries to 
cheat in favor of Allawi, a civil war will become inevitable 
in Iraq.  In that case, the independence movement of the 
Iraqi Kurds will accelerate and will undoubtedly create a 
problem for Turkey." 
 
"At the Current Stage" 
The social democrat/intellectual "Cumhuriyet" carried this 
op-ed on 11/8:  "The Americans felt insecure and terrified 
for the first time by the events of September 11, when the 
radical Islamic terrorist organization attacked them 
unexpectedly at home.  Yet the fact of the matter is that it 
was the US itself which helped to develop radical Islam. 
Dr. Frankenstein created its monster as security against the 
Soviet Union in Asia.  After the Soviet era came to an end, 
Frankenstein's monster posed a threat to American interests 
in the Islamic world.  The neo-cons benefited from this 
change and appeared on the scene.  The common interests 
connecting American politics with the long-term strategies 
of the oil and weapons' industries managed to affect 
attitude of the American people at the ballot box as well." 
 
EDELMAN