04ANKARA3619
TURKEY OFFICIALLY REQUESTS INFORMATION ON THE
Sat Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

260913Z Jun 04UNCLAS ANKARA 003619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
BAGHDAD PLEASE ALSO PASS TO MNF-I 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS PREL IZ TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY OFFICIALLY REQUESTS INFORMATION ON THE 
DEATH OF TURKISH NATIONAL IN IRAQ 
 
 
¶1. This is an action requested -- see para 2. 
 
¶2. On June 25, the Embassy received diplomatic note number 
2204/KOKD/262781, dated June 23, 2004, requesting information 
on an alleged incident on June 18 in which a Turkish national 
was killed by U.S. forces at a check point between Ramadi and 
Fallujah and suggesting indemnity for the death may be due. 
(Comment: We understand that, to date, MNF-I has not been 
able to confirm that this incident occurred.)  ACTION 
REQUEST:  Embassy requests guidance on how to respond. 
 
¶3. Begin text of informal Embassy translation of MFA note: 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Turkish Republic 
presents its complement to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and wishes to inform the Embassy of the following 
issue: 
 
Many media agencies covered the news on the death of Turkish 
national Faysal Demir, born in 1968 in Hatay-Reyhanli, son of 
Ibrahim and Subhiye, who was shot in the head after American 
soldiers opened fire to him on June 18, 2004 in Hamidiye, 
Iraq. 
 
The owner of Musluoglu Co., subcontractor of Tepe 
Construction Co., and his Iraqi partner, Haji Hayat, 
approached the Embassy of Turkey in Baghdad and provided the 
following information on the matter. 
 
On June 18, 2004, Ali Muftuoglu and Faysal Demir departed in 
the direction of Baghdad through Syria. On 4:30 PM of the 
same day they were stopped at the check point set by US 
soldiers located at Hamidiye, between Ramadi and Fallujah, 40 
km east of Ramadi. American soldiers opened fire at their car 
and the Turkish national Faysal Demir, who was sitting in the 
back seat of the car, was shot in the head and died. 
According to Muftuoglu, if the Iraqi police had not 
intervened, the other 4 passengers of the car would have been 
shot to death as fire was opened up from the right front of 
the car after the vehicle stopped and there was no threat 
from the vehicle. Muftuoglu was injured in the legs. 
 
Furthermore, there are allegations to the effect that 
American soldiers had drunk alcohol. 
 
The mentioned persons brought the car to the Embassy of 
Turkey in Baghdad. The results of the investigation made by 
the Embassy officials in Baghdad shows that the car was shot 
in its right side after it stopped. 
 
The mentioned Turkish national,s right to indemnity on the 
way he was killed is preserved. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Turkish Republic requests 
the Embassy provide information to the Turkish side after the 
completion of related investigations within the shortest 
possible time. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Turkish Republic 
avails itself of the opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the USA the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
¶4. Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN