04ANKARA1342
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Fri Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001342 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
FRIDAY, MARCH 5, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Denktas might withdraw to work against Annan Plan - Milliyet 
Denktas might seek `No' in referendum - Sabah 
Ankara reassures Denktas - Turkiye 
Greek Cypriots offended by Straw remarks - Milliyet 
Crisis with Fener Patriarchate - Hurriyet 
Turkish water for Israel - Turkiye 
Hillary Clinton on way to vice-presidency - Hurriyet 
Kerry, Hillary hand in hand - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Denktas reacts to uncompromising Greek Cypriots - Cumhuriyet 
Denktas: Annan Plan aims to destroy Turks - Radikal 
Denktas arrived uneasy, returned home hopeful - Zaman 
Denktas furious - Yeni Safak 
Al-Zarkawi might be dead - Cumhuriyet 
Iraqi resistance: US using Al-Zarkawi to incite civil war - 
Yeni Safak 
Turkey extends helping hand to Shiite victims - Zaman 
EU has alternative plan for GME - Yeni Safak 
Europeans believe Bush responsible for evil worldwide - Yeni 
Safak 
Bush launches reelection campaign - Radikal 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus:  `TRNC' leader Denktas said in a conference in 
Ankara on Thursday that the Annan Plan would destroy Turkish 
Cypriots.  `If we are not given what we want,' Denktas 
warned, `we will have to withdraw and fight for the 
rejection of the plan.'  Denktas regards the prospects for a 
solution before May 1 as `a fantasy.'  He claimed that no 
progress has been made in the negotiations thus far. 
Turkish leaders were concerned by Denktas' maneuvering, and 
warned him that the issue must be resolved, "Radikal" 
reported.  Contrary to his earlier statement on Thursday, 
Denktas said after meeting with Prime Minister Erdogan and 
Foreign  Minister Gul that he was `hopeful' of a settlement 
before May.  In talks with US Special Cyprus Coordinator 
Thomas Weston, Ankara said that international sanctions 
against the `TRNC' should be lifted if there is no agreement 
before May 1, according to "Cumhuriyet."  Ankara underlined 
Greek Cypriot attempts to increase the range of their 
missiles while carrying out peace talks with the Turks, the 
paper added.  Ankara complained to Weston that the Greek 
Cypriots will join the EU even if the peace talks fail, 
leaving the Turks empty handed. 
 
 
Turkey, Israel sign water deal:  An agreement for selling 
Turkish water to Israel, an issue under discussion since the 
mid-1990s, was finally signed on Thursday by the foreign 
ministry undersecretaries of the two countries.  Turkish 
leaders Erdogan and Gul are reluctant to strengthen ties 
with Israel due to Israel's policy in Palestine, 
"Cumhuriyet" claims.  Concerned by the reaction of its 
grassroots on the eve of upcoming local elections, the 
ruling AK Party decided to keep a low profile at the signing 
ceremony.  The agreement will contribute to the development 
of peace and stability in the Middle East, an MFA spokesman 
said.  According to the agreement, Turkey will sell 50 
million cubic meters annually to Israel for the next 20 
years. 
 
 
Foreign nationals assigned to Fener Patriarchate:  For the 
first time since 1923, six foreign nationals (i.e., non- 
Turkish citiens) have been appointed to the Fener 
Patriarchate Synod in Istanbul, a move described by Turkish 
papers as a violation of the Lausanne Treaty.  The new board 
includes two metropolitans from Greece, two archbishops from 
the US and Britain, and two former archbishops from New 
Zealand and Finland.  The possibility of an appointment of a 
foreigner as Patriarch would be `unacceptable,' a high level 
MFA source told the press.  Thus far, the Patriarchate has 
not notified the MFA about the appointments, "Hurriyet" 
claims. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq; Greater Middle East Initiative 
 
 
"Iraq" 
Yilmaz Oztuna warned in the conservative Turkiye (3/5): "It 
seems that the newly-designed constitution for Iraq is a 
disappointment for Turkey.  This is not the end of the story 
in Iraq, and undoubtedly there will be more new drafts and 
revisions along the way.  Turkey's uneasiness stems from the 
treatment of the Turkmen, because they were not recognized 
as equals with the Kurds even though their demographic 
numbers are the same.  The constitution could have at least 
recognized Turkish as an official language along with Arabic 
and Kurdish, yet that also did not happen. . Turkey cannot 
remain indifferent to the Turkmen population in Iraq. 
Turkey should not sit and watch the developments in northern 
Iraq.  It is against our national interests.  Let's not 
forget that we are directly involved in the problems of 
200,000 Turks in Cyprus. . Nevertheless, Turkey has narrowed 
its options for engagement significantly after the refusal 
by Turkey to become involved in the Gulf war.  The US 
offered us a strategic alliance, and we declined.  Let us 
hope that the same mistake will not be repeated with regard 
to the GME initiative." 
 
 
"Greater Middle East" 
Hasan Cemal analyzed in the mass appeal Milliyet (3/4): "The 
US has not finalized its plan for the GME, but the process 
of gathering reaction and opinions from US allies continues. 
It seems that France and Germany have decided to work 
together to shape a joint plan.  The Arab world, on the 
other hand, is apparently very disturbed about developments. 
Turkey is still debating its possible role and influence on 
this issue.  Yet there is no single opinion in Ankara, and 
also no game plan.  According to circles close to Foreign 
Minister Gul as well as sources within the MFA, there is a 
concern about how the project will be implemented. 
Everybody agrees on the need for reforms in this region, but 
a plan to implement reforms through outside pressure is a 
cause for skepticism. . Turkish experts also believe that 
the US will eventually work together with the EU to shape a 
well-balanced and workable model for the Middle East.  When 
it comes to regional issues, including the Palestine issue, 
Turkey generally aligns itself with EU views rather than the 
US. . In sum, the GME project has been accepted in Turkey as 
a concept.  It remains to be seen where and how the 
project's goals will be reached." 
 
 
EDELMAN