04ANKARA880
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000880 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
 HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Athens wants EU in Cyprus talks - Hurriyet 
US Official: Turks very constructive, cooperative - Hurriyet 
Erdogan thanks Denktas - Milliyet 
Ziyal the `brain' of Turkish strategy - Vatan 
Denktas' initiative boosts domestic markets - Vatan 
Al Zarkavi new target of Americans - Aksam 
Assassination attempt against Abizaid - Sabah 
Peres: Turkey may become `key player' in Middle East - 
Milliyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Cyprus talks turning into a tactical war - Radikal 
Athens claims everything under control - Cumhuriyet 
Mubarek: US `Greater Middle East' project a pipe dream - 
Cumhuriyet 
Pilot Bush vs. Vietnam vet Kerry - Radikal 
PM Erdogan rebukes Amnesty International - Yeni Safak 
Hamas calls for increased suicide attacks - Yeni Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus:  Following a request by the Greek Cypriots to 
involve the EU in the Cyprus negotiations, Ankara contacted 
Washington to discuss the possibility for US participation 
in the talks, "Cumhuriyet" claims.  However, the EU is 
expected to refrain from such an involvement due to fears of 
delaying the negotiation process.  Foreign Minister Gul said 
that the Turkish side would continue to demonstrate goodwill 
in the talks.  Ankara has not objected to the Annan 
conditions.  In return, Ankara is expecting American support 
for possible amendments to the UN-sponsored peace plan. 
Turkish dailies reflect a mood of celebration for Turkey's 
`diplomatic success,' and say that Turkey has emerged as the 
chief architect of a solution in Cyprus through its 
political determination and diplomatic creativity.  But 
Denktas expressed caution, saying that victory is still far 
from guaranteed.  Meanwhile, hopes for a solution in Cyprus 
boosted share prices on the Turkish stock market yesterday. 
 
 
Amnesty International meets PM Erdogan: During a meeting in 
Ankara on Thursday, visiting Amnesty International (AI) 
President Irene Khan urged Prime Minister Erdogan to secure 
the release of jailed former Kurdish lawmakers Leyla Zana 
and Hatip Dicle.  Erdogan accused AI of double standards, 
noting that the organization ignored his own trial in 1999 
after Erdogan was charged with reciting a religious poem, 
while at the same time it was intervening in the case of PKK 
leader Abdullah Ocalan.  Erdogan said that he could not 
interfere in the ongoing judiciary process concerning the 
Kurdish lawmakers, but that NGOs might take action to press 
for their release. 
 
 
Mubarek uneasy with `Greater Middle East' project:  Turkey's 
growing weight in the region compelled Egypt's President 
Mubarek to pay a hasty visit to Ankara on Wednesday, 
according to "Cumhuriyet."  Mubarek criticized the US 
strategy for `modernization and democratization' of a broad 
region from Libya to Central Asia.  Mubarek said that the US 
project for a `Greater Middle East' is nothing but `a pipe 
dream,' and would not succeed due to historical, political 
and cultural differences in the region. 
 
 
Shimon Peres visits Turkey:  Turkey's EU accession could 
enable the EU to take an active role in the Middle East 
peace process, former Israeli foreign minister Shimon Peres 
said during his visit to Ankara on Thursday.  Peres came to 
Turkey as the guest of opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal. 
Peres noted Ankara's possible role as a mediator between 
Israel and Syria, and urged the Turkish side to remain 
active in the Middle East peace process.  Peres also added 
that a solution to the Cyprus problem could serve as an 
example for the Middle East. 
 
 
Medya-TV license annulled:  A decision by France's 
broadcasting authority, CSA, to cancel the license of Medya- 
TV, the media mouthpiece of the PKK/KADEK, was upheld 
Thursday by a French appeals court.  The court ruled that 
Medya-TV was, in effect, a continuation of the banned Med 
TV.  The court argued that Medya-TV broadcasts were an 
incitement to violence.  Medya-TV broadcasts, which reached 
77 countries via satellite, were suspended on Thursday. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
Election 2004; Cyprus 
 
 
"John Kerry: Is he the new US president?" 
Turkkaya Ataov commented in the social democrat-intellectual 
Cumhuriyet (2/13): "The Democrats had been working to 
finalize their presidential nomination process while 
President Bush was preparing for his fourth `State of the 
Union' address, which was basically to become an election 
speech.  Last year he did not hesitate to disseminate lies 
about Saddam having vast stocks of WMD, so it was expected 
that his address would fuel the controversy about the 
accuracy of those claims.  On the other hand, President Bush 
has more campaign funds from US corporate contributors than 
the Democrats could possibly accumulate.  . On the 
Democratic side, it seems that John Kerry is the leading 
figure.  He has a good record in the past, including his 
stance about Iraq, his efforts among Vietnam Veterans, and 
the good example he created during his 14 years as attorney 
general. . John Kerry is undoubtedly a much more suitable 
name than George Bush.  Yet George Bush has more financial 
resources and also enjoys support from the CIA, the military 
and the US industrial giants." 
 
 
"Turkey Wins Big in Cyprus Chess Match" 
Mehmet Ali Birand observed in the mass appeal Posta (2/13): 
"I spoke to some Turkish officials attending the Washington 
summit who also thought differently from Denktas.  I got 
almost the same answer from all of them.  `Denktas has made 
progress,' they said.  `He is close to accepting the Annan 
plan that he hates.  You should give him his due.  He has 
been defending Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot side during 
these negotiations, not just his personal views.  There 
would have been a lot of trouble if he had done it 
differently.'  We criticized Denktas a lot, but now we have 
to give him his due. . What does this development mean? 
Let's not kid ourselves.  What happened in New York is 
crystal clear, and can be summed as follows: The Turkish 
side has accepted the Annan plan as the basis for a 
solution, and will implement the necessary measures to end 
the Cyprus problem. This shows how serious Turkey is in 
trying to become a member of the European Union.  In short, 
the Turkish government surprised both us and the world." 
 
 
EDELMAN