04ANKARA4273
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, JULY 16-31, 2004
Mon Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ANKARA 004273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, JULY 16-31, 2004 
 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries about anti-TIP public 
information campaigns, post provides as examples the 
following TIP press reports.  Text of articles not published 
in English is provided through unofficial local FSN 
translation or otherwise noted sources. 
 
¶2. (U) Published July 28, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE: SECURITY FORCES INTERCEPT 137 MIGRANTS IN DIDIM 
     BEGIN TEXT: DIDIM (A.A) - Security forces intercepted 
     137 migrants in Didim town of western province of Aydin 
     on Wednesday as they were trying to proceed to Sisam 
     island of Greece illegally.       The migrants of 
     Azerbaijani, Mauritanian, Algerian, Moldavian, Afghan 
     and Somalian origin were taken into custody for 
     violating Turkish borders and passport law.     They 
     will be deported once the legal proceedings are 
     completed. END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published July 27, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE:  Ankara Police Department Morals Branch conducts 
     operations in Ankara and Afyon. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Four people involved in human trafficking 
     and four others who were subjected to trafficking were 
     detained. 
 
     After receiving a tip by phone, the Ankara Police 
     raided a house in the Seyranbaglari district of Ankara. 
     Recep C., and two women were detained.  One woman was a 
     foreigner and the other was a Turk of foreign origin. 
     Police had already issued a warrant for Recep C. for 
     human trafficking. 
 
     During his interrogation Recep C. told the police that 
     he "bought" foreign women for $2000 from Samil D. who 
     is known as "Ahmet" in Antalya.  Later Recep C. talked 
     to Samil D. on the phone and they agreed to meet in 
     Afyon.  Three policemen accompanied Recep C. and they 
     went in front of a store outside Afyon on the Antalya 
     road. 
 
     Police detained Samil D., Murat O. and Hakan K.  They 
     had two Moldavian women accompanying them.  They, too, 
     were detained.  Recep C., Samil D., Murat O. and Hakan 
     ¶K. were sent to a prosecutor on charges of human 
     trafficking. 
 
     Three foreign women were turned over to the TNP 
     Foreigners' Department.  The Turkish woman of foreign 
     origin was released.  END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Published July 24, 2004 by Moldova's Chisinau 
Basapress in English: 
 
     TITLE: Turkey Main Destination for Trafficked Moldovan 
     Women 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSCRIBED TEXT: Chisinau, 24 July: The 
     Moldovan Interior Ministry said that Turkey remains the 
     main destination for traffickers in Moldovan women. 
 
     According to ministerial accounts the Moldovan police 
     have destroyed 37 channels of trafficking in persons in 
     the first half of this year, of which 11 connected 
     Moldovan networks with pimps and brothels in Turkey, 10 
     in the United Arab Emirates, seven in the Russian 
     Federation, four in Macedonia, and five in Romania. 
 
     The Moldovan Interior Ministry announced that a Turkish 
     national and a Russian citizen suspected of recruiting 
     Moldovan women for the prostitution industry have been 
     recently detained in Chisinau.   A court in Chisinau 
     has sentenced the Turkish national to five years in 
     prison for pimping. 
 
     The police have filed 287 cases related to the 
     trafficking in persons, including 28 cases related to 
     recruitment of children for slavery. 
 
     Neither the Moldovan government nor nongovernmental 
     organizations have exact data regarding the number of 
     Moldovan women forced into prostitution abroad. 
 
     The International Organization for Migration had 
     earlier said that over 1,200 victims of traffickers in 
     human beings had been repatriated to Moldova in the 
     past three years.   This year, 143 Moldovan young women 
     returned home after years or months of slavery in 
     Russia, Turkey or the United Arab Emirates. END TEXT. 
     [Description of Source: Chisinau Basapress in English - 
     - Independent news agency; carries economic and 
     political reports from pro-Romanian positions] 
 
¶5. (U) Published July 21, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE: TURKISH GENDARMERY ARREST 23 ILLEGAL EMIGRANTS 
     IN IZMIR 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  IZMIR (A.A) - Turkish gendarmerie arrested 
     23 illegal immigrants in Cesme in Izmir province, 
     sources said on Wednesday. 
 
     Security forces captured 23 Pakistanis who entered 
     Turkey clandestinely en route to Greece.  They will be 
     deported following legal proceedings, officials said. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published July 19, 2004 by Bishkek Public Educational 
Radio and TV in Russian: 
 
     TITLE: Kyrganistan Border Guards Receive Security 
     Training From Turkish Officers 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED EXCERPT: [Presenter] Military 
     exercises entitled "Border Security" started at the 
     base of the Border Service's training center under the 
     [NATO] Partnership for Peace program today. 
 
     The maneuvers are being conducted in two stages. 
     Georgia, Azerbaijan, Romania, Albania and Macedonia 
     attended the first stage held in March. Tajikistan, 
     Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan are taking part in the second 
     stage. A mobile group of Turkish officers is conducting 
     the exercises. 
 
     [Correspondent] For 10 days _Kyrgyz_ officers will be 
     improving their skills in protecting the country's 
     borders under the Turkish officers' supervision. The 
     Turkish officers first taught our border guards 
     computer skills and Internet use. They also taught the 
     commanders how to distinguish genuine passports from 
     forged ones. 
 
     [Nuriddin Chomoyev] deputy chairman of the _Kyrgyz_ 
     Border Service] Border security will be considered as 
     specific issues. These are border trespassing, human 
     trafficking and drug trafficking. I think that during 
     this seminar our officers will get profound theoretical 
     knowledge and will put it into practice. 
 
     [Correspondent] There are other issues on the agenda, 
     which are regarded as pressing according to 
     international standards. These are aspects of the 
     national security system, protection and control of 
     refugees and international terrorism. The mobile group 
     of the Turkish armed forces held the first stage as far 
     back as in spring.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published July 19, 2004 by Turkey's news television 
NTV: 
 
     TITLE: Prostitution rife in Turkey: Report 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: One in every 350 Turkish women faces the 
     threat of having to work in the sex sector or of being 
     sexually exploited. 
 
     July 19 - Though prostitution is legal in Turkey, most 
     of the women working in the industry are not registered 
     and many are forced to ply their trade against their 
     will, according to a report released on the weekend. 
 
     According to a study conducted by the Ankara Chamber of 
     Commerce (ATO), there are approximately 100,000 women 
     involved in the sex trade in Turkey, with the trade 
     generating some $3.0 to $4.0 billion annually. However, 
     the ATO report claimed that only 3,000 of the female 
     sex workers were employed legally in Turkey's 56 
     registered brothels, with another 12,000 registered to 
     work outside the brothel system. 
 
     The ATO report, entitled "Lifeless Women", claims that 
     there could be up to 100,000 women involved in the sex 
     trade, with at least 30,000 waiting to work in the 
     brothels of Istanbul, Izmir and Ankara. Many of these 
     women work on the streets, as they are not able to gain 
     the protection of working in a registered brothel. 
 
     There are an estimated 6,000 women working illegally as 
     prostitutes in the southeastern province of Diyarbakir 
     alone, the report said. 
 
     There are at least 500 child sex workers in Istanbul 
     alone, with some as young girls as 12 working as 
     prostitutes, the report said. 
 
     Most of the child sex slaves are primary school 
     graduates. Sex workers are mostly driven to 
     prostitution by their husbands (30 percent), and by 
     their parents (10 percent). 
 
     The ATO survey says that many sex workers are subject 
     to abuse, oppression, and condemnation. Poverty is main 
     reason that women enter prostitution, the report said. 
 
     Apart from Turkish women in the sex industry the ATO 
     report said there were sex workers from Ukraine, 
     Moldova, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Belarus engaged in 
     prostitution in the country. Unlike their Turkish 
     colleagues, many of these women are well educated. 
 
     Sinan Aygun, the chairman of the ATO, said that the 
     spread of the unregulated sex market was due to a 
     decade of lax administration on the part of state 
     authorities. 
 
     The best way to provide an alternative for women in the 
     sex trade would be to offer them the chance to gain 
     employment in other sectors, Aygun said. This would 
     require the provision of education and assistance to 
     the poor including social security in order to help 
     women avoid being forces into prostitution, he said. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶8. (U) Published July 19, 2004 by Turkey's Cihan News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE: 321 Thousand 805 Crimes Committed In Turkey In 
     2003 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA (CIHAN) - A total of 321,805 crimes 
     were committed in Turkey last year, according to a 
     survey by the Ankara Chamber of Commerce. 
 
     The number of crimes committed in the first five months 
     of 2004 hit 143,924. The year-end prediction is 
     350,000. There has been a remarkable increase in 
     robbery, picking pocketing, purse snatching, car 
     robbery, bank robbery, kidnapping, extortion, looting 
     and vandalism, encroachment, arson, forgery, murder, 
     violent assaults, rape, gambling, bribery, human 
     trafficking, sexual exploitation and other crimes. 
 
     In 2001, 299,589 crimes were recorded; in 2002, nearly 
     296,000 crimes were recorded; and in 2003, 321,805 
     crimes were committed in Turkey. Every two minutes, one 
     malicious act is committed in Turkey. 
 
     There has been an increase in economically motivated 
     crime. In 2003, 152,505 such crimes were committed. 
 
     According to the report, 135,898 crimes were committed 
     in the three most populous cities: Istanbul, Izmir and 
     Ankara. In Istanbul, 226 crimes were committed daily 
     last year. In Ankara, 85 were committed daily and 62 a 
     day were reported in Izmir. 
 
     Last year, nearly 8,200 work locations were robbed in 
     Istanbul. Ankara was the victim of 2,848 robberies and 
     Izmir 2,871 recorded such events. The lowest number of 
     robberies took place in Bayburt with 10. 
 
     The largest increase was recorded in purse snatching 
     which is currently being debated within the government. 
 
     Most home robberies took place in Istanbul last year 
     with 10,195. Istanbul was followed by Ankara with 
     2,884. The lowest number of home robberies occurred in 
     Tunceli with just 5 incidents last year. 
 
     In 2003, 2,277 robberies took place in state buildings. 
 
     Istanbul is a center for car robberies with 16,665 last 
     year. Istanbul was followed by Izmir with 1,711. In 
     2003, 24,616 cars were robbed across Turkey. The 
     corresponding figure for 2002 was 20,095. No cars were 
     robbed in Kars, Tunceli or Igdir. 
 
     The most widespread crimes are pick pocketing and purse 
     snatching. In 2002, 12,595 and in 2003, 12,793 pick 
     pocketing and purse snatching incidents took place in 
     Turkey. In the first five months of 2004, the figure 
     stands at 6,333. 
 
     Again Istanbul and Izmir top the listing in terms of 
     snatching and pick pocketing. The numbers are 
     successively 5,175 for Istanbul, and 2,430 for Izmir. 
     Last year, no incidents of purse snatching or pick 
     pocketing were recorded in the northern city of. Sinop. 
 
     The latest trend is the robbery of antique carpets and 
     similar historic pieces and precious artifacts from 
     museums. 
 
     Last year, 3,736 incidents of armed robbery were 
     recorded in Turkey. Again Istanbul comes in first with 
     1482 incidents and 295 incidents in Antalya. END TEXT. 
 
¶9. (U) Published July 8, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE: `OPERATION ANKARA' IN US' LONG ISLAND ARRESTS 
     TURKISH NATIONALS 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: US federal, state and local law enforcement 
     agents raided dozens of businesses within the 
     northeastern state of Long Island on Tuesday and 
     arrested dozens of people on money laundering and 
     immigration charges, reported US daily Newsday 
     yesterday. While seven suspects were charged with 
     laundering, four others were cited for immigration 
     violations. According to Newsday, some 57 suspected 
     undocumented aliens were taken into custody during the 
     raids, part of a crackdown called `Operation Ankara,' 
     so named because most of the suspects are believed to 
     be Turkish nationals. /All Papers/.  END TEXT 
 
¶10. (U) Published July 7, 2004 by the Associated Press: 
 
     TITLE: Long Island Sweeps Bring Charges Of Money 
     Laundering, Immigration Violations 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: GARDEN CITY, N.Y. -- Federal, state and 
     local law enforcement agents raided dozens of 
     businesses around Long Island on Tuesday and arrested 
     people on money laundering and immigration charges. 
 
     Arrest warrants were unsealed against 11 defendants. 
     Seven were charged with laundering as much as $28 
     million in proceeds from dozens of gas stations and 
     mini-markets over several years. Four others were cited 
     on immigration charges: One man was accused of re- 
     entering the United States after being deported, while 
     three others were charged with marriage fraud. 
 
     "They are all part of the same organization," said 
     Martin Ficke, special agent in charge for the U.S. 
     Immigration and Customs Enforcement bureau. 
 
 
     He said the investigation was still in the early stages 
     and more arrests were likely. 
 
     During the raids, part of a crackdown called Operation 
     Ankara, immigration officials also took into custody 57 
     suspected undocumented aliens. There were suspicions 
     that the aliens were smuggled into the United States 
     and forced to work for the operators of the gas 
     stations as repayment for entry into the country, Ficke 
     said. 
 
     The raids, which involved an estimated 200 law 
     enforcement agents, also yielded massive amounts of 
     documents and business records linked to the operation. 
 
     The suspects were arraigned on various charges at U.S. 
     District Court in Central Islip. Five of the seven 
     defendants in the money laundering case were ordered 
     held until a bail hearing on Thursday; the remaining 
     two have yet to be arrested. 
 
     Two of the four immigration violation defendants have 
     been taken into custody; one was ordered held until a 
     bail hearing Thursday and the other was released on a 
     $50,000 personal recognizance bond, said Joseph Conway, 
     the assistant U.S. attorney in the Central Islip 
     office. 
 
     The investigation was named Operation Ankara, after the 
     capital of Turkey, because most of the suspects are 
     believed to be Turkish nationals. Conway said the 
     arrests were not related to terrorism. 
 
     The money laundering charges are tied to a scheme 
     called "structuring," said Joseph Foy, a spokesman for 
     the Internal Revenue Service. The suspects made bank 
     deposits of less than $10,000 to evade federal currency 
     reporting requirements, prosecutors said. END TEXT. 
 
¶11. (U) Published July 7, 2004 by Turkey's NTV News Station: 
 
     TITLE: New York raids target alleged Turkish money 
     laundering ring; Five of the seven Turks, considered by 
     police to be the ringleaders of the group were 
     arrested. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: July 7- New York police have conducted a 
     series of raids of petrol stations around the city 
     targeting what officials described as an organised 
     Turkish crime ring involved in concealing millions of 
     dollars and smuggling in illegal workers.  The ring 
     allegedly controlled up to 140 petrol stations, mainly 
     in the Long Island region, used in part as a front for 
     their criminal activities, officials said. 
 
     The group had hidden tens of millions of dollars in 
     receipts and illegally smuggled workers into the 
     country, the officials said. Five of the seven Turkish 
     men wanted in connection with the ring were arrested in 
     the raids. The other two may still be in Turkey, 
     according to officials. 
 
     "This is a big step in shutting down an organisation 
     that has been responsible for smuggling immigrants into 
     the country and collecting millions of dollars 
     illegally," Laura Hedyweiller, the head of federal 
     Immigration and Customs Enforcement on Long Island told 
     reporters. END TEXT. 
 
¶12. (U) Published July 7, 2004 by New York Newsday: 
 
     TITLE: Gas stations raided in alleged crime ring 
     BEGIN TEXT: Dozens are targeted as officials say 
     Turkish organized crime ring hid millions in cash, 
     smuggled in workers; By Robert E. Kessler 
     Staff Writer; Staff writers Mitchell Freedman and 
     Indrani Sen contributed to this story. 
 
     Hundreds of federal agents and police yesterday raided 
     dozens of Long Island gas stations allegedly controlled 
     by a loosely organized network of Turkish organized 
     crime figures, officials said. 
 
     The ring concealed tens of millions of dollars in 
     receipts and illegally smuggled workers into the 
     country, the officials said. 
 
     Among those arrested were five of seven key figures in 
     the ring, which allegedly controlled more than 140 gas 
     stations on Long Island, and more than 50 employees who 
     are suspected of being illegal immigrants. The other 
     two alleged leaders were still being sought and may be 
     in Turkey, officials said. 
     "This is a big step in shutting down an organization 
     that has been responsible for smuggling immigrants into 
     the country and collecting millions of dollars 
     illegally," said Laura Hedyweiller, head of federal 
     Immigration and Customs Enforcement on Long Island. 
 
     The immigrants were being interviewed late yesterday to 
     determine their status, Hedyweiller said. Many of the 
     employees lived under arduous conditions, working 14- 
     to 18-hour days and sleeping on cots in the gas 
     stations as they paid off the $10,000 fees they were 
     charged to be smuggled into the country, officials 
     said. 
 
     The agents also seized several current bank accounts 
     containing $2.2 million at several branches on Long 
     Island the gang allegedly used, officials said. 
 
     The five people arrested were charged with 
     "structuring" more than $14 million in the past three 
     years, violating a law that makes it a crime to break 
     down large cash deposits into multiple smaller deposits 
     of less than $10,000. Cash deposits of more than 
     $10,000 must be reported to the Internal Revenue 
     Service under a law aimed at finding the profits of 
     criminal enterprises such as tax evasion or drug 
     dealing, said Joe Foy, a spokesman for the Criminal 
     Investigation Division of the Internal Revenue Service. 
 
     Arrested yesterday and charged with structuring were: 
     Turhan Ak, 44, of 5 Miller Farm Dr., Miller Place; 
     Ahmet Cayan, 32, of 95 Central Ave., Port Jefferson 
     Station; Adil Bayat, 41, 4 Cobblestone La., Lake Grove; 
     Yaha Bayat, 39, of 2 Wisteria Dr., Lake Grove; and 
     Orhan Alparslan, 44, Rugby Dr., West Shirley. 
 
     Still being sought were Sukru Akkaya, 42, also of 5 
     Miller Farm Dr., Miller Place, and Mustafa Catalbas, 41 
     of 9 Casey La., Mount Sinai. 
 
     The raids were conducted jointly by the IRS and 
     immigration enforcement, along with 100 Nassau and 
     Suffolk police officers. 
 
     Initial raids were carried out at three gas stations 
     that officials said in court documents were cash 
     collection points for the ring and where the leaders 
     had their offices. They are a Citgo station at 1099 
     Horseblock Rd. in Farmingville and two Delta stations, 
     at 305 Union Blvd. in West Islip and 624 Broadway in 
     North Amityville. 
 
     Court documents filed by federal prosecutors Joseph 
     Conway and Mark Lesko said cash from all the gas 
     stations controlled by the ring was brought daily to 
     the three collection stations. It was then broken down 
     into amounts under $10,000 and deposited in several 
     bank branches. 
 
     Two of the principal bank branches where agents seized 
     money yesterday were a Washington Mutual Branch in Port 
     Jefferson and an HSBC branch in West Babylon. Spokesmen 
     for both banks said they were cooperating with 
     investigators. 
 
     The structuring charges are the initial part of the 
     investigation and officials are also looking into money 
     laundering, tax evasion and smuggling charges, sources 
     close to the investigation said. 
 
     In one raid yesterday, a dozen unmarked cars filled 
     with federal agents went into the Farmingville gas 
     station and blocked all of its driveways. Agents 
     swarmed out, seized two men and began to go through the 
     station's records. 
 
     A resident who gave only his first name, Scott, said he 
     lived in the area for 14 years. "Seven or eight years 
     ago, they really rebuilt the place," he said. "It was a 
     dumpy little gas station before that." 
     Scott said that at one point years ago, immigrants were 
     living in trailers behind the gas station. "Good for 
     them," he said of the federal officials. 
 
     The five suspected ringleaders were arraigned before 
     U.S. Magistrate James Orenstein at U.S. District Court 
     in Central Islip and held without bail pending future 
     hearings. If convicted of the structuring charge the 
     defendants face up to 10 years in prison. 
 
     Ahmet Cayan's attorney, John Andrews of Port Jefferson, 
     declined to comment. 
 
     A woman who identified herself as a family friend at 
     the home of Ak and Akkaya declined to comment on their 
     families' behalf. Relatives of the other suspects could 
     not be reached for comment. 
 
     Also arrested yesterday was a Yonkers woman, Natalia 
     Sanchez_, 30, who was charged with staging marriages 
     with four Turkish gas station workers so they could 
     fraudulently obtain citizenship. Sanchez_ was released 
     on $50,000 bail by Orenstein. The four people she had 
     married are being sought, officials said. 
 
     Staff writers Mitchell Freedman and Indrani Sen 
     contributed to this story. END TEXT. 
 
¶13. (U) Published July 6, 2004 by the International 
Organization for Migration: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: MOLDOVA - New Migration Information Centre 
     - IOM has launched a new, multimedia summer campaign, 
     as part of its Migration Information Project, to 
     provide Moldovan citizens comprehensive information 
     about going abroad and the dangers of trafficking. 
 
     Working with the Moldovan Migration Department, IOM is 
     creating the first ever Centre for migration 
     information in Moldova.  The Centre opened with a 
     website www.migratie.md  and a 
     mobile information centre/minibus that will travel 
     across Moldova. 
 
     The Centre will also be closely linked with the 
     national toll-free Hotline (0-800-77777) operated by 
     the IOM partner NGO La Strada.  IOM personnel, 
     Migration Department representatives and student 
     volunteers will staff the migration bus.  They will 
     distribute leaflets containing facts on countries of 
     destinations, such as Italy, Portugal, Turkey and 
     Russia, as well as details about obtaining visas, legal 
     work and study opportunities and the dangers of 
     trafficking. They will also be conducting interviews 
     and gathering opinions about the needs for migration 
     information. 
 
     "With this project, IOM is providing reliable and 
     objective information about legal opportunities for 
     those who have decided to go abroad," said IOM Chief of 
     Mission Marielle Sander-Lindstrom. "Our goal is to 
     ensure that those who have decided to go abroad do so 
     legally, protect themselves against those who offer 
     fraudulent offers and most of all, guard against the 
     dangers of human trafficking and exploitation." 
 
     IOM and the Migration Department are launching the new 
     Center with a nationwide promotion campaign.  With 
     funding from the European Union, IOM has produced a 4- 
     minute music video, "Undeva," by the rock band The 
     Snails about a young girl who dreams of going abroad. 
     Also with EU funding, IOM has created a 30-second 
     public service announcement based on the video that 
     promotes the hotline and website. 
 
     The EU and the US Government are funding the campaign. 
     Moldova National Television and Radio is the summer 
     campaign's official media sponsor and will air the 30- 
     second spot free of charge five times per day 
     throughout July and will feature the "Undeva" video. 
     Other sponsors include local radio and television 
     stations, Patria Cinemas and Sun Communications. 
 
     Form more information contact, IOM Chisinau, Tel: 
     373.22.23 29 40 E-mail iomchisinau@iom.int.  END TEXT. 
 
DEUTSCH