04ANKARA2321
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Thu Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Verheugen: I have Been Deceived by the Greek-Cypriots - 
Hurriyet 
No Release of DEP Deputies - Hurriyet 
State Security Court Confirms Conviction of DEP Deputies - 
Sabah 
Karamanlis Promises to Support Turkey's EU Entry - Sabah 
Historic Confession From Verheugen - Milliyet 
Suicide Bombers Kill 68 in Basra - Milliyet 
Iraq Becomes a Fire-Ball - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
CHP Deputy Oymen: TGS Not Given Details of Annan Plan - 
Cumhuriyet 
Denktas Warns Against Attacks on `yes' Supporters - 
Cumhuriyet 
Nationalists' Terror Attacks Increase in Cyprus - Radikal 
No Change in the DEP Case - Radikal 
Verheugen: The Greek Cypriots Deceived Me - Radikal 
State Security Court Dynamite Sent to the EU - Yeni Safak 
EU Believes it has Been Cheated By Greek Cypriots - Zaman 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus:  "Hurriyet" reports that the pre-referendum tension 
is growing in Cyprus.  Yesterday, a group of supporters of 
the UN plan was attacked by Turkish nationalist groups who 
had come to the island from Turkey.  All papers highlight EU 
Commissioner Verheugen's remarks to the EU Parliament that 
he had been `deceived' by the Greek Cypriot Administration. 
Verheugen charged that the Greek Cypriots had indicated 
their support for the Annan plan throughout the negotiation 
process, and only now are pressing for its rejection. 
"Aksam" reports that Verheugen also said that the Turkish 
side should not be held responsible for the possible failure 
of the Annan plan at referendum.  "Milliyet" writes that 
Verheugen expressed the EU's regret for admitting the Greek 
Cypriots to the EU without a Cyprus solution.  Meanwhile, 
the Turkish and Greek Prime Ministers met in Sarajevo. 
Karamanlis reiterated that the Greek Government would not 
pressure the Greek Cypriots to approve the UN plan, but he 
confirmed that Greece will support Turkey's EU membership 
bid `to the end.' 
 
 
DEP Deputies:  A State Security Court in Ankara confirmed 
the conviction of Leyla Zana and three other former 
parliamentarians from the former Kurdish nationalist party, 
DEP.  "Yeni Safak" predicts that the verdict will have a 
negative impact on Turkey's efforts to obtain a date for the 
start of accession talks with the EU.  "Hurriyet" notes that 
the court verdict drew harsh criticism from the EU 
Commission.  A Commission spokesman expressed `deep regret' 
over the verdict, adding that the trial was followed closely 
by the commission.  EU Enlargement Commissioner Verheugen 
also criticized the decision, saying that the verdict raises 
`serious questions' about Turkey's implementation of its EU 
harmonization reforms. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
Cyprus/Bosnia-Herzegovina 
"Different views" 
Soli Ozel commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (4/22):  "If 
a solution is found to the Cyprus problem, Turkey will have 
transformed its foreign policy from one that was closed and 
isolationist to one that is open to global interaction. 
Turkey, which is among the important shapers of the post- 
9/11, post-Iraq war world, should reposition itself and more 
clearly define its interests. .  It appears that the Turkish 
Cypriots will vote for the Annan Plan.  .  It must be 
remembered that rejection of the UN-backed peace plan will 
mean approving the division of the island. .  Whatever the 
decision of the Greek Cypriots may be, the status quo in the 
north will not remain unchanged if the Turks vote `yes.'" 
 
 
"A 'No' won't save the Greek Cypriots from Annan" 
Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in the mass appeal "Posta" (4/22): 
"If the Southern Cypriots reject the Annan Plan in the April 
24 referenda, the EU will probably press for a second vote 
in the course of time.  If the outcome is negative again, a 
process for official recognition of the `TRNC' will be 
launched.  Under such circumstances, the Greek Cypriots will 
not be allowed to demand withdrawal of Turkish troops or ask 
for return of their properties in the north.  The Greeks 
must choose between the Annan Plan and the division of 
Cyprus. .  The Greek Cypriots would not vote against a 
settlement if they could see that no matter how long it 
takes, a solution to the Cyprus problem is possible only 
within the framework of the Annan Plan." 
 
 
"First genocide against Muslims recognized" 
Mim Kemal Oke observed in the conservative/mass appeal "HO- 
Tercuman" (4/22):  "In an historic decision, the war crimes 
tribunal at The Hague has officially recognized as 
`genocide' the killing of 7,000 Bosniacs in Srebrenica in 
¶1995. .  This decision might bring significant consequences. 
Now Muslims have a similar status to that of Jews -- both in 
the diaspora and in Israel - following the genocide 
perpetrated by the Nazis. .  I am afraid that the Islamic 
world, which remains both lethargic and dysfunctional, is 
not fully prepared to make use of such a significant 
opportunity.  It must be remembered that this court 
resolution came at a time of prevailing Islamist terror. 
The Islamic world must not let this decision die.  The 
Islamic world must eliminate the violence within.  If the 
Islamic world remains insensitive in the face of terrorism, 
it will likely act sluggishly in making use of this 
decision." 
 
 
EDELMAN