05ANKARA4955
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, AUGUST 23, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Tuesday, August 23, 2005 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
PKK: Will Not Lay Down Arms Unconditionally - Hurriyet 
50 Kurdish Writers, Artists Support Erdogan's Kurdish policy 
- Milliyet 
Chuck Hagel Likens Iraq to Vietnam - Aksam 
Insurgents Hang US Collaborators in Iraq - Sabah 
US Preparing to Open Embassy in Libya - Sabah 
Workers Around the World Unite Against Wal-Mart - Aksam 
Syrian Terrorist from PKK Killed in Northern Turkey - Vatan 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
US to Send Bryza and 2 Generals to Discuss PKK - Yeni Safak 
No Agreement on Iraqi Constitution - Radikal 
Republicans Lash Out at Bush on Iraq - Radikal 
PKK Transfers Militants to Iran - Zaman 
Governmen, Unions Disagree on Salary Hikes - Radikal 
Muslim Brotherhood Opposes Boycott of Egypt Polls - Yeni 
Safak 
Indonesia to Pull Out of Aceh - Yeni Safak 
China, Russia, India Form Tripartite Alliance Against US - 
Yeni Safak 
The Castro and Chavez Show - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
National Security Council to Discuss Terror in Southeast 
Turkey:  Turkey's National Security Council (NSC) is 
expected to discuss the anti-terror law drafted by the AKP 
government, and the upsurge of violence in the southeast at 
its monthly meeting on Tuesday, papers report.  The NSC 
Secretariat General advised in a report against the 
 
SIPDIS 
implementation of emergency rule in the region.  It said 
that the PKK had been forced to resume terrorist attacks in 
May 2005 in an effort to prevent a disintegration of the 
organization, which is suffering from leadership problems. 
A separate report by the military stressed that the problem 
is not merely an ethnic one, but one that had economic and 
social roots as well.  The military members of the NSC will 
caution PM Erdogan for acknowledging a `Kurdish problem' in 
Turkey, warning that statements made without consulting the 
related state institutions may prove to be harmful in the 
ongoing fight against terror.  The NSC will also discuss 
Iran, Iraq, Cyprus, and the EU. 
 
Cicek on Terror, Kurdish Issue, Armenian Conference: 
Justice Minister and Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek said 
after Monday's Council of Ministers meeting that those who 
have proposals for the government with regard to the 
struggle against terror must first accept Turkey's unitary 
structure.  Cicek said that the Council of Ministers 
evaluated PM Erdogan's statements about the `Kurdish 
problem' in Diyarbakir earlier this month and the criticism 
it has drawn from opposition parties.  Erdogan's remarks in 
Diyarbakir were assessed from a political standpoint, Cicek 
said, noting that Turkey's Constitution guaranteed that 
nationals enjoy equal rights and freedoms.  Asked the 
controversial Armenian conference that will be held in 
Istanbul on September 23, Cicek said that he had not been 
informed about plans for the gathering.  `We will see who 
will say what at the conference,' Cicek said.  On the other 
hand, 46 Kurdish intellectuals and artists released a 
declaration Monday voicing support for Erdogan's statements 
on the Kurdish issue. 
 
Edelman Brings Balance to Pentagon:  Turkish papers carry an 
article from the Washington Post which argues that Eric 
Edelman and Gordon England, who are replacing Doug Feith and 
Paul Wolfowitz at the Pentagon, have brought `less ideology, 
and more balance' to the Defense Department.  The article 
expects the two figures to be more attuned to Congress than 
their predecessors.  England, the Pentagon's number two, is 
described as a very good `technocrat,' and Edelman comes 
with a reputation as a `skilled career diplomat' with an 
`easygoing personality' who does not engage in ideological 
battles. 
 
Graham, Hagel Criticize US Policies on Iraq:  Dailies report 
US Republican Senators Lindsey Graham and Chuck Hagel as 
criticizing American policies in Iraq on "Fox News" over the 
weekend.  Graham said the United States would have a huge 
problem if the Kurds are given independence from Iraq, a 
development which will turn Iraq into a `center of anarchy.' 
Hagel claimed that Iraq was becoming another Vietnam.  `The 
last two-and-a-half years have shown that we are not winning 
in Iraq,' Hagel said, advising the US to develop an exit 
strategy from the war-torn country. 
 
Bryza, Abizaid, Jones Due in Ankara:  Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State Matt Bryza is to visit Ankara August 25- 
 
SIPDIS 
26 to discuss the PKK, Cyprus and EU, "Yeni Safak" reports. 
The paper also says that US generals John Abizaid and James 
Jones are expected in Ankara in early September. 
 
Karayilan Says One-Month Cease-Fire is Enough: Murat 
Karayilan from the PKK leadership told "Roj TV" that one 
month of suspension of operations is enough for Turkey to 
take `confidence-building measures,' and that the unilateral 
cease-fire will be extended if such measures are 
implemented.  Karayilan called for an end to Turkish 
military operations and to the isolation of Abdullah Ocalan, 
and for dialogue with the elected representatives of the 
Kurdish people.  `There is a confusion in Turkey, with many 
different voices being heard.  The position of certain 
circles is unclear.  Will they carry on military operations, 
or will they try to ameliorate the situation?' Karayilan 
asked. 
 
Mobs Attack Suspected Terrorists:  An angry crowd attempted 
to lynch suspected supporters of the outlawed separatist 
group PKK in two separate incidents, one in the Aegean port 
city of Izmir and another in the Black Sea town of Trabzon, 
papers report.  Security forces killed a PKK militant and 
wounded another in clashes in Trabzon.  The terrorist who 
was killed was of Syrian origin.  The police had to fight 
off an angry mob attempting to lynch the wounded terrorist. 
In Izmir, five people from southeast Turkey were detained 
for shouting slogans in favor of imprisoned PKK leader 
Abdullah Ocalan after getting involved in an argument with 
local shopkeepers.  An angry mob of 1,500 people attempted 
to lynch the southeasterners, but security forces dispersed 
the crowd by shooting into the air. 
 
CHP MP on Return of Displaced People to Southeast Turkey: 
The main opposition CHP Diyarbakir lawmaker Mesut Deger said 
that 125,539 displaced villagers have returned to their 
homes in 14 provinces under the `Return to Villages' 
project, revealing information he received from the interior 
ministry, the Mesopotamia News Agency reported.  Data by the 
interior ministry showed that 355,803 people from 58,368 
homes in 2,958 settlements were forced to leave their homes 
during violence in the southeast in the 1990s.  `All houses 
have been destroyed in these villages.  There are no 
stables, roads, water or electricity.  It is impossible to 
resolve this problem by sending the villagers to empty land 
without providing support to them in some way,' Deger 
stressed, urging the state to prepare the necessary ground 
to make the return home project a reality. 
New Parties On The Way:  Kurdish activist and former MP 
Leyla Zana invited the former mayor of Gaziantep, Celal 
Dogan, to join the Democratic Society Movement (DTH) during 
a meeting on Monday, papers report.  Papers claim that Zana 
and her colleagues are trying to win over social democratic 
voters to supplement their Kurdish base.  Dogan reportedly 
told Zana that the DTH should pursue policies that cover all 
of Turkey, not only the southeast, and that democratic 
principles should be observed in the DTH, which is expected 
to turn itself into a political party in September. 
Meanwhile, Dogan invited Zana and other Kurdish politicians 
to join the new party he is about to establish.  "Aksam" 
claims that Rifat Hisarciklioglu, chairman of the Turkish 
Union of Chambers (TOBB), and Sinan Aygun, chairman of the 
Ankara Chamber of Commerce (ATO), are preparing to establish 
a democratic nationalist party targeting the votes of social 
democrats.  Meanwhile, papers report that the Chief 
Prosecutor's Office has launched an examination of 
statements by former DEP lawmakers, including Leyla Zana, 
who are involved in the DTH.  Legal action may be taken 
against the DTH if the prosecutor decides that a ban on 
propagating regional movements was violated. 
 
Significant Increase in Kurdish Satellite Broadcasts: 
"Milliyet" carries a report detailing a significant increase 
in Kurdish broadcasts via satellite from Iraq, Iran, and 
Europe to Turkey.  A seventh Kurdish channel began test 
transmissions along with six others, of which two are 
supportive of the PKK, one is an Iranian state channel, and 
the others belong to Kurdish groups in northern Iraq.  The 
Kurdish broadcasts reach 72 countries across Europe, the 
Middle East, and Africa as well as Turkey.  The broadcasts 
can also be received in America via satellite.  The channels 
are as follows: 
 
¶1.  Roj TV: Broadcasts in Kurdish, Arabic and Turkish from 
Brussels and follows the PKK line.  It broadcasts for 12 
hours starting at 1000 GMT.  Roj TV, known as `PKK 
television,' airs news, political discussions, music, and 
children's programs. 
 
¶2.  Mesopotamia TV (Me-TV):  Close to the PKK cause, Me-TV 
broadcasts cultural, educational and music programs in the 
morning and evening timeframe.  Me-TV was allegedly set up 
as insurance against a possible closure of Roj-TV. 
 
¶3.  Kurdistan TV:  Broadcasts from the city of Selahaddin in 
northern Iraq.  Kurdistan TV is controlled by the Kurdistan 
Democracy party (KDP) and broadcasts news, political talk 
shows, musi,c and children's programs 24 hours a day.  It 
also offers news in Arabic. 
 
¶4.  Kurd-Sat TV: Broadcasts from the city of Suleymaniye in 
northern Iraq.  Controlled by the Patriotic Union of 
Kurdistan (PUK), Kurd-Sat TV broadcasts news, political 
discussions, music, and children's programs 24 hours a day. 
It also has some programs in Turkish and Arabic. 
 
¶5.  Zagros TV:  Began broadcasting from northern Iraq a 
short while ago.  Known to be close to the KDP.  Zagros TV 
broadcasts news, discussions, and music programs in Arabic 
during the day and in Kurdish in the evening. 
 
¶6.  Ishtar TV:  Has begun test transmissions.  The content 
and broadcast policies to be adopted by Ishtar TV, which is 
close to Kurdish groups in northern Iraq, is not yet clear. 
 
¶7.  Sahar TV:   Iranian state television.  Broadcasts two 30- 
minute Kurdish news and commentary programs every day. 
 
Women from Southeast Turkey Receive Leadership Training in 
US:  "Zaman" carries a report that 62 women from southeast 
Turkey received 10-days of training in Ohio under a `women's 
leadership' program funded by the US State Department.  The 
program aims to make Turkey a `model country' in women's 
leadership opportunities.  True Path Party (DYP) lawmaker 
Mehmet Eraslan submitted a motion to the parliament asking 
the AKP government about the goal of the US program and the 
number of participants.  State Minister Nimet Cubukcu said 
that the program, a joint project of Turkey's Southeastern 
Anatolia Project (GAP), Kent State University in Ohio, and 
Bahcesehir University in Istanbul, was kicked off in 
November 2004.  Cubukcu also said that George Soros' `Open 
Society Institute' is to donate 300,000 USD to the program, 
which aims to turn women in southeast Turkey into business 
owners. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Turkey's Kurdish Issue; Israel 
 
"The AKP Government Has No Kurdish or Middle East Policy" 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in the mass-appeal "Hurriyet" (8/23): 
"Turkey will not be able to resolve the PKK problem without 
clarifying its policies on Iraq and the Middle East.  Prime 
Minister Erdogan and his advisors are so confused on the 
Middle East that they cannot solve the Kurdish problem, but 
could proceed down a dangerous path. .  It is unclear what 
the PM meant when he referred to a `democratic republic,' a 
term used by Ocalan to define a republic founded by two 
separate but equal entities under the same roof. .  Only 
about 600 people listened to Erdogan at a recent rally in 
Diyarbakir, the province where the AKP received 34 percent 
of vote in the last election.  Couldn't Erdogan's advisors 
have predicted that after such tumult, the PM would be put 
in a difficult position and the PKK would collect the gains? 
Why was the AKP provincial office only able to turn out a 
crowd of 600?  PKK leader Ocalan, the lone inmate of  Imrali 
prison, has made public 101 written notes through his 
lawyers since he was jailed in 1999.  Does the PM have 
anything in mind to prevent this?  Finally, since the PM has 
acknowledged a Kurdish problem in Turkey, comments demanding 
that Ocalan be accepted as an interlocutor have started to 
receive more attention in the press." 
 
New Voices From Diyarbakir 
Oral Calislar wrote in the leftist/nationalist "Cumhuriyet" 
(08/22):  The PKK announced a ceasefire for a one-month 
period.  That is unacceptable.  We need to create greater 
public pressure so that they will never touch their weapons 
again.  We need to do what those who support violence do not 
want us to do.  We need to strive for a new initiative that 
will completely destroy the atmosphere for violence. 
Compared with two months ago, we are at a very positive 
stage now.  Evaluating this new situation, Sezgin Tanrikulu, 
President of the Diyarbakir Bar Association, said this: 
`The time when problems were solved through violence has 
passed.  In this light, I do not think it is right for the 
PKK to use violence as a method.  At this point, the Kurdish 
problem can be solved not through violence, but by enhancing 
freedoms in a democratic environment through tolerance and 
compromise.  That is why the PKK should not declare a 
ceasefire for one month, but renounce violence as a method 
altogether.'  The voices rising from Diyarbakir are proof 
that we have reached a new stage in terms of the region and 
the Kurdish problem.  Now is the time to say "stop" to those 
who wish to take Turkey back to the old days.  If the 
process that started with the 151 signatures becomes 
permanent, it will mark a turning-point in Turkey's path to 
the European Union. 
 
"Sharon as a Deterrent Example" 
Mim Kemal Oke opined in the conservative/nationalist "Halka 
ve Olaylara Tercuman" (8/23):  "It was Ariel Sharon who 
settled the Israeli fundamentalist, racist, and fanatical 
masses in the Gaza Strip in a bid to safeguard the region. 
He came under heavy attack by Jewish extremists for 
evacuating Gaza.  Sharon defined the extremist settlers who 
resisted Israeli troops as `Jewish terrorists' and 
`barbarians.'  Sharon now says in a postmodern, neo-liberal, 
urban manner that you cannot achieve security through the 
use of force.  This shows that human beings can be tamed by 
history.  Palestinians, who claim the Gaza pullout has been 
a victory won by resistance groups like Hamas, should learn 
from Israel's experience that they cannot advance too far 
with such a mentality.  You can capture a country by 
violence, as seen in Iraq, but you cannot keep it.  Sinn 
Fein is striving to disband the IRA, and the US is 
exhausting itself to win the global war against al-Qaida, a 
group the Americans had propped up for use in the Afghan 
war.  Those who will write the history of Israel will devote 
a chapter to Sharon.  Reading it is not so important.  What 
matters is to take a lesson from it." 
 
MCELDOWNEY