05ANKARA2432
TURKISH STATEMENT ON FORMATION OF IRAQI
Thu Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002432 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH STATEMENT ON FORMATION OF IRAQI 
TRANSITIONAL GOVERNMENT 
 
¶1. On April 28, the Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
released a statement on the formation of the Iraqi 
Transitional Government.  Informal embassy translation 
follows: 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
 
 
Turkish Republic Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Information Department 
No: 69 
April 28, 2005 
 
Announcement 
 
The ongoing process of forming the Iraqi Transitional 
Government is now completed, and having the new government 
start functioning today is a step towards the establishment 
of a democratic system in Iraq.  We wish success to the Iraqi 
Transitional Government as it undertakes its important 
responsibilities during the political interim process in 
Iraq. 
 
The Iraqi Transitional Government, which has been formed with 
the great support of the parliament, has the opportunity to 
make new beginnings in many areas. It is time for national 
reconciliation, to recover from injuries, and to create a 
common future for the Iraqi nation. 
 
In the coming period, the process of drafting the 
constitution will be launched. The participation of all 
segments of the Iraqi nation to this process, keeping 
national interests in the forefront, and taking action on 
issues related to the common future of Iraq with spirit of 
togetherness are of vital importance. We expect that the 
United Nations, which is to contribute to the organization of 
elections, will undertake an active role in line with UN 
Security Council Resolution 1546 in the coming interim 
process. 
 
Turkey will support actions taken towards the establishment 
of stability in Iraq in the coming period as well. Therefore, 
we will continue developing our cooperation and dialogue with 
all parties in Iraq, including with the Iraqi Transitional 
Government and the Parliament. 
 
END TEXT 
 
¶2. Iraq posts minimize considered. 
EDELMAN