05ANKARA3186
GOT AND IOM LAUNCH INTERNATIONAL TRAFFICKING
Wed Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 003186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: GOT AND IOM LAUNCH INTERNATIONAL TRAFFICKING 
PREVENTION CAMPAIGN 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The IOM and the GOT, with funding from the 
U.S., launched a first major multi-country prevention 
campaign to combat human trafficking across Turkey, Ukraine 
and Moldova.  The campaign includes a toll-free "157" 
helpline, multi-national multi-media advertising, and 
passport inserts.  End Summary. 
 
157 Helpline 
------------- 
 
¶2.   On Monday, May 23, the toll-free "157" helpline for 
victims of human trafficking opened for business.  Goals for 
the helpline are to rescue trafficked individuals in close 
coordination with law enforcement, to limit trafficking 
through pro-active intervention, and to strengthen regional 
response to trafficking.    The helpline operates 24/7 and is 
staffed by three full-time and two volunteer operators who 
speak Russian, Turkish, English and Romanian.  The helpline 
was established to assist in the rescue of victims, but 
operators can also provide information on visas and 
procedures for the safe return home to the countries of 
stranded migrants on a non-emergency basis.  Would-be victims 
can dial toll free from any phone, including mobile phones, 
from inside Turkey.  IOM will run the line for six months and 
then hand it over to an NGO. 
 
¶3.  Nearly 3,000 curious and heavy-breathing Turks flooded 
the helpline during the first week.  Happily, however, 
helpline operators identified two victims of trafficking and 
secured law enforcement assistance.  Happily, too, the 
heavy-breathing calls seem to have waned. 
 
Multi-National Multi-Media Advertising 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Thirty-second commercials in the Ukraine (local 
television in Crimea, Odessa CRIM-TV, KERCH-TV, and Oblast 
State TV) and Moldova (National Television and 
Teleradio-Gagauzia) will publicize the 157 and locally-based 
prevention hotlines.  Similarly, Turkish music television 
channels will run 30-second spots advertising the 157 number. 
 
¶5.  Further advertising of the helpline is on billboards, 
billboard stands (near passport control), and digital message 
boards displaying messages in Russian, Romanian, Turkish and 
English at Istanbul's Ataturk Airport. 
 
¶6.  Panorama Newspaper, a Russian/Turkish periodical, also 
carries advertising of the 157 number.  All Turkish 
consulates in the Russian-speaking world are distributing the 
newspapers.  There is distribution at Ataturk Airport and the 
Odessa and Crimea seaports as well. 
 
Passport Inserts 
---------------- 
 
¶7.  Colorful pocket-sized passport inserts (in Russian, 
Romanian, Turkish and English) warn women to call the 
toll-free 157 helpline if someone takes their passports or 
forces them into any type of work without pay.  Passport 
control officers tuck the inserts into all targeted women's 
passports from known source countries at key border 
crossings:  Ataturk and Sabiha Gokcen Airports in Istanbul, 
Istanbul Karakoy Seaport, the Antalya airport, and the 
Trabzon Seaport.  Non-governmental organizations in the 
Ukraine are distributing similar handouts to those women who 
may be at risk for trafficking at seaports and regional 
airports used for transport to Turkey. 
 
Press 
----- 
 
¶8.  The IOM and the GOT launched the campaign with press 
conferences at Istanbul's Ataturk Airport and at the IOM 
office in Ankara.  In the context as well of the release of 
the U.S.'s annual TIP report, human trafficking has gotten 
above average coverage in the Turkish press of late. 
MOORE