05ANKARA903
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, Feb 11-15,
Thu Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ANKARA 000903 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
DEPARTMENT FOR VALERIE KWOK USAID E&E/ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, Feb 11-15, 
2005 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published Sunday, February 13 by the Turkish Daily 
News; http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/: 
 
    TITLE: Turkey eyes 'model' success in human trafficking 
    fight; By Fatma Demirelli 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA - Turkish Daily News 
 
    On Jan. 11, Turkish newspapers published the appalling 
    story of a 21-year-old Ukrainian woman, identified as 
    Tatyana Litvinenko, who was rescued in a police raid on 
    an Istanbul brothel, where she was forced into 
    prostitution. The woman, reported the newspapers, came 
    to Turkey in July of last year when she was seven 
    months pregnant in hope of working as a babysitter 
    before she ended up in the hands of a transnational 
    human trafficking gang operating the brothel. Her 
    captors were not moved by her plea that she could not 
    have sex because of her pregnancy. A week after she 
    gave birth to her baby, one of the captors pushed 
    chewing gum into the baby's mouth and killed it because 
    the mother was spending too much time taking care of 
    the kid, rather than the clients. 
 
    Tatyana is one of dozens of desperate women, mostly 
    from former Soviet bloc countries, where unemployment 
    is high and opportunities are few, coming to Turkey in 
    hope of changing their lives for the better but 
    eventually ending up being trafficked by crime gangs 
    primarily for the purpose of sexual exploitation. Over 
    the last few years, trafficking in persons, women in 
    particular, has grown at an alarming rate in the region 
    and Turkey, as a preferred destination, has had its 
    share from the surging crime. 
 
    Vast economic opportunities that are further increasing 
    in parallel to growing prospects for eventual European 
    Union membership and ensuing stability, geographic 
    proximity and a liberal visa regime have attracted 
    increasingly many would-be migrants from Eastern Europe 
    and former Soviet bloc countries in search of better 
    living conditions to Turkey over the past years. This 
    situation, in turn, is heavily exploited by human 
    traffickers, who sometimes lure young women with 
    promises of regular employment but which ultimately 
    results in forced prostitution, debt and various forms 
    of abuse including forced confinement, control of 
    personal documents and passports and threats. 
 
    Estimates of how many people are being trafficked in 
    Turkey are difficult to locate. A total of 262 people 
    were identified as victims of trafficking by the 
    Turkish police and gendarmerie in 2004, a figure that 
    officials say is only the "tip of the iceberg." 
 
    Ready to take the challenge: Turkish authorities say 
    they are aware of the problem and are prepared to 
    accept the challenge to make Turkey the country dealing 
    most effectively with the problem of human trafficking 
    in the region. Pressure on Ankara to improve anti- 
    trafficking efforts has increased in recent years in 
    connection with its bid to join the European Union. 
    Ankara admits international pressure but says its 
    growing efforts are guided by a desire to combat one of 
    the worst forms of human trafficking rather than simply 
    to respond to an outside demand. 
 
    "We, as Turkey, are aiming at becoming a model country 
    in the Caucasus, the Balkans and the Middle East in 
    terms of combating human trafficking," taking the most 
    advanced measures among the countries of the region, 
    said Ambassador Murat Ersavci, the director-general for 
    consular affairs at the Foreign Ministry, who also 
    heads a national task force in charge of coordinating 
    anti-trafficking efforts. "Our efforts towards this 
    goal are very serious." 
 
    In an annual report examining the situation in world 
    countries in the fight against human trafficking, the 
    U.S. State Department placed Turkey in Tier 3, the 
    worst category of countries that do not comply with the 
    minimum standards and are not making significant 
    efforts to do so in its report in 2003. That assessment 
    improved in the 2004 report, which placed Turkey on the 
    Tier 2 watch list for its determination to make 
    significant efforts at combating trafficking, waiting 
    to see implementation of the pledged steps for a 
    possible upgrade to Tier 2. 
 
    Ersavci said Turkey hoped to be moved to Tier 2 in the 
    2005 report, expected to be released in the coming 
    months, with the eventual goal of joining the Tier 1 
    countries. 
 
    The Organization for International Migration (IOM), 
    which Turkey joined as a full member in November 2004, 
    is hopeful that Turkey is set for a better assessment 
    after all the progress it has recently achieved. 
 
    Commending the increasing efficiency of Turkish law 
    enforcement authorities in identifying and referring 
    victims of human trafficking to the IOM for assistance, 
    Marielle Sander-Lindstrom, chief of mission of IOM's 
    Turkey office, said Turkey's efforts are "fantastic." 
 
    "To me, it proves what I thought at the beginning, that 
    Turkey has so much capacity and potential to actually 
    have a significant impact on human trafficking, that if 
    we can support Turkey now, when we have that window of 
    opportunity, then we can do something positive for the 
    entire region," she said. 
 
    Over the last couple of years Turkey has amended its 
    penal code, the Law on Work Permits for Foreigners and 
    the Citizenship Law, introducing a stronger legal basis 
    to fight trafficking. The new Turkish Penal Code (TCK), 
    which will become effective as of April of this year, 
    introduces heavier punishment for traffickers, up to 12 
    years in prison and a fine. Changes in the Citizenship 
    Law make passage of a provisional period of three years 
    compulsory before a foreigner can request Turkish 
    citizenship for being married to a Turk, a step taking 
    aim at the trafficking of women through false 
    marriages. Through the changes in the Law on Work 
    Permits, foreigners can be legally employed in some 
    additional categories, including domestic service. 
 
    In another legal step to make the fight against human 
    trafficking more effective, the Interior Ministry has 
    allowed a humanitarian visa for identified victims of 
    human trafficking if they do not want to return home 
    immediately or if they agree to testify against 
    traffickers in court. 
 
    Turkish authorities, working in cooperation with the 
    IOM, have also organized a number of training sessions 
    for law enforcement officers, the police and 
    gendarmerie, and judicial personnel to raise awareness 
    on trafficking and give them skills to identify a 
    victim of human trafficking, the very first step in 
    dealing with the problem. 
 
    Sander-Lindstrom said the number of victims referred to 
    IOM for assistance went up to 62 in 2004, a dramatic 
    increase from only two in 2002, a sign of the success 
    of the training. The heightened awareness among law 
    enforcement personnel will also hopefully save 
    trafficking victims from being "dumped" at the borders 
    of the source countries as any irregular migrant, a 
    practice, according to both the U.S. State Department 
    and the IOM, that would leave victims vulnerable to re- 
    trafficking. 
 
    Hotline 111 for victims: 
 
    On the more practical side, an NGO-managed shelter 
    facility for victims of trafficking was set up in 
    Istanbul in November, following a high-profile ceremony 
    for the signing of a protocol on the establishment of 
    the facility held in June and attended by then U.S. 
    Secretary of State Colin Powell and Turkish Foreign 
    Minister Abdullah Gul. A similar facility is planned to 
    soon be operational in Ankara. 
    A telephone hotline, starting with 0 800, has been put 
    into service for help calls from victims of human 
    trafficking. A toll-free, three-digit number, 111, will 
    soon be operational to receive calls from across 
    Turkey. 
    The Turkish government is also in touch with those 
    regional countries which most of the victims of 
    trafficking come from, including Ukraine, Moldova, 
    Russia, Bulgaria, Romania, Georgia and Azerbaijan. The 
    interior ministries of Turkey and Belarus signed a 
    memorandum of understanding on cooperation in July 
    ¶2004. 
 
    The cost of catching up: 
 
    Despite the progress, the level of awareness among law 
    enforcement bodies and the judiciary remains weak, and 
    public awareness is even weaker. The "fine line" 
    between forced prostitution as a victim of trafficking 
    and prostitution as such is for the most part blurred 
    in the eyes of the public. Victims also often lack 
    access to assistance they need, such as legal and 
    psychological counseling, shelter, medical assistance, 
    because they are lumped together with illegal 
    immigrants for not having the proper legal documents 
    and in some cases dumped at the border, only to be 
    reinserted into the trafficking cycle by traffickers. 
 
    Implementation of the legal steps taken to raise 
    awareness is a task that needs further effort and 
    requires more financial resources. And allocating more 
    money to fight against human trafficking is difficult 
    for a country like Turkey, which not only faces 
    trafficking but also must have enough resources to deal 
    with dramatic flows of illegal migrants from Asia, the 
    Middle East and Africa. 
 
    Assisting the victims is also a huge task with a heavy 
    financial cost. The IOM's advice is to build up the 
    ability of NGOs to provide assistance for victims, 
    including shelter, and to involve civil society in 
    providing protection and health and legal assistance. 
 
    "It's a lot to ask of Turkey," said Sander-Lindstrom, 
    adding, "But Turkey is taking its responsibility as a 
    destination country." END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published Sunday, February 13 by the Turkish Daily 
News; http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/: 
 
    TITLE: Campaign aims to build anti-trafficking 
    capability 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: In an attempt to boost efforts and 
    capabilities for combating human trafficking through 
    information and stepped-up law enforcement, the 
    government last week launched the "Counter-Trafficking 
    Now!" campaign. The $700,000 project is funded by the 
    U.S. government and will be implemented by the 
    International Organization for Migration (IOM). 
 
    As part of the project some 100,000 women and girls 
    aged 15-45 from source countries in the former Soviet 
    bloc will receive leaflets with information about human 
    trafficking and the number of a three-digit telephone 
    hotline for emergency assistance. The leaflets will be 
    in the form of passport inserts obtained upon arrival 
    in Turkey. 
 
    The project envisages providing training to 150 police 
    and gendarmerie personnel on the realities and causes 
    of human trafficking as well as on key laws dealing 
    with the issue. Some 150 victims will also receive 
    shelter and medical and other assistance as part of the 
    one-year project. END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Published Sunday, February 13 by the Turkish Daily 
News; http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/: 
 
    TITLE: 'Modern-day slavery' preys on the vulnerable 
    BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA - Turkish Daily News 
 
    Although its geographic location heavily exposes Turkey 
    to the trafficking of persons from surrounding 
    countries, it is by no means the only country suffering 
    from this growing problem. The U.S. State Department 
    estimates that between 600,000-800,000 men, women and 
    children are trafficked across international borders as 
    modern-day slaves for forced prostitution, working in 
    quarries and sweatshops and in general involuntary 
    servitude. Millions more are trafficked within their 
    home countries. 
 
    Economic hardship, political instability and civil war 
    at home are driving forces behind the 21st century 
    slave trade. The trade, in turn, feeds a global demand 
    for cheap and vulnerable labor. Women and children are 
    particularly vulnerable. Estimates show that of the 
    600,000-800,000 people trafficked across borders each 
    year, 70 percent are female and 50 percent are 
    children. Traders' ploys are creative and ruthless, 
    ranging from promises of marriage to regular employment 
    or just a `vacation' in another country. END TEXT. 
 
¶5. (U) Published Sunday, February 13 by the Turkish Daily 
News; http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/: 
 
    TITLE: Set to work against human trafficking 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA - Turkish Daily News 
 
    Responding to a pressing need to develop better ways of 
    coping with one of the worst forms of human rights 
    violations as well as to growing outside pressure from 
    the European Union and the United States to improve its 
    poor standards for dealing with the problem, Turkey is 
    modifying its legislation and implementing practical 
    measures to combat the growing trafficking of women 
    from former Soviet countries in its territory by means 
    of a nationwide undertaking. 
 
    As the latest step in a series of efforts over the last 
    couple of years, the government has launched a campaign 
    to help victims of human trafficking through measures 
    such as the setting up of an emergency telephone 
    hotline and the distribution of leaflets to some 
    100,000 women and girls aged 15-45 from former Soviet 
    countries that include information about human 
    trafficking. The leaflets will be in the form of 
    passport inserts obtained upon arrival in Turkey. 
 
    According to the Turkish Foreign Ministry, which 
    coordinates implementation of a national Action Plan to 
    fight against human trafficking, Turkey will soon 
    become a "model country" in the vast region covering 
    the Balkans, the Middle East and the Caucasus for its 
    high efficiency in the fight against the trading of 
    women, men and children for sexual and labor 
    exploitation, a reproduction in the modern day of old- 
    world slavery. END TEXT. 
 
¶6. (U) Published Saturday, February 12 by the Turkish Daily 
News; http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/: 
 
    TITLE: Turkey launches campaign for trafficking victims 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: The Turkish government yesterday launched a 
    campaign to help victims of human trafficking by 
    setting up an emergency telephone hotline and 
    distributing leaflets to some 100,000 women and girls 
    aged 15-45 from former Soviet countries that include 
    information about human trafficking. The leaflets will 
    be in the form of passport inserts obtained upon 
    arrival in Turkey. 
 
    The $700,000 project is funded by the U.S. government 
    and implemented by the International Organization for 
    Migration (IOM), officials told a press conference. The 
    111 line will operate 24 hours a day and will be 
    staffed mainly by Russian speakers for women who are 
    forced into prostitution in Turkey by organized 
    trafficking gangs. 
 
    The project is the latest in a series of steps Turkey 
    has taken to improve its efforts to combat trafficking 
    after it was placed on a special watch list by the U.S. 
    State Department last year. The number of victims of 
    trafficking were 239 in 2004 according to official 
    data, but the figures may be far from reflecting the 
    real situation. 
 
    The "Counter-Trafficking Now!" campaign also includes 
    plans to train Turkish law enforcement officers on the 
    realities of human trafficking. 
 
    Many women from the ex-Soviet Union, notably from Black 
    Sea states such as Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, work 
    as prostitutes in Turkey, especially in Istanbul and 
    the coastal resorts. 
 
    The lucrative trade in women and children for sexual 
    purposes by criminal gangs has become a major problem 
    across Europe in recent years. END TEXT. 
 
¶7. (U) Published Friday, February 11 by Reuters: 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA, Feb 11 (Reuters) - Turkey will set 
    up a telephone hotline to help victims of human 
    trafficking, mostly women from the former Soviet Union, 
    officials said on Friday. 
 
    The hotline will be staffed mainly by Russian speakers 
    for the women who are brought to Turkey by criminal 
    gangs and forced into prostitution. 
 
    Language problems are believed to be a major obstacle 
    that prevents victims from going to the police. The 
    project for the "111" line, which will operate 24-hours 
    a day, was funded mainly by the United States. 
 
    Murat Ersavci of the Foreign Ministry told reporters 
    the line would provide medical and psychological help. 
    Official figures show 239 women were victims of 
    trafficking in Turkey in 2004, up from 102 the previous 
    year. But officials say they suspect these figures are 
    the tip of the iceberg. 
 
    Many women from the ex-Soviet Union, notably from Black 
    Sea states such as Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, work 
    as prostitutes in Turkey, especially in Istanbul and 
    the coastal resorts. 
 
    The lucrative trade in women and children for sexual 
    purposes by criminal gangs has become a major problem 
    across Europe in recent years. END TEXT. 
 
¶8. (U) Published Friday, February 11 by Radikal; By Hilal 
Koylu; http://www.radikal.com.tr/: 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: Turkey, which was presented as one of the 
    countries that "does not exert efforts" for prevention 
    of human trafficking in the yearly report of the US 
    State Department, will start a special campaign against 
    human traffickers.  The campaign will be publicized 
    with the slogan "end to modern slavery." 
 
    The campaign will be conducted under the coordination 
    of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and its priority 
    goal shall be saving women taking "refuge" from the 
    hands of human traffickers.  Within the framework of 
    the campaign, new shelters in Ankara, Izmir and Antalya 
    will be added to the one operating in Istanbul. 
 
    An "emergency-help" telephone hotline to give service 
    in Russian and Turkish will be activated.  The "111" 
    hotline number may be used by all victims.  The IOM 
    shall closely follow the campaign.  The IOM officials 
    said "we will conduct the campaign with the MFA.  It is 
    very important to develop a special goal and 
    understanding vis-a-vis the women who suffer."  The MFA 
    also said that this campaign is very important and that 
    "this time all units of the state have been put into 
    action." 
    Turkey is viewed by both the US and the EU as good in 
    "legal arrangements and protection" in the fight 
    against human trafficking, but in order to eliminate 
    the mishaps faced in practice it will introduce such 
    campaigns frequently. 
    Promising "I will improve further," Turkey prepared the 
    following report card for itself in the fight against 
    human trafficking: 
 
    -Turkey is a signatory of UN Children Rights Charter. 
    -The TGNA approved the UN Convention Against 
    Transborder Organized Crime and Protocol on Human 
    Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling. 
    -Article 80 of the new Penal Code, which will enter 
    into effect on April 1, defined human trafficking.  The 
    punishment for human trafficking will be an 8-12 year 
    jail sentence. 
    -The Law on Working Permits for Foreigners has entered 
    into effect. 
    -In order to prevent fake marriages for the purpose of 
    obtaining foreigners' work permits, a rule was 
    introduced requiring five years continuous residence in 
    Turkey for foreign spouses and children to be able to 
    work. 
    -The National Task Force to Struggle Against Human 
    Trafficking was established. The organization rescued 
    more than 60 women from traffickers and it established 
    a shelter where victims can get legal, psychological 
    and medical counsel. 
    --Within the Interior Ministry a Branch Directorate on 
    Human Movements was established. END TEXT. 
 
¶9. (U) Published Friday, February 11 by Milliyet; By Utku 
Cakirozer; http://www.milliyet.com.tr/: 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: With the financial support of the US 
    administration, a project for the prevention of human 
    trafficking and sex slavery will be started.  According 
    to the project which will be publicized today, an 
    "emergency assistance hotline" that women who are 
    brought to Turkey from former Eastern Bloc countries 
    and forced to work in the prostitution sector can call 
    will be created.  In addition, shelters will be 
    established for the rehabilitation of victims.  In the 
    US State Department's latest human trafficking report 
    in 2004, Turkey was put in the group of countries that 
    are "under monitoring." END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN