05ANKARA5119
ADDRESSING THE AI THREAT IN TURKEY
Thu Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/RUS, OES/STC, EB/TPP/ATP, EB/TPP/BTA 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER/PBUDASHEWITZ 
ITP/MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
FAS PASS FSIS AND APHIS 
VIENNA PASS APHIS/SLITER 
BRUSSELS PASS APHIS/FERNANDEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR TBIO KSTH
SUBJECT:  ADDRESSING THE AI THREAT IN TURKEY 
 
Ref:  State 153802 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified. Not for Internet 
Distribution. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Post delivered referenced talking 
points to officials at the Turkish Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA).  MARA officials 
are very concerned that Avian Influenza could spread to 
Turkey primarily by wild bird populations migrating from 
Russia.  Officials welcomed any exchange of information 
on the issue however inter-agency relations may inhibit 
a coordinated effort by the Turkish government to 
address any outbreak.  End Summary. 
 
------------------- 
Welcomed Initiative 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On August 19, AgCounselor delivered talking 
points regarding highly pathogenic H5N1 Avian Influenza 
(AI) to Deputy Under Secretary for Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, Nebi Celik.   DUS/Celik indicated that the 
Ministry was trying to follow the AI outbreak in Russia 
and Central Asia and were extremely concerned with the 
spread of the disease given Turkey's eastern borders. 
Celik stated that the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs had the primary responsibility for tracking the 
disease.  Celik was extremely interested in any 
information we could provide regarding the outbreak 
particularly with the situation in Russia and 
Kazakhstan.  Celik stated that they would provide 
information on any developments in Turkey. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Turkey's Poultry Sector - Varied and Vulnerable 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3.  (U) Turkey's commercial poultry sector is comprised 
of several large companies.  However, about 40 percent 
of Turkey's population still lives in rural areas with 
many depending on subsistence farming including some 
poultry and egg production.  The average farm size in 
Turkey is only 8 hectares with each farm invariably 
keeping poultry (ducks, chickens, geese, turkeys) for 
household consumption.  More often than not, the poultry 
is being raised in open areas, where they can come into 
contact with wild fowl.  It is not unusual to see 
chickens along the side of the road in rural areas. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Banning Live Poultry Imports from Russia 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Turkey does not permit any commercial imports of 
poultry meat although imports of breeding stock 
including day old chicks are permitted.  In August, 
Turkey banned all imports of live poultry from Russia. 
Imports of live poultry from countries in Central Asia 
are not permitted. 
 
------------ 
GOT Measures 
------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  According to the Celik, the Under Secretary 
of Agriculture, Hamit Ogut, is the primary contact for 
the AI situation.  Celik requested that any information 
regarding AI be sent to the Under Secretary with copies 
to other members of the Ministry.  He noted that the 
European Union and Turkey will be doing an joint 
emergency exercise in the eastern part of Turkey to 
combat a possible outbreak of AI. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Further discussions with MARA representatives 
revealed that Turkish government has an established 
emergency action plan (EAP) to deal with AI and perhaps 
all types of infectious animal diseases.  The EAP is an 
internal document and we were unable to obtain a copy. 
For AI, MARA, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of 
Forestry all share some responsibility for this issue. 
Forestry has responsibility for migratory and wild bird 
populations while Health focuses on human illness. 
According to our contact, instructions have been 
provided to health care workers to report any unusual 
human illnesses and for the poultry industry to report 
any unusual bird illnesses or deaths.  In addition, 
there be an additional workshop/exercise in Bondurma in 
September or October to determine the ability of the 
emergency response system. 
 
------------------------------ 
Some Outstanding Issues Remain 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Despite assurances by Ministry officials that 
a system is in place to address any problems, some 
issues remain.   First, there has been no indication 
that the Ministry is providing any information to small 
landowners, who maintain small flocks and who are most 
likely to come into contact with wild migrating fowl. 
Second, relations between the Turkish ministries are not 
as good as they should be.  MARA officials indicated 
that they are the lead agency on the illness without 
acknowledging the role of Health or Forestry.  It is not 
clear how much information is being shared among 
ministries. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  During discussions with one MARA official, 
post learned that the government has not addressed the 
issue of paying for culling of birds.  Apparently, no 
funds have been allocated either to pay for culling, 
disposing of carcasses, or for compensating farmers. 
 
 
 
------------------- 
Comment:  Follow-up 
------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Post will follow up during the next several 
weeks with officials from the Ministries of Health and 
Forestry as well as the poultry industry for further 
information.  In addition, we will meet with EU 
officials to determine the results of their joint 
exercise.  End Comment. 
 
MCELDOWNEY