05ANKARA5947
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA COVERAGE - VISIT OF UNDER
Mon Oct 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ANKARA 005947 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR R, EUR/SE, EUR/PPD, NEA/PPD, INR/R/MR, ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA COVERAGE - VISIT OF UNDER 
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS 
 
SIPDIS 
KAREN HUGHES 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. Turkish media coverage of Under Secretary Hughes' 
September 27-29 visit to Ankara and Istanbul was generally 
fair and factual.  Coming on the eve of Turkey's historic 
start of EU accession talks, scheduled for October 3, 
coverage was less comprehensive than it might otherwise have 
been.  The visual images of the Under Secretary's visit - 
touring shops in historic markets in Ankara and Istanbul, 
holding a Turkish child at the education park in Istanbul, 
speaking with women NGO representatives in Ankara - were 
very positive.  The Under Secretary's comments following her 
meeting with MFA Undersecretary Ali Tuygan, especially her 
reassurance that the United States is looking at further 
steps to address the PKK issue, also received positive 
coverage.  Reporting on Under Secretary Hughes' roundtable 
discussion with women's groups focused on the Turkish 
women's criticisms of US policy in Iraq.  Most papers also 
carried the Under Secretary's responses to those criticisms, 
and implied that she had taken the criticism seriously and 
pledged to pass on what she heard to President Bush.  The 
Under Secretary's meeting with religious leaders in Istanbul 
received scant press attention, as press access was limited. 
Most media picked up the Under Secretary's positive comments 
about Turkey, the Turkish people, and Istanbul.  Press 
commentary on the visit was also limited, and focused on the 
need for the US to follow words with concrete actions. 
Ironically, the most negative portrayal of the visit came 
when some Turkish dailies reprinted excerpts of articles 
written by the US traveling press.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
NEWS REPORTING FAIR AND FACTUAL 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy Karen Hughes visited 
Ankara and Istanbul September 27-29 for meetings with 
government officials, NGOs, and religious leaders.  Coverage 
of the visit in the Turkish media was fair and factual.  A 
summary of the coverage in major dailies follows: 
 
"Hurriyet" -- mainstream secular (cir. 520,000) that is 
Turkey's most influential daily.  "We Need Your Help to 
Improve Our Image" (page 24), September 29, 2005 
 
US Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy Karen 
Hughes, the person trying to improve President George Bush's 
image, acknowledged to Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul that 
"President Bush is aware of the reaction of people in the 
region to his Iraq policy."  Hughes met with Undersecretary 
Ali Tuygan before being received by FM Gul.  She informed 
them that she wanted to make her visit to the region, 
including to Turkey, go beyond just a public relations 
effort for her country.  Hughes said that she gives great 
importance to Turkey in the effort to improve the US image 
in the region, and she asked for support and views from 
Ankara on this issue.  Hughes acknowledged that the American 
people are not well informed about countries in the region, 
that she had brought 20 American journalists with her, and 
that her trip was aimed at providing the public with first- 
hand information on the region.  Gul told Hughes that 
improving America's image in Turkey would require the United 
States to take concrete steps against the PKK.  He also 
reminded Hughes that Turkey had asked the United States to 
begin direct flights or ship visits to northern Cyprus in 
order to alleviate the isolation of the Turkish Cypriots. 
 
Speaking to reporters, Hughes said that the United States 
has made a commitment to the Turkish people on the PKK 
issue, and that work on that issue is continuing.  She 
reiterated that the Americans view the PKK in the same way 
they view al-Qaida.  Hughes said that the United States and 
Turkey need each other in order to best advance the 
interests of their people.  She noted that the two countries 
"shared common values such as democracy, respect for human 
rights, and women's rights." 
 
Hughes later met with representatives from representatives 
of various women's NGOs.  She had some difficult minutes 
there when many of the women criticized US policy in Iraq. 
KA-DER member Fatma Nevin Vargun called on the United States 
to end wars that lead to poverty.  Hughes responded that, as 
a mother, she also did not like war, but added that 
sometimes war is necessary to protect the peace.  Another KA- 
DERR member, Nurdan Bernard, criticized the US for not 
taking decisive action against the PKK.  Hughes answered 
that the US views the PKK as a terrorist organization no 
different from al-Qaida.  Following the discussion with 
NGOs, Hughes made a brief tour of the castle area.  She 
chatted with shopkeepers, and bought a blue bead.  Hughes 
subsequently left Ankara for Istanbul, where she met with 
representatives of all religions at Topkapi Palace.  Hughes 
said that President Bush had specifically asked her to meet 
with religious leaders, and described the meeting as "a very 
good experience." 
 
"Yeni Safak": Islamist-oriented, pro-government (circ. 
120,000); "An Image Can't be Corrected With Blue Beads" 
(page 1), September 29, 2005 
 
Experts said that Hughes' mission to improve the US image in 
the region will be difficult.  They added that "an image 
can't be improved by an individual.  Blue beads won't be 
enough."  Yeditepe University Professor of Psychiatry Dr. 
Arif Verimli noted that Hughes had used body language in an 
effort to appeal directly to the emotions of the Turkish 
people.  "Especially having her picture taken with the blue 
bead was an attempt to appeal to the emotions of Turks.  But 
having a picture of Hughes with a blue bead, which has an 
important place in Turkish culture, won't be enough to fix 
the image overnight."  Ankara University Professor of 
Psychology Dr. Ali Donmez said that "Hughes seemed sincere. 
But Bush's image is at such a point that a few people aren't 
going to be able to repair it in a short period of time." 
 
"Jet Public Diplomacy For Bush's Image" (page 14):  Hughes 
met with representatives of a number of women's NGOs.  When 
some of them criticized US policy in Iraq, she answered that 
"as a mother, I also don't like war.  But sometimes it is 
necessary to go to war to protect the peace."  From 
Cengelhan in the Ankara Castle, Hughes visited shopkeepers, 
examining headscarves especially, before buying a blue bead. 
Hughes later went to Istanbul, where she visited the 
Findikzade Education Park sponsored by the Turkish Education 
Volunteers Foundation.  Hughes greeted the children by 
saying "merhaba" in Turkish, urged the students to visit the 
United States when they grow up, and made a donation of 
English-language books.  She then moved on to Topkapi Palace 
where, following a brief tour, she listened to the Koran 
being read in the Holy Trust section.  She spoke for a time 
to a Turkish woman in a headscarf who was touring the 
palace, and to a couple from Bahrain.  Hughes met for about 
an hour with representatives of various religions.  During 
the meeting, she mentioned tolerance, and said that Turkey 
could be a source of inspiration for religious tolerance for 
the rest of the world.  Hughes said she had been impressed 
by the hospitality, warmth, and directness of the Turkish 
people. 
 
"Radikal": liberal intellectual (circ. 45,000) 
"Hughes Strikes Through Her Charisma" (page 6), September 
29, 2005 
 
State Department Under Secretary Karen Hughes, who arrived 
in Turkey as US President George Bush's "image guru," 
learned that Ankara's image criteria include "concrete steps 
on Cyprus and the PKK."  Hughes was sharply criticized by 
women's rights activists, who told her "not to ask for 
cooperation from us on the war."  Hughes, who is responsible 
for public diplomacy at the State Department, met first with 
MFA Undersecretary Ali Tuygan.  Speaking to journalists 
after the meeting, Hughes said that Turkey and the United 
States need each other in order to best serve the interests 
of their people.  She said the two countries have shared 
values that include democracy, respect for human rights, and 
women's rights.  Hughes added that the US supports Turkey's 
membership in the EU, and reiterated that "we condemn the 
PKK just as we condemn al-Qaida. 
 
Hughes met later with women's rights activists at the Ankara 
Castle.  Serpil Sancar of KA-DER said that "we can cooperate 
on freedom and issues of daily life, but not on war, 
violence, and arms."  Hidayet Sefkatli Koksal of the Capital 
Women's Platform, recalled that she had made efforts and 
prayers to prevent the motion from being approved by the 
Turkish Parliament on March 1, 2003.  Koksal continued: "I 
know that you are angry with us because of March 1.  But I 
am bothered every time I see women in children in a 
photograph from Iraq.  Until this issue is resolved, it is 
difficult to talk about good things.  It disturbs me to see 
American preachers in suits and ties on GOD-TV giving 
sermons praising the war.  We are trying to prevent Islamic 
fundamentalism.  You need to struggle against evangelical 
fundamentalism."  Hughes responded that the US is working 
together with Iraq: "The United States will continue this 
struggle until it is won.  No parent in America wants to 
lose their children in a war.  The decision to go to war was 
made with great difficulty.  I saw how much pain my friend 
President Bush went through in reaching this decision. 
Women in the time of Saddam were not better off than the 
women in today's Iraq.  The women in Afghanistan are 
thanking us." 
 
"Sabah": mainstream secular (circ. 450,000), "Bush's Image 
Maker Came to Turkey to Make Turks Love Her, But." September 
29, 2005 
 
At her meeting with representatives of women's NGOs, Karen 
Hughes tried to justify the war by saying that it had saved 
Iraqi women from being raped, and that President Bush 
agonized over the decision to go to war; but in the end, her 
justifications were not convincing.  Karen Hughes, who 
helped President Bush win the elections by giving him advice 
on his image, heard lots of complaints from women in Turkey, 
where she came to rebuild the US image.  Hughes, the Under 
Secretary for Public Diplomacy at the State Department, was 
 
SIPDIS 
the target of the women organizations representatives' rage 
against Bush for the war in Iraq. 
 
Hughes has been tasked to rebuild the US image damaged by 
the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.  She came to Ankara after 
visits to Egypt and Saudi Arabia, and met with women's 
groups as the first event in her schedule.  Hughes met with 
representatives of the Association for Supporting Women 
Candidates (KA-DER) and other women's NGOs at Cengelhan, in 
the Ankara Castle.  Hughes began her remarks by praising 
Ataturk and Turkish women.  She said that her job is to 
foster relations between the US and other countries, and 
that Turkish women could take the lead.  But when the women 
started to speak, she received unexpected responses. 
 
After they completed their remarks, representatives of the 
women NGOs presented gifts to Hughes before departing.  It 
was noticed that the American journalists accompanying 
Hughes on her trip to the Middle East showed great interest 
in the anti-militarist Turkish women.  Hughes said that 
friends are supposed to talk to each other frankly, and said 
she appreciated the views that were shared.  She then went 
on a short tour through Ankara Castle.  Hughes went into 
shops, looked at souvenirs, chatted with shopkeepers, and 
bought herself a blue bead.  Hughes showed special interest 
in children.  She urged them to learn English and go see the 
United States. 
 
"Milliyet" (circ. 320,000); "She Loved Istanbul," September 
30, 2005 
 
Karen Hughes, Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy at the US 
State Department, who was on a Middle East tour to improve 
the image of US President George Bush, visited historical 
and tourist places of Istanbul on the last stop of her tour. 
Following her visits, which were covered only by "Milliyet," 
Hughes said that "Turkey and Turks have fascinated me.  I am 
very impressed by Istanbul.  I have decided to come back to 
Istanbul with my husband next summer for holiday." 
Professor Filiz Ozer, an art historian, accompanied Hughes, 
who first went to Hagia Sophia in a heavy rain.  Smiling 
continually at the people around her, Hughes later went to 
the Grand Bazaar to do some shopping and chat with 
shopkeepers.  Hughes visited carpet shops and asked for 
information on antique kilims.  She drank apple tea that was 
offered to her, and tasted simit bought from a street 
seller.  The shopkeepers presented Hughes with a blue bead 
to ward off the evil eye. 
 
Answering our questions on her way out of the Grand Bazaar, 
she said "I am very happy that I have come here and met with 
you.  It's been a great experience for me."  Hughes also 
said that she had been "fascinated" by Istanbul: "I've 
realized that I should spare more time for this city.  The 
people are incredibly welcoming and hospitable.  I loved the 
Turks.  Istanbul is a place that has to be seen, definitely. 
No matter which way I turn, I come across a marvelous view." 
Emphasizing that she had had a great evening and very useful 
meetings, Hughes said "I wish I could stay here longer and 
do some more shopping.  I will come back as soon as possible 
and do shopping for my house."  Hughes, who will prepare an 
extensive report for President Bush on Egypt, Saudi Arabia, 
and Turkey, left for the US on a private plane yesterday 
afternoon. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
INTERVIEW FOCUSES ON US-TURKISH BILATERAL ISSUES 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. As part of her media outreach in Turkey, the Under 
Secretary interviewed with Ferai Tinc, foreign news editor 
 
SIPDIS 
of Turkey's leading national daily, "Hurriyet."  The 
interview focused on the main issues in the US-Turkish 
bilateral relationship.  A translation of the interview as 
it appeared in "Hurriyet" follows: 
 
"BUSH'S IMAGE GURU TO RETURN WITH GUL'S MESSAGE" 
An interview by Ferai Tinc 
"Hurriyet," September 30, 2005 
 
"As I go back to America, I am carrying a message that has 
impressed me very much". 
 
The message that Bush's so-called "image guru," Karen 
Hughes, the Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy at the US 
State Department, is carrying is from Foreign Minister 
Abdullah Gul. 
 
At our meeting in Istanbul, the last stop on her tour of 
Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey, Hughes explained the 
message that she was taking to Washington as follows: 
 
"Listen, I want to tell you something.  It has really 
touched me.  When I met with Foreign Minister Gul yesterday, 
he made an effective explanation.  He told me about the 
difference in mentality between us and the people on the 
streets in Turkey.  He said `When you look at Iraq, Iran, 
and Syria from America, you see them as countries "over 
there"; but they are our neighbors.'  Now I will take these 
words to America, to the policy meetings at the State 
Department.  In the coming months, or weeks, or even days, 
when it is time to address these issues, you will see us 
saying `this issue concerns Turkey's neighbors, so maybe we 
should talk to Turkey about it first.'  That is what I am 
taking with me from Turkey back to Washington." 
 
Describing the aim of her visit not as "correcting the US 
image," but "listening to important allies, and ensuring 
that their views are reflected in the US policies," Hughes 
gave interesting answers to my questions.  My questions and 
her answers follow: 
 
Q:  We hear news that it is now Syria's turn after Iraq.  Is 
that true? 
 
HUGHES:  No.  Iraq was a special situation.  People 
shouldn't just look at Iraq and think what happened there 
will also happen somewhere else.  What we expect from the 
Government in Syria is to change its behavior and stop 
allowing insurgents and terrorists to infiltrate to Iraq 
across its borders. 
 
Q:  What do you expect from Turkey on this? 
 
HUGHES:  We don't expect anything from Turkey.  It is in the 
interest of Turkey as much as it is in the interest of the 
United States that Syria stop supporting the insurgents in 
Iraq, and interfering in the affairs of Lebanon and 
Palestine. 
 
We should do more on the PKK 
 
Q:  Why has the US effort to address the PKK issue been 
ineffective?  It is claimed that the US needs the PKK to 
destabilize Iran and Syria.  Is that true? 
 
HUGHES:  We do not cooperate with terrorists, full stop. 
PKK is a terrorist organization.  We support Turkey.  We 
share information with Turkey about the activities of the 
PKK.  We have started to work with the Turkish Government to 
dry up the financial resources of the PKK.  We encourage the 
Iraqi Government to cooperate with Turkey in its fight 
against the PKK.  The PKK kills innocent people every day. 
We understand the concerns of the Turkish public.  As our 
National Security Advisor said, we should contribute more to 
resolve this issue.  When I return, I will draw our 
government's attention to this issue and tell them that more 
should be done to overcome the PKK.  We should give Turkey 
the confidence that we will do that. 
 
The isolation of Turkish Cypriots should come to an end 
 
Q:  Do you have any new approaches to resolve the Cyprus 
issue? 
 
HUGHES:  We support the UN's solution process and the ending 
of the isolation of the area under Turkish authority. 
 
Q:  The civic turmoil that resulted from the war in Iraq 
threatens the region.  When will you withdraw from Iraq? 
Why were the Turkmen targeted in Tal Afar? 
 
HUGHES:  We will leave Iraq as soon as Iraq becomes capable 
of governing itself.  Yes, the Turkish Government and 
Turkish people were against the war.  But we have to keep 
going, with Turkey's support, to achieve a democratic, 
united, and stabile Iraq.  We are trying to make sure that 
the rights of all groups in Iraq are respected. 
 
MCELDOWNEY