05ANKARA2474
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002474 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, APRIL 29, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
US Report: PKK Aims to Establish `Democratic' State - 
Hurriyet 
US `Gaffe' in Terror Report - Milliyet 
Ankara Seeks `Middle Way' in Relations With Yerevan - Sabah 
Rumsfeld to Saddam: Stop the Resistance and Go Free - 
Hurriyet 
New Iraqi Cabinet Approved - Sabah 
Iraqi Government `Partially' Established - Milliyet 
Abbas Warns of Tough Retaliation for Cease-Fire Violation - 
Sabah 
85 Percent of Americans Find Press News `Biased and 
Negative' - Aksam 
Britons Find Blair `Charismatic' But `Unreliable' - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkey-US Begin `Bargaining' on Incirlik Airbase - Radikal 
US Issues `Contradictory' Terror Report - Cumhuriyet 
Iraq's Neighbors to Meet in Istanbul Today - Cumhuriyet 
Al-Quds Al-Arabi: Rumsfeld Recently Met Saddam in Iraq - 
Cumhuriyet 
Rumsfeld Asks Saddam for Help in Halting Resistance - Yeni 
Safak 
Iraq's First Government Formed on Saddam's Birthday - Zaman 
Talabani Vetoes 5 Names in New Iraqi Cabinet - Yeni Safak 
EU Supports Caferi Government in Iraq - Yeni Safak 
US Discusses Dividing Iraq Into 6 States - Yeni Safak 
HRW: Despite Reforms, Torture Widespread in Turkey - 
Cumhuriyet 
Putin: Russian Weapons Pose No Threat to Israel - Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
US, Turkey Kick Off Technical Talks on Incirlik Airbase: 
Turkey began technical talks with the United States 
regarding the US proposal to establish a logistical cargo 
hub at Incirlik Air Base for operations in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, Turkish media report.  On Thursday, the Turks 
told the Americans that President Sezer will approve the 
related degree soon.  Representative of the Turkish General 
Staff (TGS) and Foreign Ministry (MFA) attended yesterday's 
talks, in which technical details like flight plans, 
notification procedures, personnel, and inspection of cargo 
planes by the Turks were discussed.  Turkish officials told 
the press that there are no plans to sign a new memorandum 
of understanding on the subject. 
 
US State Department 2004 Country Report on Terrorism: 
Turkish dailies are critical of the Department of State's 
"Global Patterns of Terrorism" report for describing the PKK 
as an organization fighting `to establish an independent, 
democratic Kurdish state in southeastern Turkey, northern 
Iraq and parts of Iran and Syria.'  Papers view the Turkey 
chapter of the report as `contradictory,' and claim that the 
US has made a `gaffe' in describing PKK aims.  An MFA source 
regarded the mention of `democratic' goals for a terrorist 
organization as `a contradiction, "Yeni Safak" writes.  The 
paper blames the US for extending `covert' support to 
terrorism.  "Radikal" focuses on parts of the report in 
which Turkey's support for the global war against terrorism 
is highlighted. 
Ankara Welcomes New Iraqi Government:  The Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) said in a statement on Thursday that `the 
formation of an elected Iraqi government constitutes a step 
forward to establish a democratic regime in Iraq.'  Ankara 
wished success to the new Iraqi government, `which will 
undertake important responsibilities in Iraq's political 
transition process.'  The statement stressed that the time 
has come `to reach a national compromise, heal the wounds, 
and create a joint future for the Iraqi people.' 
Participation of all Iraqi groups in the writing of the new 
Iraqi constitution and acting in unity in solving problems 
Iraq may face in the future are very important, the MFA 
said, noting that Turkey will support all efforts to help 
Iraq reach stability. 
 
Iraq's Neighbors to Meet in Istanbul Today: Iraq's neighbors 
are to gather in Istanbul Friday for their first meeting 
following the Iraqi general elections.  Turkish prime 
Minister Erdogan and Foreign Minister Gul, representatives 
of the Arab League and Organization of the Islamic 
Conference (OIC), and the foreign ministers of Iraq, Iran, 
Syria, Egypt, Kuwait, Jordan and Bahrain will join the 
talks. 
 
Ankara Seeks a `New Era' With Yerevan:  Prime Minister 
Tayyip Erdogan said on Thursday that a political 
relationship could be established with Armenia while 
historians from the two countries examine the archives on 
what Armenians claim to be the `genocide' of their kin by 
Ottoman forces during World War I.  MFA officials told 
"Sabah" that `positive elements' in a recent letter by 
Armenian President Robert Kocharian to Prime Minister Tayyip 
Erdogan are being taken into account, and that a political 
decision will be conveyed to Yerevan.  Ankara expects `firm 
statements' from Yerevan indicating that Armenia has no 
territorial demands from Turkey.  The border crossing 
between the two countries could be opened if Armenia stops 
pursuit of `genocide' claims, say Turkish officials, noting 
that they are seeking a `win-win' situation for both sides. 
 
Turkey, Israeli, Palestinian Businessmen Explore 
Cooperation:   Turkey's Union of Chambers (TOBB) said that 
Israeli and Palestinian businessmen met for the first time 
in Ankara, expressing a common will for cooperation.  TOBB 
Chairman Rifat Hisarciklioglu held a joint press conference 
on Thursday with Shraga Brosh, president of the 
Manufacturers' Association of Israel, and Ahmad Hashim al- 
Zogheir, chairman of the Palestinian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry, in which Hisarciklioglu announced the 
formation of the `Ankara Forum for Economic Cooperation 
Among Palestine, Israel and Turkey.'  Hisarciklioglu noted 
that Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan and Foreign Minister Gul 
supported the `union' among the three countries.  The groups 
will meet again in Jerusalem in the first half of June to 
discuss cooperation in tourism, industry, and agriculture. 
Brosh said that some good proposals, such as opening doors 
to Palestinians and facilitating their living conditions 
through trade with other countries, may be discussed at the 
June meetings.  "Milliyet" expects Erdogan to raise the 
issues of restoration of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem by 
TOBB and a possible Turkish contribution to the construction 
of Gaza Airport in Palestine during his weekend visit to the 
region. 
 
`Yarmulke' Issue in Erdogan's Israel Visit:  Israeli 
officials are concerned that Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip 
Erdogan may not cover his head during a visit to Yad Vashem 
in Jerusalem, "Sabah" reports.  Erdogan is scheduled to 
arrive in Israel on May 1 on a state visit.  The Israelis 
are concerned that he may not cover his head at the 
Holocaust museum, out of fear that a Turkish prime minister 
seen in a yarmulke may anger his Islamic grassroots.  Last 
month, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul refused to cover his 
head during a visit to Yad Vashem. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: US-Turkey 
 
"The Grave Situation in Turkish-US Relations" 
Fatih Altayli argued in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (4/29): 
"Visiting the US to check the pulse on Turkish-American ties 
led me to an important conclusion.  The situation is more 
grave than widely believed in Turkey.  The seriousness of 
the problem cannot be explained by reducing it to a few anti- 
Turkish articles in the American media or a few television 
shows that portray Turkey in a negative light.  Criticism of 
Turkey is being expressed by all groups at every 
opportunity.  Television channels watched by a predominantly 
Muslim audience are constantly talking about the lack of 
religious freedom in Turkey.  Others are criticizing Turkey 
for more general violations of human rights.  Even the man 
in the street is aware of Turkey, and not in a positive 
sense.  Robert Pollock, the writer of the well-known article 
on Turkey, says he likes Turkey a lot.  Regarding his `ugly 
depiction' of the country in "The Wall Street Journal," he 
argues that `there is a problem that everybody was ignoring, 
most particularly the Turkish side.  I wanted to bring this 
up.  I highlighted the problem and diagnosed it.  Now it is 
time to correct the problem, and I am on Turkey's side in 
this process.'  .  Nevertheless it seems that the healing 
process will not be that easy.  Prime Minister Erdogan is 
planning a visit to the US in June, but President Bush is 
apparently reluctant to give him an appointment.  Turkish 
MFA Undersecretary Tuygan made a recent visit to Washington, 
but failed to make progress on this issue -- another 
indication of Washington's disappointment.  Here in the US 
everybody considers the upcoming Turkish PM's visit to 
Israel as an important step toward the normalization of 
bilateral ties.  According to some influential names in the 
Washington administration, the crisis in Turkish-American 
ties is not only about the relationship, but also about the 
broader international picture.  They believe that Turkey has 
to redefine its ties with the US.  They saythat Turkey 
should abandon the definition of strategic partnership that 
rests solely on Turkey's geo-strategic location.  That 
factor is no longer very important.  Turkey should have a 
different and deeper type of cooperation with the US.  It 
seems that Turkish-American relations will have a different 
dimension in the period to come.  Whether that change will 
be negative or positive will be for Turkey to decide." 
 
"From Anti-Americanism to Official Americanism" 
Cengiz Candar observed in the conservative-sensational 
"Dunden Bugune Tercuman" (4/29):  "I think it has been 
noticed by everyone that Ankara has turned its course more 
toward Washington an away from Brussels. The first signals 
of this came from thw Deputy Chief of Staff at a TGS press 
briefing in January.  This course became clearer with the 
remarks of TGS Chief General Ozkok last week.   On the same 
day General Ozkok spoke, the amendment for Incirlik, which 
had been held up in the Prime Minister's office, was 
presented to the Council of Ministers for approval.  It 
seems that the US got everything it requested from Turkey on 
the Incirlik issue.   Then, at the AKP group meeting, PM 
Erdogan praise for the US was the top item on the agenda. 
When Erdogan was received in the White House for the first 
time, he was neither a Prime Minister nor a parliamentarian. 
Until that time, such a privilege was only given to real 
strategic partners of the US - the UK and Israel. 
Unfortunately, the AKP government didn't perceive that, and 
instead chose to surf the growing wave of `anti- 
Americanism.'  Now PM Erdogan, is sending positive signals 
to Washington.  Will the doors of the White House be opened 
for him when he is there in May or June?  He has been 
knocking on that door for quite some time now.  The door 
that was opened for him in December 2002 with just a wave of 
the hand has not been opened even a crack so far this time. 
The likelihood of Erdogan eventually being received at the 
White House remain quite high.  But the White House seems 
determined to make Prime Minister sweat a little bit before 
opening the door." 
 
EDELMAN