05ANKARA3055
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, May 15-31,
Wed Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 15 ANKARA 003055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, May 15-31, 
2005 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2.  (U) Published in Radikal on Monday, May 16: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Third Council of European Leaders' 
     Summit will draw a roadmap for the development of human 
     rights and democratic values in the 21st century. 
 
     There will be three sessions on:  European Union and 
     European Values; Problems Facing European Societies; 
     and, European Architecture. 
 
     Three agreements on the fight against terrorism, money 
     laundering and cooperation in preventing human 
     trafficking will be opened to signature. 
 
     The agreement on prevention of human trafficking 
     foresees establishment of a monitoring group to protect 
     victims of human trafficking.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published by The Journal of Turkish Weekly on Monday, 
May 16: 
 
     TITLE:  Another European Summit! 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Normal readers of newspapers in Turkey and 
     in Turkish have every right to be perplexed about the 
     names of two organizations, namely the European Council 
     and the Council of Europe, as both are translated into 
     Turkish as "Avrupa Konseyi."  The first is the highest 
     organ of the European Union, while the second is the 
     oldest pan-European organization, set up in 1949.  "The 
     aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater 
     unity between its members for the purpose of 
     safeguarding and realizing the ideals and principles 
     which are their common heritage and facilitating their 
     economic and social progress," says the body. 
 
     In the course of its 56 years of existence, the Council 
     of Europe has brought together the governments and 
     parliaments of its member states to cooperate in an 
     ongoing program of dialogue and cooperation, setting 
     the norms of the societies of Europe for the betterment 
     of the lives of individual Europeans.  Nearly 200 
     conventions, covering such areas as human rights, 
     minorities, local democracy and transfrontier 
     cooperation, culture, education, sports, media-legal 
     cooperation, the environment, the protection of flora 
     and fauna, social affairs and health. 
 
     Certainly, the greatest achievements of the Council of 
     Europe lie in the adoption and continuous improvement 
     of the European Convention for Human Rights and 
     Fundamental Freedoms.  The European Court of Human 
     Rights (ECHR) has been the defender of the human rights 
     of every European against the abuse of their rights and 
     dignity by their governments. 
 
     The Council of Europe has provided all types of 
     assistance to the newly independent states after the 
     breakups of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, including 
     help in writing their constitutions, supervising their 
     elections and monitoring their human rights 
     performances.  Today the number of member states of the 
     Council of Europe has reached 46, including such city- 
     states as San Marino, Liechtenstein, Andorra and 
     Monaco.  The total population of Council of Europe 
     member countries is over 800 million. 
 
     Since the establishment of the European Economic 
     Community (EEC), the economic affairs mentioned in the 
     Statute of the Council of Europe have been assumed by 
     the EEC.  With the start of political cooperation and 
     transformation of the EEC into the EU in many areas, 
     the work of the two European institutions began to 
     overlap.  The overlap grew after the adoption of the 
     Paris Charter in 1990 and the establishment of the 
     Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
     (OSCE).  The functions of the Council of Europe and of 
     the OSCE have become even more overlapped in such areas 
     as development democracy and encouraging human rights 
     in Europe.  The political role of the Council of Europe 
     must now be shared by more than two other European 
     institutions. 
     Since the concept of security in Europe has radically 
     changed from military security to social and individual 
     security in Europe, the task of fighting against such 
     evils as terrorism, the trafficking drugs and human 
     beings and the migrations of peoples have come to 
     occupy the agendas of the Council of Europe, the EU, 
     the OSCE and, under its new doctrine, also that of 
     NATO.  Today the EU has 25 members, which are also 
     members of the Council of Europe.  The EU is much 
     richer than the Council of Europe.  Even moreso with 
     its Mediterranean Program, the New Neighborhood Policy 
     and new EU enlargements, which will extend cooperation 
     to cover most of Europe.  OSCE membership also extends 
     to cover even non-European Central Asian countries. 
     The EU has issued a human rights charger of its own, 
     even though it's not as effective as that of the 
     Council of Europe. 
 
     Although it's true that efforts are being made at every 
     level to secure cooperation and dialogue between 
     European organizations, it's not possible to prevent 
     overlap in many sensitive areas.  The meeting of heads 
     of states and governments of the Council of Europe in 
     Warsaw this Monday and Tuesday for the institution's 
     third summit must, among other issues, address the 
     issue of overlapping competencies of these different 
     European institutions. 
 
     Unfortunately, this meeting is taking place under the 
     shadow of the forthcoming French referendum on the new 
     EU Constitutional Treaty.  Doubts raised in France 
     about the future structure of the EU may make European 
     leaders less willing to make radical decisions at the 
     Warsaw summit. 
 
     But the competencies of the three European 
     Organizations (the Council of Europe, EU and OSCE) must 
     be clearly delimited.  Otherwise, intrusion in the work 
     of the Council of Europe, mostly by the EU, of which 
     now 25 and in the future many more countries will be 
     subjected to the directives of the European Council and 
     Commission, will eclipse and eventually supersede it. 
 
     Whatever the leaders may decide, the most important 
     role of the Council of Europe is to protect human 
     rights and basic freedoms, and to support and promote 
     European norms of democracy.  These functions must 
     remain intact but must also be enhanced.  We hope that 
     Turkey will play an active role at the summit to 
     enhance this old but still very effective organization. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶4.  (U) Published by Turks.US (www.turks.us) on Monday, May 
16: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkish PM on xenophobia, racism, anti-Semitism 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkish Premier Recep Tayyip Erdogan has 
     indicated today (Monday) that xenophobia, racism, anti- 
     Semitism, pre-conceived notions against certain 
     religions and IDs, as well as followers of radical 
     religious ideas always exist.  "These illnesses now 
     include enmity towards Islam," stressed Erdogan. 
 
     Erdogan is in Warsaw to attend the Council of Europe 
     (COE) Heads of State and Government Summit which 
     started at the historical Royal Castle in the Polish 
     capital Warsaw. 
 
     "The principles on which the COE has been built will be 
     the ones who will guide us in finding solutions to 
     global problems.  The standards we have come up in the 
     COE are the ones that can be looked upon as role model 
     for other regions of the world," told Erdogan. 
 
     "We were hoping to enjoy the positive signs of 
     globalization, just after the end of the Cold War and 
     until September 11 attacks took place.  These incidents 
     who how deadly international terrorism is," said 
     Erdogan. 
 
     According to Erdogan, terrorism today kills innocent 
     individuals and is taking place everywhere.  "Terror 
     hits without making discrimination among regions, 
     religions and ethnicity.  The fight against terrorism 
     requires strong international cooperation.  Drug and 
     human trafficking, corruption and environment have 
     become global problems," commented Erdogan. 
     Prime Minister Erdogan expressed that, after September 
     11, certain circles began to define terrorism within 
     the boundaries of a certain religion and culture.  "I 
     want to emphasize the point that terrorism has no 
     religion, culture, ethnicity or nationality.  There is 
     no religion on earth that tolerates killing 
     individuals.  September 11 resulted in wrong 
     evaluations.  I am pleased to see that logic has won 
     the battle against terrorism and further gap between 
     civilizations avoided," remarked Erdogan. 
 
     "The COE brings together all European countries within 
     the framework of common democratic values and could be 
     the best platform to do away with pre-conceived notions 
     and intolerance," noted Erdogan. 
 
     Erdogan mentioned that the UN, UNESCO, OIC, OSCE and 
     the EU must work together to increase dialog between 
     cultures and religions.  "We realize that Turkey, as a 
     country which spans on two continents (Asia and 
     Europe), has a special obligation to serve as a bridge 
     between cultures and religions and enhance dialog," 
     said Erdogan. 
 
     Erdogan stated that, in the past two years, 
     comprehensive reforms have been made in Turkey in the 
     areas of personal freedoms and transparency.  "We are 
     aware of the fact that there is still a lot that Turkey 
     must do.  Our experiences show that, a country with a 
     predominantly Muslim population, can reach global 
     standards of democracy by staying loyal to its 
     traditions and moral values.  The concepts of justice, 
     equality, accountability, consultations, respect for 
     individual and moral values are all concepts present in 
     hundreds of years of Turkish culture," added Erdogan. 
 
     Erdogan had a chance to talk to Azeri President Ilham 
     Aliyev, Greek Prime Minister Kostas Karamanlis, Polish 
     President Aleksander Kwasniewski, Polish Premier Marek 
     Belka, South Cyprus Greek administration leader Tassos 
     Papadopoulos, Luxembourg's Prime Minister Jean-Claude 
     Juncker, Norwegian Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik, 
     French Minister of Foreign Affairs Michel Barnier, 
     Bulgarian Prime Minister Georgi Purvanov, COE 
     Parliamentary Council Chairman Rene Van Der Linden and 
     COE Secretary Terry Davis. 
 
     Turkish sources said that Erdogan did not meet the 
     Armenian President Robert Kocharian.  END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  (U) Reported by the Anadolu Ajansi on Monday, May 16: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Col Ferhat Konya, DDG for Smuggling at the 
     Jandarma General Command Operation Department, noted 
     that about 3 million people around the world became 
     victims of human trafficking each year.  He added, "90 
     percent of this figure consists of 15-26 year old women 
     and children who are subject to prostitution." 
 
     The "Fight Against Human Trafficking Seminar" organized 
     by the Jandarma General Command and the IOM Turkey 
     office, began at the Porto Bello Hotel in Antalya. 
 
     In his speech at the seminar, Jandarma Col. Konya said 
     that human trafficking was spreading around the world 
     because of reasons such as poverty, desire for a better 
     life, erosion of social values, political and economic 
     uncertainties and cheap manpower. 
 
     Konya noted that in particular human trafficking for 
     sexual exploitation was disrupting the life quality of 
     the victims and that it was a low-risk and high profit 
     criminal activity. 
 
     Konya said, "About 3 million people around the world 
     each year become victims of human trafficking.  90 
     percent of them are women and children who are made 
     tools of prostitution.  The remaining 10 percent are 
     consisting of man and children who are forced to work 
     at factories, land and households, or to beg.  They 
     also include those whose organs are taken after being 
     deceived.  Many women are deceived by offers of a job 
     or promises of a rich and nice life.  Soon after, they 
     are being used and exploited as if they are an object." 
 
     Konya stressed that Turkey put great emphasis on the 
     fight against human trafficking and that it took 
     measures within this framework.  He added that the 
     necessary judicial infrastructure was completed and 
     legal arrangements were adopted. 
     There will be papers presented at the seminars on 
     topics such as "Differences Between Human Trafficking 
     and Immigrant Smuggling," "Reasons Behind Human 
     Trafficking," "Human Trafficking Process," "Determining 
     Victims" and "Using Victims as Witnesses." 
 
     The seminar will last until May 18.  Participants 
     include IOM Turkey office, the UNHCR Turkey office, 
     Scotland Yard officials, and representatives from the 
     MFA, Justice Ministry, TNP, Jandarma General Command 
     and the IKGV (HRDF). END TEXT. 
 
¶6.  (U) Published by Zaman Online (www.zaman.com) on Monday, 
May 16: 
 
     TITLE:  Counter Terror, Laundering, and Human 
     Trafficking Rule 3rd EC Summit 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Three separate agreements prepared 
     regarding the fight against terror, money laundering, 
     and human trafficking are seeking the signed approval 
     of member countries at the summit of the European 
     Council (EC). 
 
     It is reported that nearly 20 members of the 46-member 
     EC have signed the said agreements. 
 
     Turkey is not among those countries that signed the 
     agreements today. 
 
     According to information an Anatolia News Agency 
     correspondent received from diplomatic sources, due to 
     a delay of an approval expected from the cabinet, 
     Turkey did not sign the agreements during this summit. 
 
     The same diplomatic sources noted that Turkey is 
     determined to sign these agreements within the shortest 
     possible time. 
 
     These agreements envisage that member countries will 
     cooperate more effectively and work together in the 
     fight against terror, money laundering, and human 
     trafficking. 
 
     Meanwhile, another 21 countries have become parties for 
     the 14 protocols, which are seeking signatures with a 
     ceremony organized during the summit, prepared for the 
     European Court of Human Rights to work more 
     effectively. 
 
     Turkey has signed this agreement already but has not 
     yet approved it.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  (U) Reported by TurkishPress.com (www.turkishpress.com) 
on Wednesday, May 18: 
 
     TITLE:  C.O.E. Condemns Islamophobia and Anti-Semitism 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Warsaw (AA)-Heads of state & government of 
     member-states to the Council of Europe (COE) condemned 
     Islamphobia and anti-Semitism, and called on 
     establishment of a mechanism to promote non- 
     discrimination. 
 
     A final declaration was released on the second day of 
     COE Third Summit of Heads of State & Government in 
     Polish capital Warsaw. 
 
     In the final declaration, leaders said, "we strongly 
     condemn all forms of intolerance and discrimination, in 
     particular those based on sex, race and religion, 
     including anti-Semitism and Islamphobia.  We affirm our 
     determination to further develop, within the COE, rules 
     and effective machinery to prevent and eradicate them." 
     Islamphobia, which has been rising in Europe in the 
     aftermath of the September 11th events in the United 
     States, was brought onto agenda of the summit with 
     initiatives and effective diplomatic efforts of Turkey. 
 
     The expression of "combat against Islamphobia" was 
     included in a formal document of the COE for the first 
     time. 
 
     During his speech yesterday (Monday), Turkish Prime 
     Minister Erdogan called on the COE to create 
     influential mechanisms against Islamphobia. 
 
     Inter-Cultural & Inter-Religious Dialogue - 
 
     Again with the support of Turkey, the COE said in the 
     final declaration, "we are resolved to ensure that our 
     diversity becomes a source of mutual enrichment, inter 
     alia, by fostering political, intercultural and inter- 
     religious dialogue." 
 
     The COE has decided to appoint a coordinator to this 
     end. 
 
     Meanwhile, the COE expressed its resolution to create a 
     new framework for enhanced cooperation and interaction 
     with the European Union in areas of common concern, in 
     particular human rights, democracy and the rule of law. 
 
     The COE also decided to secure improved practical 
     cooperation with the Organization of Security and 
     Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). 
 
     Combat Against Terrorism - 
 
     "The COE will continue to play an active role in 
     combating terrorism, which is a major threat to 
     democratic societies and is unjustifiable under any 
     circumstances and in any culture.  It will also further 
     develop its activities in combating corruption, 
     organized crime, including money laundering and 
     financial crime, trafficking in human beings and 
     cybercrime, and the challenges attendant on scientific 
     and technical progress.  We shall promote measures 
     consistent with our values to counter those threats," 
     it said.  END TEXT. 
¶8. (U) Published by RTE News (www.rte.ie) on Saturday, May 
21: 
 
     TITLE:  Wexford remembers Kurdish asylum seekers 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A plaque honoring the memory of the eight 
     Kurdish asylum seekers who were found dead in a 
     container en route to Ireland was unveiled this 
     afternoon in Wexford. 
 
     The plaque has been erected close to the site at 
     Wexford Business Park where the bodies were discovered 
     nearly three and a half years ago. 
 
     Unknown to authorities, 13 people crammed into the back 
     of a container at the Belgium port of Zeebrugee in 
     December 2001, expecting to arrive in either Britain or 
     Ireland, where they were going to seek asylum. 
 
     Over the course of the 53-hour journey to Waterford and 
     on to Wexford, eight of them suffocated due to lack of 
     oxygen. 
 
     Six men and two young boys died, while four men and a 
     woman survived. 
 
     A gang involved in human trafficking was subsequently 
     sentenced in Turkey, some to eight years for 
     manslaughter and some for two years for conspiracy. END 
     TEXT. 
¶9.  (U) Reported on UTV (www.utvlive.com) on Saturday, May 
21: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A plaque to honour the memory of eight 
     Kurdish asylum seekers found dead in a container en 
     route to the Republic, has been unveiled in County 
     Wexford later today. 
 
     The plaque was erected close to the site at Wexford 
     Business Park, where the bodies were discovered in 
     December 2001. 
 
     Thirteen people, expecting to arrive in either Ireland 
     or the UK as asylum seekers, were crammed into the back 
     of a container at Zeebruge in Belgium. 
 
     However, over the course of the 53-hour journey, eight 
     people suffocated in the sealed container due to lack 
     of oxygen. 
 
     Two young boys and six men died.  Four men and a woman 
     survived. 
 
     A number of people involved in human trafficking were 
     later sentenced in Turkey. 
 
     Some of the survivors and relatives of those who died 
     attended the ceremony.  END TEXT. 
 
¶10.  (U) Radikal carried the following report on Monday, May 
23: 
 
     TITLE:  Cooperation against Women (Human) Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  ISTANBUL - Dr. Hercules Moscoff, Human 
     Security Advisor to the Greek MFA, noted that 
     international organizations and the civic society must 
     cooperate in order to prevent human trafficking. 
 
     Speaking at the Prevention of Human Trafficking 
     Conference, organized by the Greek Medecins Du Monde 
     foundation and the International Blue Crescent 
     Humanitarian Assistance and Development Foundation, 
     Moscoff noted that regional cooperation was very 
     important in fighting against this (type of) 
     contemporary slavery. Moscoff stated that victims of 
     human trafficking mostly were subject to deportation as 
     if they were criminals and added, "Decision-makers, 
     international organizations and NGOs must cooperate in 
     order to prevent human trafficking.  It is very hard to 
     fight against this crime by oneself." 
 
     Attorney Spyros Kloudas, a member of the Athens Bar, 
     noted that Greece adopted a law two-and-a-half years 
     ago.  He stated that until then they were deporting 
     victims of human trafficking and thus making the most 
     important witness to prosecute the criminals disappear. 
     He said that with the new law they prevented the 
     deportation of these people and were providing free 
     legal support. 
 
     Sultan Ozturk, member of the Turkey Human Trafficking 
     Sub-group at the UNHCR, said that according to the 1951 
     Convention, refugees were people who had a rightful 
     fear of oppression for being a member of a different 
     social group, race, religion and nationality.  She 
     noted that these people leave their countries for this 
     reason and don't want to return.  Ozturk noted that all 
     refugees have the right to have a safe haven.  She said 
     that international protection means more than just 
     physical security and that refugees in a host-country 
     at least should enjoy equal rights and assistance with 
     the other foreigners that reside legitimately in the 
     country.  END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  (U) Radikal published the following article on Sunday, 
May 22: 
 
     TITLE:  There are 200 Networks involved in Human 
     Trafficking in Turkey 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  ISTANBUL - Muzaffer Baca, Vice Chairman of 
     the International Blue Crescent Humanitarian Assistance 
     and Development Foundation, claimed that women who were 
     brought to Turkey from abroad as a help for housework, 
     were used as slaves.  Baca said, "There are 200 
     networks (gangs) in Turkey that are involved in human 
     trafficking." 
     The International conference on "Human Trafficking: An 
     Important Human Rights Violation," organized by the 
     Greek Medecins du Monde and the International Blue 
     Crescent Humanitarian Assistance and Development 
     Foundation and with the financial support of the EU 
     Commission in Turkey, began in Istanbul yesterday 
     (Saturday). 
     Mehmet Seyan, Deputy Governor of Istanbul, said that 
     the conference was important for elevating public 
     awareness on the human trafficking issue.  Seyman 
     referred to the UN Convention on the Fight Against 
     Crimes Crossing Borders and said, "Most common type of 
     human trafficking is sexual exploitation of women. 
     Unfortunately Turkey has been affected both as a 
     target, transit and also as a source country for human 
     trafficking.  In Istanbul -- a place where human 
     trafficking is more widespread -- 39 incidents of human 
     trafficking occurred and 109 victims were saved, 61 of 
     the suspects in these incidents were arrested in 2004 
     and 2005." 
 
     Nikatas Kanakis, a member of the executive board of the 
     Medecins de Monde, said that the human trafficking 
     issue would become a worse problem in ten years. 
 
     Baca, on the other hand, said that according to a 
     study, there were 200 networks involved in human 
     trafficking in Turkey.  He claimed that women who 
     wanted to get away from these networks were either 
     committing suicide or were found dead. 
 
     Aysen Onen, Vice President of the International Jurist 
     Women Federation, said that most of these women were 
     deceived by being offered a job or getting married and 
     thus they were made subject to human trafficking. 
 
     Muzaffer Baca, Vice Chairman of the International Blue 
     Crescent Assistance and Development Foundation, pointed 
     to the networks that were involved in women 
     trafficking. END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  (U) Published by Aksam on Sunday, May 22: 
 
     TITLE:  There are 200 Networks involved in Human 
     Trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The "Conference on Prevention of Human 
     Trafficking," organized by the financial contributions 
     of the EU Commission in Turkey brought into light a 
     bitter fact:  It was determined that there are 200 
     gangs involved in human trafficking in Turkey. 
 
     Speaking at the opening of the conference, Mehmet 
     Seyan, Deputy Governor of Istanbul, said that the most 
     common type of human trafficking was sexual 
     exploitation of women. 
 
     He said that they mostly see women and immigrant 
     trafficking in Istanbul and that the police department 
     was conducting works on this issue. 
 
     He noted that the TNP was doing its best to protect the 
     victims of women trafficking and that it made sure that 
     such foreign women return to their countries safely. 
 
     Seyman said that in the last two years they saved 109 
     victims of women trafficking. 
 
     Nikatas Kanakis, a member of the executive board in 
     Greece of the Medecins de Monde, said that the human 
     trafficking issue was an important problem for the 
     region, including Turkey and Greece. END TEXT. 
 
¶13. (U) Cumhuriyet published the following on Sunday, May 
22: 
     TITLE:  The Only Way Out:  Death 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Istanbul News Service - The "Conference on 
     Prevention of Human Trafficking," organized with 
     financial contributions of the EU Commission in Turkey, 
     stressed that in particular women trafficking began to 
     spread after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the 
     wars in the Gulf and the Balkans. 
 
     Mehmet Seyan, Deputy Governor of Istanbul, said that 
     the most common type of human trafficking was the 
     sexual exploitation of women.  He noted that Turkey was 
     affected from this both as a destination, transit and 
     source country. 
 
     The "Conference on Prevention of Human Trafficking," 
     organized by the Medecins de Monde and the Blue 
     Crescent Assistance and Development Foundation, began 
     at the Point Hotel yesterday. 
 
     Seyman pointed at the UN Convention on Organized Crime 
     Crossing Borders that went into effect in 2003 and that 
     within this framework it was important to prevent women 
     and child trafficking.  Seyman said that Turkey was 
     affected both as a destination, transit and source 
     country and that they mostly see women and immigrant 
     trafficking in Istanbul.  He said that in Istanbul 39 
     incidents occurred in 2004 and 2005 and those 109 
     victims were saved and 61 suspects were arrested.  He 
     added that what was done officially was not enough and 
     that for scoring success, the public must get more 
     conscious on the human rights issue. 
 
     Nikatas Kanakis, a member of the executive board in 
     Greece of the Medecins de Monde, said that the human 
     trafficking issue was an important problem for the 
     region, including Turkey and Greece and predicted that 
     the impact of the problem would increase in a decade. 
 
     Muzaffer Baca, Vice Chairman of the International Blue 
     Crescent Assistance and Development Foundation, noted 
     that for many years each woman coming to Turkey was 
     regarded as a "Natasha," and that these women were 
     (actually) brought by a network.  Baca said that women 
     were brought from these countries as household help and 
     were forced to serve as a slave.  He noted that 
     according to a study, there were 200 gangs involved in 
     human trafficking in Turkey.  He added that women, who 
     want to get rid of these networks, were either 
     committing suicide or were found dead.  END TEXT. 
 
¶14.  (U) Published by Cumhuriyet on Monday, May 23: 
 
     TITLE:  They Fall in Love with Those Who Sell Them 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Istanbul News Service - On the last day of 
     the "Conference on Prevention of Human Trafficking," 
     participants discussed support provided to the victims 
     of human trafficking and the importance of cooperation 
     among institutions on this issue. 
 
     The "Conference on Prevention of Human Trafficking" 
     that began at the Point Hotel the other day, ended 
     yesterday. 
 
     At the first panel discussion headed by attorney Aysen 
     Onen, Galma Jahic, an academician from the Istanbul 
     Bilgi University Faculty of Law, stressed the 
     importance of cooperation between the NGOs and the 
     state in preventing human trafficking.  She gave 
     examples from Bosnia-Herzegovina.  Jahic noted that 
     there were three NGOs in Bosnia working on this issue 
     and said, "cooperation was established over time 
     between these institutions and the police.  Now when a 
     victim of human trafficking is captured, a 
     representative of the NGO, too, is present during their 
     first encounter." 
 
     Jahic stressed that women victims actually agree to be 
     sex slaves a result of the sort of treatment that they 
     were subject to and that the same thing might happen in 
     Turkey, so it should be recognized and resolved. 
     Alina Budeci, the Moldova representative of La Strada 
     Foundation said that they set up a toll-free hotline 
     that was open to international calls as well.  She 
     noted that they have been serving 24 hours and seven 
     days a week through this line to the victims. 
     Budeci noted that there were some loopholes and listed 
     them as: "During the process to determine the identity 
     of the victim, the NGO rep and the police must work 
     together.  The rehabilitation and identity 
     determination process for the victims must be at the 
     same time.  One should adopt a method suitable to each 
     victim since each may have a peculiar situation." 
     Prof. Bonnie Miller, a psychotherapist and a social 
     worker, underlined that victims of human trafficking 
     were under severe trauma and depression.  She said, 
     "Most of these women do not define themselves as 
     victims but as a person who made a mistake.  They feel 
     attached to their traffickers and sometimes they even 
     fall in love with them.  These women when captured in a 
     country should be given at least two or three days of 
     rest before they testify to the police.  Their security 
     must be provided and they must be explained their 
     rights.  They must be helped to get rid of the hatred 
     they feel toward their bodies." END TEXT. 
 
¶15. (U) Published by Haaretz (www.haarez.com) on Thursday, 
May 26: 
 
     TITLE:  Exploitation or deportation, that is the 
     question for Turkish workers 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  By Ruth Sinai.  Six months ago, two human 
     rights organizations asked the High Court of Justice to 
     allow 800 Turkish workers employed here by a Turkish 
     company, Yilmazlar, to switch employers, alleging that 
     the firm had mistreated them.  The workers petitioned 
     the court because the state had refused permission for 
     them to switch employers.  But at the request of 
     Yilmazlar and the state, the hearing has been postponed 
     repeatedly, most recently to July 5.  Meanwhile, the 
     workers must choose between staying at Yilmazlar and 
     being exploited, or quitting and risking deportation. 
 
     Yilmazlar's presence in Israel stems from Israel 
     Military Industries' contract to upgrade tanks for the 
     Turkish army.  In exchange for this contract, Israel 
     promised Turkey a certain amount of business.  Pursuant 
     to this promise, Yilmazlar is renting out Turkish 
     laborers to Israeli contractors here. 
 
     In their petition, the Hotline for Migrant Workers and 
     Kav La'Oved charged that Yilmazlar had failed to pay 
     its workers, and forced them to sign promissory notes 
     allowing the company to seize their assets in Turkey 
     should they quit.  Therefore, they argued that the 
     Turks should be able to quit Yilmazlar, just as other 
     foreign workers are allowed to leave their employers. 
     But the state argued in response that the deal with 
     Yilmazlar is a unique contract stemming from the IMI 
     deal, one with implications for Israel's foreign 
     relations.  Therefore, the workers should not be 
     allowed to switch employers. 
 
     The petition, which accused the state of abetting human 
     trafficking due to its stance, was filed on November 
     29, and the court scheduled a hearing on January 25. 
     But Yilmazlar's local attorney, Tal Benenson, requested 
     a postponement, saying he had been called up for 
     reserve duty.  His service was later canceled, but the 
     hearing was postponed until February 16. 
 
     The hearing actually took place four days later, but it 
     proved a mere formality:  The court decided that IMI 
     should be added to the petition as a respondent, and to 
     give it time to prepare its response, scheduled a new 
     hearing on April 5. 
 
     This time, the state requested a postponement, saying 
     its attorneys were overburdened by the flood of 
     petitions against the disengagement.  The court agreed, 
     but requested that the delay be brief.  However, 
     Benenson then said he was going abroad for a month, so 
     the hearing was pushed off until May 15. 
 
     That hearing was later postponed until July 15, and the 
     state already has already requested that it be 
     postponed again, on the grounds that attorney Orit 
     Koren will be in classes that day. 
 
     In her response to the postponement request, Hotline 
     attorney Naomi Levenkron argued that Yilmazlar recently 
     has moved to seize assets of workers who have quit, and 
     attached a copy of one of the promissory notes the 
     workers had signed.  But Yilmazlar, whose name appears 
     nowhere on the note, insisted it has never asked 
     workers to sign such documents, and argued that the 
     note must be a private contract signed by the worker. 
 
     The Hotline added that some workers who quit have 
     already been deported, since upon resigning, they lost 
     their legal status here.  Others have filed suit 
     against Yilmazlar. 
 
     Benenson rejected the organizations' accusations 
     against Yilmazlar, calling them "tendentious and 
     false."  A good example, he said, is the promissory 
     note allowing the worker's assets to be seized, "which 
     has no connection whatsoever to Yilmazlar.  The company 
     is under close supervision by seven agencies, including 
     the Turkish and Israeli Labor Ministries, and they 
     inspect it every day."  END TEXT. 
 
¶16.  (U) Published by Milliyet on Friday, May 27: 
 
     TITLE:  Hello, Help (Line) for Russian Women 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Utku Cakirozer, Ankara.  Small cards will 
     be given to women traveling to Turkey from the former 
     Soviet Union in order to avoid human trafficking.  The 
     card gives information on a hotline for such women to 
     call in case of emergency. 
 
     The IOM and the GOT entered a joint project to prevent 
     women and children from the Ukraine, Moldova, Russia, 
     Romania, Georgia and Belarus to be forced into labor, 
     including prostitution.  A "Hotline 157" was introduced 
     within this framework and it became operational last 
     week.  The hotline can be called free of charge from 
     regular and cell phones and callers will be responded 
     in Turkish, Romanian, Russian and English. 
 
     A 4-page mini promotional card on the hotline will be 
     inserted into the passports of tourist women at the 
     Turkish border gates. 
 
     The card has a young woman figure and a blue bead on 
     it.  END TEXT. 
 
¶17.  (U) Reported by adnkronosinternational (www.adnki.com) 
on Friday, May 27: 
  TITLE:  Italy:  Police Break Up Chinese Migrant Ring 
 
  BEGIN TEXT:  Rome, 27 May (AKI) - Italian police have 
  broken up an international Chinese crime ring involved in 
  people smuggling and kidnappings and have carried out 
  dozens of arrests in Italy and other areas of Europe. 
  The arrests were ordered by magistrates in the central 
  Italian city of Ancona and are targeting a mafia-style 
  organization.  A general of the carabiniere's special 
  squad (ROS) said at least seventy people had been 
  arrested so far, and some of these had been picked up in 
  Greece, Turkey, France and Germany. 
 
  The members of the organization-mainly Chinese-are 
  accused of trafficking in human beings, kidnapping for 
  ransom and abetting illegal immigration. 
 
  "This complicated and Chinese-dominated structure took 
  hundreds of illegal Chinese immigrants to Italy and 
  Europe from their countries of origin through a series of 
  stops, particularly in Greece and Turkey" the ROS' 
  General Giampaolo Ganzer told Italian state radio. 
 
  The transfer of the Chinese migrants from their home 
  country to Italy or other European destinations sometimes 
  took as long as a year and inquiries have revealed that 
  during this time they were detained and intimidated with 
  psychological and physical violence. 
 
  "Dozens of victims were released and the heads of sweat- 
  shops arrested," Ganzer added. 
 
  There is a strong density of Chinese migrants in Tuscany 
  and also in the area around Naples - many of them are 
  involved in the garment industry. 
 
  The ROS operation was made easier by the recent 
  introduction of a European-wide arrest warrant.  END 
  TEXT. 
 
¶18.  (U) Published by Agenzia Giornalistica Italia - News in 
English (www.agi.it) on Friday, May 27: 
 
     TITLE:  Illegal Immigration:  70 Arrests in France, 
     Greece, Italy, Turk 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  (AGI) - Ancona, Italy, May 27 - Around 
     seventy people, the majority of whom Chinese, were 
     arrested by the Greek and Turkish police, in 
     collaboration with Italian Carabinieri.  In Italy, in 
     different regions, in France and Greece the Carabinieri 
     are issuing arrest warrants against a Chinese mafia 
     organization involved in human trafficking, kidnappings 
     for extortion and illegal immigration from China.  As 
     shown in the investigations, the duration of the 
     transfer of immigrants to their destination exceeded in 
     some cases a year, in which the immigrants were 
     segregated and intimidated with physical and 
     psychological violence.  The special investigations 
     unit of the Carabinieri concluded the operation thanks 
     to European collaboration in the sector, helped by the 
     recent norm on the European arrest warrant.  END TEXT. 
 
¶19.  (U) Published by the International Herald Tribune 
Europe (www.iht.com) on Saturday, May 28 
 
     TITLE:  Turkish lawmakers push to revise criminal code. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Associated Press, Reuters, Saturday 
     May 28, 2005.  Ankara.  Opposition members of the 
     Turkish Parliament have condemned an amendment - one 
     among a set of changes to the country's new penal code 
     - that softens penalties for teaching unauthorized 
     courses on the Koran. 
 
     Turkey was rushing to complete the new code, already 
     delayed, by next Wednesday in line with a pledge to the 
     European Union, which it wants to join. 
 
     On Friday, 346 deputies in the 550-member chamber 
     approved the revamped code and only three voted against 
     it. 
 
     The first major overhaul of the 79-year-old legislation 
     improves the rights of women and children and brings 
     higher human rights standards; it recognizes rape in 
     marriage and sexual harassment as crimes; and it 
     includes tougher measures against rape, pedophilia, 
     human trafficking and torture. 
 
     Ankara must have its revised penal code in force before 
     entry talks with the EU can start on Oct. 3. 
 
     The amendment in question will reduce the jail penalty 
     for offering courses in the Koran without official 
     permission to between three and 12 months, from three 
     to six years. 
 
     Turkey's secularists, who often accuse the governing 
     Justice and Development Party of trying to undermine 
     the country's strict separation of politics and 
     religion, fear the amendment will seriously weaken the 
     state's ability to monitor and control radical Islamist 
     groups. 
 
     Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan, who leads the party, 
     shrugged off their complaints on Friday as being over- 
     emotional. 
     The Justice and Development Party, which has its roots 
     in political Islam, inserted the last-minute amendment 
     into Turkey's new penal code late Thursday, setting off 
     a walkout by secularist opposition deputies. 
 
     "The real person responsible for this amendment is the 
     prime minister himself," Ali Topuz, a senior deputy in 
     the main opposition Republican People's Party, told 
     reporters in Parliament late Thursday. 
 
     Erdogan criticized the secularist establishment, saying 
     it should respect the wishes of Turkish society.  The 
     prime minister is under pressure from his conservative 
     power base to ease curbs on religious symbols and 
     freedoms.  END TEXT. 
 
¶20.  (U) Published by Tirana Shekulli on Sunday, May 29 
 
     TITLE:  Albanian Police Break Up Migrant Trafficking 
     Network 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  The Albanian police have 
     destroyed a trafficking network involving Kurds.  The 
     network started in Istanbul, passed through Tirana, 
     Kosovo and Slovenia, with EU countries as the final 
     destination.  The police operation followed a month of 
     tracking by the prosecution authorities, who in 
     cooperation with their colleagues from Turkey managed 
     to arrest the suspected organizers of this trafficking 
     network.  Officials from the Serious Crimes Prosecution 
     [PKR] office arrested five individuals:  two Turks, two 
     Albanians, and a Macedonian.  The arrests of the five, 
     who are suspected of being involved in this network of 
     clandestine trafficking, followed the arrest of a group 
     of six Kurds by the police at the Rinas [Tirana] 
     airport.  They intended to enter Albania, where they 
     were to be taken over by the arrested and stay in 
     temporary quarters while waiting to travel to Kosovo 
     and then to Slovenia. 
 
     Operation 
 
     After the arrest of the five persons charged with 
     clandestine trafficking, Dashnor Kaja, deputy director 
     general of the state police, explained the details of 
     the operation at a press conference.  According to him, 
     it has been learned that the final destination of the 
     persons were EU countries, such as Italy, Germany, and 
     France.  After the arrest of the suspects as organizers 
     of Kurds trafficking via the Istanbul route, yesterday 
     the police carried out several checks of apartments 
     where illegal immigrants are believed to have stayed. 
     According to police sources, they also suspect that 
     other persons might be involved in this trafficking 
     route of illegal immigrants, but as of late yesterday, 
     the number of arrested remained at five.  Ali Ademi, a 
     Macedonian citizen of Albanian nationality; Jasin Ozel 
     (Yasin Ozel), and Ajhan Dogan (Ayhan Dogan), both of 
     Turkish citizenship and nationality; and Hysni Mali and 
     Tafil Selfo from Albania are charged with cooperating 
     with each other in carrying out the trafficking of 
     Kurds from Turkey to the West.  During the operation of 
     two nights before, the police seized a car, a Mercedes 
     owned by Hysni Mali, with license plates TR 3548 J, 
     which is believed to have served for transporting 
     clandestine immigrants. 
 
     How Trafficking Was Discovered 
 
     At Friday noon, six persons of Turkish citizenship and 
     Kurdish nationality arrived at "Mother Teresa" airport 
     in Rinas.  Knowing that Turkish and Albanian citizens 
     do not need visas, they Kurds had only invitations from 
     their friends in Albania.  Of course, the invitations, 
     according to police sources, are suspected of being 
     forged.  After they passed the Rinas border control and 
     customs without any problems, they headed to the 
     capital in a Mercedes with plates TR 4815 J, also owned 
     by Hysni Mali.  They were dropped off near the center 
     of the capital, at "Zogu I Pare" boulevard.  Tafil 
     Selfo picked them up at that point in order to take 
     them to his house, where the Kurds would be sheltered 
     until their departure for Kosovo.  Just as the 
     clandestine [Kurds] thought they had succeeded and were 
     about to rest, agents from the Tirana police arrived at 
     Selfo's house.  The uninvited guests arrested the owner 
     of the house, while they took the Kurds to the premises 
     of the Tirana police.  There they were interrogated 
     individually by the officers of the Anti-trafficking 
     Section of the capital police.  According to the 
     sources, the clandestine Kurds claimed that the persons 
     they had contacted were precisely the two Turks, Ozel 
     and Dogan, and the Albanian from Macedonia, Ali Ademi. 
     After taking them to the Tirana police station, the 
     anti-trafficking agents also carried out checks in 
     other apartments that they were suspicious about. 
 
     Four thousand euros was the cost for a Kurd to make his 
     European dream come true.  This was what these 
     individuals from Turkey, or those of Kurdish 
     nationality, had to pay to travel from Istanbul to the 
     developed EU countries, passing through the Albanian 
     capital as the first obstacle.  In this no-that-little 
     payment, the Albanian collaborators of the 
     aforementioned network had also their share, each being 
     paid for the work he carried out.  The accommodators in 
     Kosovo and Slovenia, or the Turkish citizens who were 
     in charge of "recruiting" people who wanted to migrate 
     to the West also profited.  Having in mind that Turkey 
     and Albania have no obstacles given their mutual visa 
     regime, as well as Kosovo, the Turks came quite easily 
     from their country to Albania.  In this way, the 
     suspected members of this network had planned 
     everything in detail, not leaving much room for 
     thought.  The accommodations, the shuttles from the 
     airport in Tirana and from Tirana to the Morina border 
     crossing, were guaranteed by their "friends" in Albania 
     and Kosovo.  "We came to visit Albania," the Kurds were 
     said to have replied when they were caught by the 
     police at Selfo's apartment on "Bardhok Biba" street in 
     the capital. 
 
     The Trafficking 
 
     This version did not go well for the clandestine Kurds, 
     since the interrogation and re-interrogation of them 
     discovered that this was a well-organized trafficking 
     operation planned in some detail. Twenty thousand leks 
     per person was what "cab driver" Hysni Mali was paid to 
     transport the Kurds from Rinas to their place of 
     shelter.  His knowledge of Turkish, according to the 
     Tirana police sources, facilitated communication with 
     the Kurds.  Mali attempted to defend himself before the 
     investigators from the Anti-trafficking Section.  He 
     has had previous detentions as a suspect involved in 
     trafficking of humans.  Meanwhile, their transport from 
     Tirana to Pristina was to be carried out by various 
     buses of the Tirana-Pristina line; these buses leave 
     almost every hour of the day from Tirana toward Kosovo. 
     After arriving in Pristina and their stay there, 
     depending on the conditions, the clandestines were to 
     go to Slovenia via the land border of Kosovo, Serbia, 
     Bosnia, and finally arrive in Slovenia, where their 
     deployment to their final destinations was to be 
     carried out.  From Kosovo to Slovenia, according to the 
     police sources, the clandestine immigrants would travel 
     by vehicle in exchange for various payments. 
 
     Accommodation 
 
     The accommodation for each person cost the trafficking 
     network from 1,000-5,000 new leks.  In the house 
     adapted to a hotel on "Bardhok Biba" street, the 
     immigrants were to stay from two to four days.  This 
     depended on the number of persons intending to go to 
     Kosovo.  "I simply looked for people to lodge from the 
     street," said Tafil Selfo, arrested by the police and a 
     suspected member of the aforementioned group of 
     clandestine trafficking.  The landlord had managed to 
     put four-five beds in a big room in attempting to 
     maximize his profit.  It was where the Kurds stayed, in 
     order to later take off for the West.  END FBIS 
     TRANSLATED TEXT. 
¶21.  (U) Published by Chisinau Basapress on Thursday, May 
26: 
 
     TITLE:  Suspected Turkish Human Trafficker Detained in 
     Moldova 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  Chisinau, 26 May:  The 
     Moldovan police have arrested a Turkish national on 
     charges of trafficking young Moldovan women to Turkey 
     and Cyprus, the press secretary at the Chisinau police 
     commissariat, Alla Meleca, told the Basapress news 
     agency. 
 
     According to her, Murat Saglam, 29, was detained at the 
     Chisinau airport while seeing one of the trafficking 
     victims off. 
 
     A criminal probe has found out that since the beginning 
     of this year Murat Saglam has sold six Moldovan females 
     aged 19-26.  In addition, he helped another nine girls 
     to obtain documents to travel to Turkey and Cyprus. 
 
     The Turkish national recruited his victims in Chisinau 
     bars.  He promised to help them find jobs as waitresses 
     or dancers in Turkey and Cyprus. 
 
     Saglam made deals with potential purchasers through 
     Internet, receiving between 1,500 and 2,000 dollars for 
     each sexual slave. 
 
     If found guilty, Murat Saglam faces from 10 to 20 years 
     of imprisonment. 
 
     Since the beginning of 2005, the police have uncovered 
     102 cases of human trafficking.  END FBIS TRANSLATED 
     TEXT. 
 
¶22.  (U) Broadcast on Rome RAI Radio Uno Network on Friday, 
May 27: 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  Rome Radio Uno Network in 
     Italian at 0600 GMT on 27 May reports Italy's military 
     police carabinieri are carrying out dozens of arrests 
     in several Italian regions, Greece and Turkey. 
 
     The arrests-ordered by a judge in the central Italian 
     city of Ancona-are targeting a suspected Chinese- 
     dominated "mafia-like organization" dedicated to 
     smuggling human beings, and kidnappings. 
 
     So far, 70 have been arrested, according to a 
     carabinieri general. 
 
     "In total, 70 people have been arrested.  This morning 
     a series of actions promoted by Italy are under way, 
     while dozens of people have already been arrested in 
     Greece and Turkey," Gen. Giampaolo Ganzer, from the 
     carabinieri's Special Operations Department told 
     Italian Rai radio: 
 
     "This complicated and Chinese-dominated multi-ethnic 
     structure took hundreds of Chinese illegal immigrants 
     to Italy and Europe from the country of origin via a 
     series of junctures, particularly in Greece and 
     Turkey," he added. 
 
     Gen. Ganzer also said that many illegal immigrants were 
     reduced into slavery in Chinese illegal workshops in 
     Italy: 
 
     "Some people are accused of protracted kidnappings, 
     aiding and abetting illegal immigration and, basically, 
     slavery, because many of the victims which did not 
     manage to pay completely the ransom imposed by the 
     organization were then locked up in illegal workshops 
     which we have discovered in Italy, particularly in 
     Prato and Florence." 
 
     "Dozens of victims were freed and the heads of the 
     workshops arrested."  END FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN