05ANKARA2137
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
Thursday, APRIL 14, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Syria Welcomes Sezer With Great Ovations - Vatan 
Neighbors Sezer, Assad Hand-in-Hand - Hurriyet 
Sezer Given a Hero's Welcome in Syria - Star 
Sezer: Assad Pledged Full Withdrawal From Lebanon by Month's 
End - Milliyet 
Talabani: An Independent Kurdistan Cannot Survive - Aksam 
Armenian Priest Kalayjiyan Insults Ataturk - Vatan 
Bulgaria, Romania to Join EU in 2007 - Sabah 
Bush a Country Music Fan - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Damascus Gives Sezer a Warm Welcome - Cumhuriyet 
Sezer Advises Damascus: Don't Defy the World - Zaman 
Damascus' Love for Sezer - Radikal 
Syrian Press Praises Sezer's `Courage' Despite US Pressure - 
Yeni Safak 
European Parliament Holds a Minute of Silence for Armenian 
`Genocide' - Radikal 
Iran to Withdraw 2,000 Troops From Lebanon - Zaman 
Armenian Church Representative Calls Ataturk a `Butcher' - 
Cumhuriyet 
Kaim May Become a New Fallujah - Yeni Safak 
Zoellick's Convoy Attacked in Baghdad - Radikal 
Wealthy Nations Offer Sudan a Record-High $4.5 Billion Aid - 
Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
President Sezer Given a Warm Welcome on Official Visit to 
Syria:  In meetings with his Syrian counterpart President 
Bashar al-Asad in Damascus on Wednesday, Turkish President 
Ahmet Necdet Sezer stressed the need for reforms in the 
region, papers report.  Sezer expressed pleasure over 
Syria's decision to withdraw from Lebanon in line with UN 
Security Council resolutions.  All Turkish papers give 
extensive coverage to the Sezer call on Damascus yesterday, 
during which the Turkish President was given a warm welcome. 
Syria and Turkey expressed a genuine desire to push 
bilateral relations forward and expressed similar identical 
viewpoints on recent developments in the Middle East, 
reports comment.  President Assad said in a statement after 
three meetings with Sezer that their talks were 
`comprehensive, positive and fruitful,' and that the visit 
by Sezer demonstrated the depth and strength of ties between 
the two countries.  Assad pointed to the agreement between 
Syria and Turkey regarding the importance of consolidating 
Iraq's sovereignty and unity.  `The political process in 
Iraq should guarantee the widest possible participation of 
the Iraqi people without foreign interference,' Assad said 
of Iraq.  On the situation in the `occupied' Arab countries, 
Assad said Syria agreed to solve the issue in accordance 
with UN Security Council resolutions.  Assad urged a full 
Israeli withdrawal from Arab lands occupied in 1967, adding 
that Palestinians should be allowed to build their state 
with Jerusalem as its capital.  Assad praised Turkey's 
efforts and constructive role to achieve a just and 
comprehensive peace in the region.  Assad said he and Sezer 
expressed a strong interest in Lebanon's security and unity. 
Sezer agreed that they shared the same point of view on 
developing cooperation in all fields, saying his talks with 
President Assad touched on economic, political, trade and 
cultural topics, the situation in Iraq, and the Palestinian 
cause.  Sezer said the two countries shared the same views 
regarding Iraq's integrity and unity and international 
efforts to rebuild the country.  The Turkish president also 
welcomed Syria's pullout from Lebanon.  At a dinner hosted 
by Assad in honor of Sezer and his delegation, the Syrian 
president recalled that Damascus has condemned terrorism and 
reiterated his readiness to struggle it.  Assad also voiced 
appreciation for Turkey's supportive position of the `just 
causes' of Syria.  Sezer said positive developments in 
Turkish-Syrian relations in recent years led to increased 
cooperation, which will promote prosperity for both peoples. 
Sezer reiterated his call for continued efforts to preserve 
Lebanon's stability and unity.  Sezer called on the 
international community to back the  establishment of an 
independent Palestinian state.  Sezer also said that 
restoration of Iraq's position in the international 
community as a sovereign and free country is a common goal 
for Syria and Turkey. 
 
Erdogan Receives Molyviatis:  Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan 
discussed bilateral ties and Cyprus with visiting Greek 
Foreign Minister Petros Molyviatis in Ankara Wednesday, 
papers report.  The two expressed a common will for 
resolution of the Cyprus problem and stressed the need to 
intensify dialogue between Ankara and Athens.  Erdogan said 
that a solution in Cyprus should be found under the aegis of 
the UN.   Molyviatis proceeded to Istanbul after wrapping up 
meetings in Ankara.  Meanwhile, Greek Prime Minister 
Karamanlis is expected to visit Turkey in June. 
 
MFA Denies Gul Backed Lifting of `Casus Belli' Decision: 
The Turkish Foreign Ministry said Foreign Minister Abdullah 
Gul's remarks to the Greek daily "To Vima" on the 
territorial waters dispute between Athens and Ankara had 
been `misinterpreted.'  Spokesman Namik Tan denied that Gul 
has supported the lifting of a 1995 Turkish parliamentary 
decision of recognizing Greek attempts to extend territorial 
miles as a `cause for war.'  Turkey has no change of policy 
on the subject, Tan said.  On the other hand, Turkish media 
reported yesterday and today that Turkish and Greek boats 
were involved in a confrontation near `Kardak,' an 
uninhabited islet in the Aegean.  The incident occurred as 
Greek and Turkish foreign ministers heralded a new era of 
cooperation during talks in Ankara, say papers.  The Turkish 
side holds Greeks responsible for the mini-crisis, which was 
resolved just an hour before Molyviatis was received by 
Erdogan on Wednesday. 
 
TGS on Turkey-Greece, Armenia, `Polarization' in Turkey: 
Responding to questions from press at TGS headquarters in 
Ankara Wednesday, Second Chief of Staff General Ilker Basbug 
said Turkey will not change its policy of viewing Greek 
attempts to extend territorial waters in the Aegean to 12 
miles as a `cause for war.'  Basbug said a decision adopted 
on the issue by the Turkish Parliament on June 8, 1995 is 
still in force.  `The basic objective of this policy is not 
to provoke, but to prevent, clashes between the two 
countries,' Basbug noted.  Commenting on the desecration of 
the Turkish flag during celebrations of Kurds' `Nevruz' 
festival in Mersin last month and the lynching attempt by 
nationalists against four leftist activists in Trabzon last 
weekend, Basbug said the Turkish military will not tolerate 
attacks on the flag.  `Such provocations will only harm 
Turkey,' Basbug said, and called on the nation to act within 
the scope of laws and common sense.  Papers give extensive 
coverage to statements by President Sezer, Prime Minister 
Erdogan, and General Basbug warning the Turkish people not 
to respond to provocations.  The incident in Mersin last 
month triggered an outpouring of flag-waving patriotism 
across Turkey.  European Commission representative Hans- 
Joerg Kretschmer said he is following the events in Trabzon 
`with great concern.'  A senior EU diplomat in Ankara said 
that a successful lynching could have interrupted Turkey's 
EU entry talks. 
 
Turkish Parliament Declaration on Armenian `Genocide':  The 
Turkish parliament issued on Wednesday a declaration against 
the Armenian genocide allegations.  The declaration said it 
is for the benefit of Turkey and Armenia to reconcile, end 
prejudices and create a climate which would enable the two 
nations to share a common future based on tolerance, 
friendship and cooperation.  It called for the formation of 
a joint commission of Turkish and Armenian historians which 
would have unfettered access to archives in both countries. 
Turkey and Armenia will only pass on prejudices, enmity and 
vindictive feelings to their children unless they end taboos 
through a joint initiative and prepare to settle old scores 
with their history, the declaration said.  It called on 
other countries wanting peace and stability in the Caucasus 
to support the initiative.  Turkey's General Staff (TGS) 
said military archives from the 1914-18 period would also be 
opened.  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said Turkey will 
formally ask the British parliament to reject the so-called 
Blue Book, published in 1916, which contains eyewitness 
accounts to conclude that Armenians were being 
systematically exterminated by the Ottoman Turks. 
 
Oskanyan Lashes Out at Turkey:  Armenian Foreign Minister 
Vardan Oskanyan said that Turkey is not only refusing to 
adopt a conciliatory approach regarding the `genocide' 
issue, but is also trying to launch a counterattack. 
According to the Yerevan-based Mediamax agency report, 
Oskanyan recalled that Turkey has asked London to declare as 
`groundless' The Blue Book, which is considered one of the 
main sources on which the Armenian claims are based. 
Turkish leaders have recently said the book was wartime 
propaganda.  Oskanyan also said that during membership 
negotiations with the EU, Turkey will be asked to recognize 
the Armenian genocide.  Oskanyan said that if Turkey, with 
its big military potential and pro-Azeri position on the 
Nagorno-Karabakh issue, does not recognize the `genocide,' 
Armenia would not feel safe.  "Hurriyet" says that Oskanyan 
has `rudely' rejected calls by Turkish parliament to set up 
a commission to investigate the claims of `genocide.' 
 
President Moo-hyun Due in Turkey:  South Korean President 
Roh Moo-hyun is due in Ankara late Thursday, on the first 
state visit by a Korean leader in 48 years.  Moo-hyun said 
his visit will help boost Korean investments in Turkey. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Turkish President to Syria 
 
"Blind and Deaf Hosting Each Other" 
Cengiz Candar observed in the conservative-sensational DB 
Tercuman (4/13):  "A Turkish minister was visiting Baghdad 
while Iraq was on the brink of war and the toppling of the 
cruel Saddam regime was at hand.  The Turkish Foreign 
Minister was even defending such a mistake at the time. 
Currently we see a similar situation with President Sezer's 
visit to Damascus to see a leader whose tenure is about to 
come to an end.  It is only a matter of days.  The Turkish 
presidential visit was welcomed by the Syrian regime, with 
the prime minister saying Sezer had come to his second home. 
It is hard to comprehend the reasons for this kind of myopia 
and even blindness that Turkish leaders  are suffering from. 
They somehow fail to understand that such blindness will 
only cause Turkey to lose significant ground in the 
international arena.  `National pride' and `independence of 
decision' have absolutely nothing to do with this.  On the 
contrary, presenting an image of support for an ailing 
dictatorial regime in the Middle East is fully incompatible 
with Turkish national pride. . It seems that Turkey and 
Syria do indeed have something in common: both of them 
insist on making major strategic mistakes and continue to 
misread international realities. . There could be a Turkish 
proverb for this kind of situation: `the deaf and the blind 
enjoy hosting each other.'" 
"Assad Should Make a Gesture for Turkey" 
Hakan Celik wrote in the sensational-mass appeal Posta 
(4/13): "Sezer visited Damascus at a time when international 
sensitivity is at its height.  Hosting the Turkish president 
is a very important event and demonstration of support for 
both the Syrian people and the Syrian regime.  It seems that 
Syrians have already considered it to be a kiss of life. 
Damascus has received a friendly and supportive hand from 
Turkey in the midst of its current international dilemma. . 
The aftermath of this visit is very important.  Any concrete 
result will contribute to peace in the Middle East.  Assad 
should be able to use the unique opportunity that came with 
Turkey's friendly hand.  He should take the necessary steps 
to comply with the international community's expectations of 
the Damascus regime." 
 
EDELMAN