05ANKARA5196
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 7, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
US Accused of Using Chemical Weapons in Tal Afar - Hurriyet 
Surprising Offer from Israel - Hurriyet 
Chirac Discusses Turkey with Schroeder - Hurriyet 
Two Arrested From Hizb-ut Tahrir Operation - Hurriyet 
Clash in the Judiciary - Sabah 
Tension in Siirt: 1 Dead - Sabah 
Turkish Nationalists Raid September 6-7 Exhibition - 
Milliyet 
Women and Children Used as Shield for Terrorist Activity - 
Vatan 
Zerkavi Brings Sharia Regime to Iraq - Posta 
PKK Threatens Germany - Aksam 
Two Turkish Soldiers Die in Mine Blast - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Greece Blocks Anti-Turkey Festival - Radikal 
Sezer Urges People To Show Common Sense - Radikal 
Federal Investigation On Bush Relief Effort - Yeni Safak 
France Prepares `B Plan' for Turkey's EU Accession - 
Cumhuriyet 
The Second Turkmen Massacre - Cumhuriyet 
US Appreciates Turkey's Solidarity on Katrina - Zaman 
Tbilisi Airport Contract Goes to Turkish Company - Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
US Accused of Using Chemical Weapons in Tal Afar: 
"Cumhuriyet," "Hurriyet," and "Yeni Safak" report that over 
100 Turkmen have been killed in a large-scale assault by US 
and Iraqi security forces on the Turkmen city of Tal Afar. 
"Cumhuriyet' claims that 5,000 US troops, 1,500 Kurdish 
peshmerge, and 1,500 Shiite troops are participating in the 
operation.  Turkmen sources say that Kurdish militia members 
have destroyed 50 houses in Tal Afar belonging mainly to 
Sunni Turkmen without evacuating the residents.  The report 
asserts that many Turkmen were killed during the operation. 
Chairman of the Iraqi Turks Culutural and Solidarity 
Association, Mahmut Kasapoglu, claimed in a written 
statement that US military forces used chemical weapons in 
Tal Afar, and that 500 Turkmen had died by suffocation due 
to the effects of these weapons.  "Hurriyet" adds that 
Kasapoglu claimed US troops have surrounded the city with 
barbed wire before what he termed `the largest US operation 
since the occupation of Iraq.'  Kasapoglu called on Turkey 
to pressure the US to end the operation.  "Yeni Safak" 
quoted a US official in Ankara as saying that the operation 
Tal Afar is directed against terrorists and insurgents who 
had settled in the city, and that it was not targeting the 
Turkmen population.  The official said the US is keeping 
Turkey informed about the course of the operation in Tal 
Afar. 
 
US Generals to Visit Ankara Tomorrow:  "Yeni Safak" reports 
that Commander of US Forces in Europe, General James Jones, 
and representatives of US Central Command (CENTCOM) will 
visit Ankara for talks with the Turkish General Staff on 
Thursday and Friday.  The paper says that the discussions 
will focus on the issues of the PKK and Iraq. 
 
Two Turkish Soldiers Die in Mine Blast in Hakkari:  "Aksam" 
reports that 2 Turkish soldiers were killed and 2 others 
injured on Tuesday when they stepped on a land mine believed 
to have been laid by the PKK. 
 
More Violence in Southeast:  1 demonstrator was killed in 9 
others wounded in a clash with police in the southeastern 
city of Siirt.  The demonstrators had attempted to march 
toward the city center following a press conference given by 
the city mayor, a member of pro-Kurdish DEHAP. Police first 
tried to break up the demonstration with pepper spray, while 
demonstrators pelted the police and the nearby municipality 
building with rocks.  Shots were fired and one demonstrator 
was found dead in the street.  15 suspects were detained in 
the incident.  Many commentators in the press highlighted 
growing tension between Kurdish activists and Turkish 
nationalists that has led to a series of violent ethnic 
confrontations over the past week.  PM Erdogan, meanwhile, 
criticized DEHAP leaders for provoking the clashes, and 
asserted that the recent violence reflects the impending 
collapse of both DEHAP and the PKK.  `We will not allow them 
to exploit their democratic rights in this way,' Erdogan 
said. 
 
EU Meeting to Fix Language on Counter-Declaration: 
"Hurriyet" reports that EU officials are expected to 
finalize the language of an EU counter-declaration to 
Turkey's non-recognition of Cyprus at a meeting today in 
Brussels.  The paper anticipates an effort by France and 
some other countries to insert language into the document 
that would call on Turkey to open its ports and airports to 
the Greek Cypriots by the end of 2006.  The current draft 
language insists on "de jure" normalization of relations 
with Cyprus and the opening of ports and airports, but does 
not specify a timetable for these actions by Turkey.  Asked 
about developments related to Turkey's EU process, PM 
Erdogan siad yesterday that `there is nothing to worry about 
at this point.  There are just a couple of countries that 
are raising objections.' 
 
GMF Reports Drop In EU Support for Turkey:  A new survey by 
the German Marshall Fund has found that public opinion in 
the EU with regard to Turkey's EU accession has turned more 
negative.  According to the survey results, just 22 percent 
of citizens in EU countries favor Turkey's eventual 
membership in the EU.  42 percent, however, remain undecided 
on the issue.  The poll also reports that support within 
Turkey for EU membership has dropped from 73 percent to 63 
percent over the past year. 
 
Israeli Offer for Diplomatic Missions:  "Hurriyet" reports 
that during the meeting of the foreign ministers of Israel 
and Pakistan last week in Istanbul, Israel described plans 
for opening Israeli representation offices in turkish 
embassies and consulates in non-Arab, Islamic countries. 
"Hurriyet" urges the government to support the proposal as 
part of Turkey's mediating role between Israel and Muslim 
countries. 
 
Judicial Year Opens With A Crisis: All papers report on a 
dispute between the Constitutional Court and the Supreme 
Court of Appeals during yesterday's ceremony to mark the 
beginning of Turkey's judicial year.  Supreme Court of 
Appeals chief justice Osman Arslan called for the 
Constitutional Court's authority to close or penalize 
political parties to be transferred to the Appeals Court, 
arguing that the Constitutional Court is not equipped to 
deal with criminal cases and functions much too slowly. 
Arslan also criticized members of the Constitutional Court 
for not having a proper background in judicial matters. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq/Tal Afar 
 
"The Human Tragedy in Tal Afar" 
Kenan Akin argued in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (9/7):  "The 
US army in Iraq is conducting a campaign of vengeance in Tal 
Afar, and initial figures indicate more than 200 dead and 
thousands leaving their homes.  The operation in Tal Afar, 
which is being carried out by US forces in cooperation with 
Kurdish peshmerge, looks like a massacre.  There are claims 
that the US wants to change the demographic composition in 
Tal Afar. . The US claims the causes of freedom and 
democracy to justify its presence in Iraq, but we have seen 
nothing more than blood and tears so far.  The US is being 
bitterly criticized by everyone, including the American 
people.  Even UN Secretary General Kofi Annan is warning of 
growing terrorism in Iraq.  Iraq has turned into a terrorist 
country, where it is possible to carry out every kind of 
violence.  The US bears the major responsibility for this 
situation.  For the future, it appears that Iraq will be 
divided into three.  It seems inevitable that what starts as 
a federation will end up as a complete division.  It is sad 
to see this, because Iraq used to be an Arab land where 
Sunnis, Shiites, Kurds, and Turkmen and Assyrians could live 
as well." 
 
"Behind the Scenes in Tal Alafar" 
Emin Pazarci wrote in the tabloid "Bugun" (9/7): "The US 
continues its operations in Talafar, and there are reports 
of heavy clashes.  Tal Afar is a typical Turkmen city, so 
naturally the current operation targets Turkmen.  But it 
does not cover all of the Turkmen population, because the US 
problem is really with the Sunni Turkmen.  In fact, the 
Turkmen population in Tal Afar is not unified.  Most of the 
Shiite Turkmen are directly engaged with Iran, while the 
Sunni Turkmen look more to Turkey.  There is also a tribal 
Shiite Turkmen family there controlled by Barzani. . The 
area is very important for Barzani, and he wants to open an 
office in Tal Afar by using his family's link to the region. 
Once Barzani gains control over Tal Afar, the Kurdish 
influence will undoubtedly prevail.  Having Tal Afar under 
Barzani's control would also serve US interests, because the 
insurgents in Tal Afar are coming from Syria and being 
supported by the Sunni Turkmen.  The Bush administration is 
not happy about the current situation in Tal Afar. . It 
seems that in near future, Barzani will control the city and 
will manage to expand Kurdish influence significantly.  He 
plans to create strong bonds with the Syrian Kurds as well. 
The Turkmen link with Turkey will be cut off." 
 
MCELDOWNEY