05ANKARA778
EXBS; TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE
Thu Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000778 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR N/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA FOR PWALKER 
USDOE/NNSA FOR TPERRY 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
ISCG FOR GOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM TU
SUBJECT: EXBS; TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE 
(JANUARY 2005) 
 
REF: A. STATE 146478 
     ¶B. ANKARA 775 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1.      Summary:  EXBS advisor's primary focus this month was 
on two significant events, DOS/DOE meeting with GOT officials 
concerning the proposed plan for the early return of spent 
HEU fuel rods to the United States and coordination of the 
DOC team to propose the Product Identification Tool (PIT) 
project to GOT official.  EXBS Advisor also continued to 
promote PSI and encouraged Turkey's active participation, 
including Operational Expert Group meetings and exercises. 
Finally, EXBS advisor continued negotiation of the NP 
Cooperation Agreement, while working to ensure other 
nonproliferation activities continue to progress. 
 
¶2.    Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.    Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent Reporting 
Period 
 
1)    January 10- EXBS advisor met with MFA Nuclear Energy 
Head of Department  Basak Tug.  EXBS advisor reviewed the 
proposed visit of combined DOS and DOE team that arrived 
January 14 (see below).  The goal of the team was to begin 
coordinating the return of spent nuclear fuel rods from 
Turkey to the United States.  EXBS adviser was able to 
arrange meetings with senior Turkish Atomic Energy Authority 
(TAEK) members as well as a visit to the Cekmece Nuclear 
Research Reactor. 
 
Following the meeting with Tug, EXBS Adviser met with  Arms 
Control and Disarmament Head of Department Sabri Ergen.  EXBS 
Adviser delivered talking points concerning Turkey's upcoming 
participation in PSI activities, including Operations Experts 
Group and Turkey's consideration to host a 2006 PSI exercise. 
 EXBS Advisor also review upcoming PIT team visit and the 
pending NP Cooperation Agreement. 
 
2)    January 12- 13-  EXBS Adviser served as a member of the 
Embassy team during visit to Turkey/Iraq  Habur Gate border 
crossing.  The Embassy team participated in the weekly 
US/Turkey/Iraq border meeting, with the main topics of 
concern being the large truck backlog at the border crossing 
and the safety of the trucks and drivers.  Various options 
were discussed and will be reviewed by each country. 
 
Following the meeting, EXBS Adviser met with Turkish Custom's 
Habur Regional Director Rusten Danis.  Danis explained 
current operations, reviewed future improvements to the 
border crossing and proposed improvements to the processing 
of vehicles.  EXBS Adviser then conducted a detailed walk 
through of the border crossing operations.  This review 
included tracking a truck from entering the border crossing, 
inspection procedures and then clearing of the truck to 
proceed.  Both traffic leaving and entering Turkey were 
viewed. 
 
3)          January 14- EXBS Adviser coordinated and was part 
of a DOS/DOE visit to TAEK to discuss the United States 
Foreign Research Reactor Spent Nuclear Fuel Acceptance 
Program and propose that Turkey participate in the next 
upcoming shipment later this year.  Meetings were held with 
TAEK President Mr. Okay Cakiroglu, Cekmece Reactor Director 
Dr. Sevket Can and Reactor Department Head Dr. Sinan Taylan. 
Turkey agreed in principle to participate in the shipment but 
noted that specific considerations would have to be made to 
ensure the Cekmece Reactor would remain operational.  Ref B 
is a detailed report of these meetings and the visit to the 
Cekmece Research Reactor. 
 
4)    January 17- EXBS Adviser participated in the visit and 
discussions at the Cekmece Research Reactor.  The DOS/DOE 
team was initially provided a detailed tour of the reactor 
and the facilities.  Following the tour, EXBS Adviser 
participated in discussion concerning the contract for 
return, policy issues and the availability of replacement 
fuel for the reactor. 
 
5)    January 26- EXBS Adviser met with MFA Arms Control and 
Disarmament Head of Department  Sabri Ergen to conduct 
monthly update meeting on all current projects in progress in 
Turkey, including Internal Control Program (ICP), Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT) and Second Line of Defense 
(SLD).  EXBS Advisor also finalized the agenda for the 
upcoming Product Identification Tool (PIT) project meetings 
that would be held the following week.  Finally, EXBS Advisor 
led a general discussion concerning the NP Cooperation 
Agreement and Turkey's participation in the next PSI experts 
working group and upcoming exercises in Portugal and Spain, 
providing updated information on each exercise.  Ergen stated 
that Turkey intended to participate in both exercises and was 
still considering hosting a 2006 PSI exercise. 
 
EXBS Advisor met with Department Head for Customs Enforcement 
Mehmet Guzel to review the proposed Risk Management Workshop 
for Turkish Customs officials.  Following the review it was 
agreed that GOT would most benefit from two workshops for 
different segments of the Customs Ministry and other GOT 
personnel.  EXBS advisor also reviewed the status of other 
projects, including CIT and the upcoming PIT project. 
Additionally, EXBS Adviser was briefed by Guzel on current 
operations in both the &Green Zone8 between customs posts 
and the border in general, and specifically at the border 
crossing with Iraq at Habur Gate. 
 
6)    January 28- EXBS Advisor met with Undersecretariat of 
Foreign Trade Agreement Department Head Fail Kural to review 
the progress of the ICP project.  Kural informed EXBS Advisor 
that there has been a significant change in personal with in 
the department and the ICP has not progressed as hoped.  EXBS 
Advisor informed Kural of the upcoming visit of the DOC 
contractor to Turkey and coordinated a meeting with Kural and 
other relevant UFT personnel to discuss the project in hopes 
of getting it back on track. 
 
EXBS Advisor met with Department Head for Customs Enforcement 
Ender Gurleyik to discuss recent visit to the Habur Gate 
border crossing and other significant customs activities. 
EXBS Advisor also discussed possible equipment shortfalls 
that Turkish customs may be experiencing that could be 
addressed following the approval of the NP Cooperation 
Agreement. 
 
EXBS Advisor then met with General Directorate of Customs 
Department Head for Export Controls  Abdurrahman Demir to 
discuss the upcoming PIT team visit.  EXBS Advisor explained 
the project and scheduled a detailed meeting and 
demonstration of the PIT with Demir and other technical 
experts from the Undersecretariat of Customs for the 
following week.  Demir also provided EXBS Advisor with a 
status report on the CIT project, explaining that GOT is 
behind the desired schedule but making progress.  He added 
that a draft training plan should be completed by mid to late 
February when more active coordination with TAEK should 
occur. EXBS Advisor again offered support to the development 
of the plan or in coordinating with TAEK. 
 
¶B.    Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None. 
 
¶C.    Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.    Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.    Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security 
 
1)    The United States provided GOT in December the latest 
approved update on the NP Cooperation Agreement.  (Note: GOT 
reply was received on February 4 and forwarded for comment.) 
 
 
¶3.    Future Activities 
 
¶A.    Feb 1-3 - DOC team scheduled to visit Ankara to 
introduce the Product Identification Tool to members of the 
Turkish government.  This tool can improve the resources 
available to Turkish Customs official at the border 
processing locations. 
 
¶B.        Mar 14-17- EXBS Advisor to attend EXBS Statement of 
Work/Procurement Workshop in Baku, Azerbaijan. 
 
¶C.    Mar 21- Apr 5, 2005 - EXBS Advisor to conduct program 
consultations in Washington DC. and leave. 
 
¶D.         Apr 11- 15 (tent)- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT 
Refresher Course and project review. 
 
¶E.         May 16- 20 (tent)- DOE NNSA to conduct CIT 
Instructor Training 
¶4.    Red Flag Issues- None 
 
¶5.    Contact Information for EXBS Adviser ) Kevin Lyon, 
phone (90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, 
email LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
EDELMAN