05ANKARA783
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000783 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Ankara wants UN inspectors for Kirkuk - Vatan 
US nuclear weapons kept in Turkey - Aksam 
US keeps 90 nuclear bombs in Incirlik Airbase - Vatan 
Greek Cypriot opposition leader:  We want a bi-zonal, bi- 
communal solution in Cyprus - Milliyet 
Rice warns Iran from Europe - Hurriyet 
Rice wants to turn a new page with Europe - Turkiye 
Sharon may visit Ramallah - Aksam 
Next Sharon-Abbas meeting in Ramallah - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Europe a nuclear depot for the US - Radikal 
US keeps 480 missiles in 6 European countries - Cumhuriyet 
Iraqi election results to be announced late February - Yeni 
Safak 
Turkish MFA claims `irregularities' in Iraqi elections - 
Yeni Safak 
NYT: US may intervene in Kirkuk against the Kurds - Zaman 
Peace hopes gear up in Middle East - Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ankara `Evaluates' US Requests for Using Incirlik AB: 
Turkish MFA Spokesman Namik Tan confirmed at a weekly press 
conference on Wednesday US requests for using the Incirlik 
Airbase in southern Turkey as a logistical cargo hub. 
`Americans want to use Incirlik within the framework of UN 
regulations,' Tan said.  Tan noted that Ankara is evaluating 
the request. 
 
MFA Complains of Iraq Election Results:  The MFA said 
Wednesday that some `irregularities' occurred in the Iraqi 
elections.  Spokesman Namik Tan said that the participation 
of some Iraqi groups was not at the desired level, and urged 
the Iraqi administration to take steps to make up for 
irregularities in the January 30 elections in order to 
ensure the political representation of all ethnic and 
religious groups, papers report.  `As neighbors of Iraq, it 
is our right to pay attention to Iraq and this has nothing 
to do with interference in internal affairs,' Tan said. 
 
FM Gul Welcomes Israel-Palestine Ceasefire:  FM Abdullah Gul 
welcomed the Israeli-Palestinian ceasefire agreement at the 
Sharm-el-Sheikh summit at a news conference in Ankara on 
Wednesday.  Both sides' decision for forming a security 
cooperation committee, Israel's withdrawal from Palestinian 
cities, and the release of Palestinian prisoners are 
positive developments, Gul stressed.  Gul reportedly said 
that Turkey will provide training for Palestinian security 
forces, and increase and diversify aid  to the Palestinians. 
 
PKK Preparing for Attacks in Turkey:  PKK/Kongra Gel is 
preparing for fresh attacks in Turkey before a possible 
joint operation by the US and Turkey for removal of the 
terror organization from the region, "Cumhuriyet" says. 
Murat Karayilan, a high-level PKK official who is expected 
to take over the terror organization's leadership during 
`Nevruz' celebrations late March, has reportedly ordered the 
attacks against military and economic targets in major 
Turkish cities.  The PKK is busy smuggling militant groups 
and hundreds of pounds of C-4 explosives to southeastern 
Turkish provinces Diyarbakir, Tunceli and Bingol, says the 
paper.  Meanwhile, "Zaman" says that Washington has launched 
an investigation into the PKK's financial resources.  A 
decision to that end had been taken at the tripartite US- 
Turkey-Iraq security summit in Ankara last month, says 
"Zaman." 
 
Greek Cypriot Opposition Leader in Turkey:  Nicos 
Anastassiades, head of the Democratic Rally Party (DISI), 
the main opposition in Greek Cyprus, called for 
reconciliation between Turkey and Cyprus, and voiced support 
for Turkey's drive to join the European Union, Turkish 
papers report.  Anastassiades came to Istanbul Wednesday as 
the official guest of the ruling AK Party.  `It is time to 
close the traumatic and painful chapter of Cyprus once and 
for all, and I'm confident that we can together win the 
future,' he told a conference in Istanbul.  FM Abdullah Gul 
said Wednesday that Ankara would not recognize Nicosia until 
a lasting settlement is reached on the partitioned island. 
Commenting on Anastassiades' remarks Tuesday urging the 
withdrawal of Turkish troops from Cyprus, Gul reminded that 
Greek Cypriots had rejected a UN-backed peace plan which 
envisaged pulling troops out of Cyprus.  Turkish troop 
deployment in Cyprus is based on international agreements, 
Gul stressed.   Anastassiades is scheduled to meet with Gul 
and other AKP leaders in Ankara on Thursday and with Erdogan 
in Istanbul on Saturday.  He will also see Greek Orthodox 
Patriarch Bartholomew. 
 
US Has Nuclear Bombs Across Europe:  All Turkish papers 
carry a "New York Times" article claiming that the US has 
480 nuclear weapons in six military bases across Europe.  A 
report by the Natural Resources Defense Council says the 
existence of such weapons damaged efforts of nuclear non- 
proliferation.  The US keeps 90 of the bombs at Incirlik 
Airbase, 40 of which are under Turkey's control, says the 
report. 
 
Armenian Delegation Visits Ankara:  An Armenian delegation 
visited the Ankara Chamber of Commerce (ATO) on Wednesday, 
papers report.  Armenian Youth Party leader Sargis Asatryan 
said Turkey today is a democratic country and rejected 
`common talk' claiming the killing of some one million 
Armenians by Ottoman forces in 1915.  `We don't want France 
or the United States to intervene in relations between 
Armenia and Turkey,' Asatryan reportedly said. 
 
Majority of Turks Want EU Membership - Survey:  A survey 
conducted by the Turkish State Statistics Institute shows 
that 70.2 percent of Turks will vote for European Union (EU) 
membership, and only 16.2 against, if a referendum is held. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Rice in Europe; Middle East 
"Condi Is Trying to Conquer Hearts" 
Sami Kohen commented in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (2/10): 
"Can we talk about the repair of ties between France and the 
US, especially the recent statements regarding `a new stage 
in relations' and `working together.'  By looking at 
statements from Condoleezza Rice during her European tour, 
including in Berlin and Paris, we can conclude that the 
crack in the transatlantic alliance is the process of being 
repaired.  Secretary Rice rushed to Europe right after her 
confirmation, giving a strong indication of the US desire to 
repair ties.  . Yet it remains to be seen whether statements 
by Rice actually indicate a genuine policy change in the 
Bush Administration.  Nevertheless, it is plausible to think 
about a change.  The same is true of Europe, particularly 
France.  Paris seems to be more flexible and realistic on 
the Iraq issue than ever before." 
 
"A New Chapter?" 
Hadi Uluengin commented in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" 
(2/10): "It was interesting that Rice talked about `opening 
a new chapter' shortly after she started her Paris visit. 
Her approach might be an indication of a more flexible 
policy line in the second Bush administration.  At this 
stage, deeds are needed more than the words in order to 
believe that this is the case.  It is certain, however, that 
there is in both the US and Europe the desire to open a new 
chapter . Secretary Rice very rightfully highlighted the 
common values shared by America and Europe, which put her 
diplomatic approach onto the right track.  As the US and 
Europe prepare for a new chapter in their ties, another 
brand-new chapter has appeared in the Middle East.  The 
Israel-Palestine peace is good news for the whole world and 
for the relationship between the US and Europe." 
 
"The Peace Winds in Middle East Strengthens Bush's Power" 
Hakan Celik commented in the mass appeal "Posta" (2/10): 
"The summit in Egypt brought very important results for 
peace in the Middle East.  Israel and Palestine promised to 
stop attacks on one another.  Now, the whole world wonders 
whether these promises will be kept.  It is a positive 
development for the US that a peace agreement was reached 
during Condoleezza Rice's Middle East tour.  This will be 
registered as a positive mark for Rice, and the Bush 
Administration's activity in the region will increase.  The 
international community urges the US to not open a new war 
front before the Palestinian-Israel issue is solved. 
Current developments will help the Bush Administration 
increase pressure on Syria and Iran.  As host of the summit, 
Egyptian President Mubarak announced that as a good will 
gesture he will appoint an ambassador to Israel.  The ruling 
AKP of Turkey put distance between itself and Israel in 
order to get closer to the Arabs.  Naturally this policy 
negatively affected Turkish-Israeli bilateral ties and 
eliminated the possibility of Turkey playing a role in 
solving the Israel-Arab dispute.  Thus, when Turkey offered 
to become a mediator in the Middle East dispute and to host 
a summit, it was not accepted by either side." 
 
EDELMAN