05ANKARA6637
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3082
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6637/01 3131542
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091542Z NOV 05
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1093
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 6663
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 8997
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 9944
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 4913
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4612
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1217
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/CDRUSAE IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 006637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Paris Riots Spread to 4 Belgian Cities - Bugun 
German Coalition Suggests `Privileged Relationship' for 
Turkey- Sabah 
Talabani: Independent Kurdistan `Just a Dream' - Milliyet 
RAI: US Forces Used Chemical Weapons in Fallujah - Milliyet 
Saddam's Lawyer, al-Zubaydi, Killed in Baghdad - Aksam 
74 Turks Killed in Iraq Since March 2003 - Vatan 
Azerbaijani Opposition to Take to Streets - Milliyet 
UN: 3 Million Earthquake Victims Homeless in Pakistan - 
Turkiye 
Russia to Set Up Security Fence along Chechnya Border - 
Turkiye 
Australia Hunts for Terrorists - Sabah 
US, China Agree on Textile Imports - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Gul to Meet Rice, Straw in Bahrain - Cumhuriyet 
Muslim World to Discuss its Future in Bahrain - Zaman 
EU: Turkey Slows Down Reforms - Radikal 
France Applies `Civil War' Rules against Rioters - Yeni 
Safak 
`Martial Law' in France - Radikal 
Villepin: Riots Have Nothing to do with Headscarves - 
Cumhuriyet 
Barzani: Kurds to Seek Independence if Iraq Goes to Civil 
War - Cumhuriyet 
US, EU Urge Baku to Investigate Election Fraud Claims - 
Radikal 
Azerbaijani Opposition to Hold Peaceful Rally in Baku - 
Zaman 
Russia to Build `Wall of Shame' at Chechnya Border - Yeni 
Safak 
US Religious Freedom Report: Anti-Christian Sentiment on 
Rise in Turkey - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Erdogan on Unrest in France:  `I invite the 4.5 million 
Turks living in European countries to remain calm in the 
face of acts of violence in Paris,' Prime Minister Tayyip 
Erdogan told his party group on Tuesday.  Erdogan said that 
those who claim to have faced discrimination and unjust 
treatment cannot acquire their rights by violence, by 
`attacking innocent people and their property.'  `It has 
become a global priority to join hands and establish a world 
of peace,' Erdogan said.  Erdogan said that Turks in Europe 
should integrate into the societies they live, but also 
urged governments to implement policies that will pave the 
way for `equal rights and opportunities for all parts of 
society.'  `Mankind should carefully consider the 
consequences of terrorism and violence, racism and 
discrimination, and the humiliation of religious beliefs,' 
he said.  Turkish diplomats in France have said that the 
Turkish community there has not joined in the rioting.  The 
unrest is being closely followed in Turkey, which is seeking 
to join the European Union despite strong public opposition 
by many European countries, including France.  On Monday, 
 
ANKARA 00006637  002 OF 005 
 
 
Erdogan had linked the riots to a ban on Muslim headscarves 
in French schools, saying it had contributed to Muslim 
immigrants' feelings of exclusion and had `provoked' the 
unrest.  Erdogan said yesterday that the press reports 
claiming he had identified the ban on Islamic headgear as 
the main cause for the riots had been `distorted,' adding 
that he did attribute the unrest to a single cause. 
 
Gul Due at `Forum for the Future' in Bahrain:  Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul will travel to Bahrain on November 11 
to attend a ministerial meeting of the Forum for the Future, 
papers report.  While in Bahrain, Gul is expected to meet 
with Secretary Rice and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw of 
Britain.  The meeting, which will be joined by the G-8 
industrialized nations, will be the second meeting of the 
Broader Middle East and North Africa Initiative (BMENAI.) 
Iran boycotted the first meeting, and is not expected to 
attend the meeting in Bahrain. 
 
Bush to Give the Middle East `Democracy Money':  The Bush 
Administration is to launch a new initiative in an effort to 
support democratization and economic development in the 
Middle East, "Milliyet" reports from Washington.  The US 
initiative, to be announced by Secretary Rice at the meeting 
in Bahrain on November 12, is being supported by financial 
contributions from several European countries and Turkey. 
The initiative to support regional democracy will be 
allotted 50 million USD, of which 35 million USD will be 
provided by the United States, 5 million by the EU, and 1 
million by Turkey.  Secretary Rice will also announce a 
second fund of more than 100 million USD for the development 
of small and medium-sized enterprises in the Middle East. 
Elizabeth Cheney is the `chief architect' of the US 
initiatives, "Milliyet" reports. 
 
US Report: Religious Freedoms Deteriorate in Turkey:  The US 
Report on International Religious Freedom for 2005, released 
yesterday by the State Department's Bureau of Democracy, 
Human Rights, and Labor claims that there has been a 
deterioration in respect for religious freedom in Turkey 
over the past year.  The report says that Muslims wishing to 
convert from Islam to another religions sometimes experience 
social harassment and violence from relatives and neighbors, 
and adds that headscarf restrictions remain in effect in 
universities and public schools.  It notes that members of 
religious minorities are effectively blocked from careers in 
state institutions.  The Directorate of Religious Affairs 
(Diyanet) initiated a public campaign against Christian 
missionary activity in the country, the report underlines, 
adding that high-level government officials made statements 
depicting missionaries as a threat.  The report also notes 
that there was an increase in anti-Christian media coverage, 
and that threats and vandalism against Christians and church 
facilities increased.  Meanwhile, the state-run Athens News 
Agency (ANA) said yesterday that the US report noted that 
last year, the Turkish government continued to shrug off 
appeals for the reopening of Halki Seminary in Istanbul. 
`Given the position of Ankara against the Ecumenical 
Patriarch Bartholomew I and the debates over the ecumenical 
character of the Patriarchate, the report's reference to the 
activities of the Patriarchate acquires particular 
importance,' ANA said. 
 
EU Reports on Turkey to be Released Today:  Dailies expect 
the 149-page EU progress report on Turkey to be released 
today to laud the performance of the Turkish economy, but to 
highlight shortcomings in the fight against corruption, the 
independence of the judiciary, the control of military 
spending, and the protection of religious freedoms.  The 
 
ANKARA 00006637  003.2 OF 005 
 
 
report claims that Turkey's reform process has slowed over 
the past year, and calls for accelerated progress on freedom 
of expression and religious minority issues.  The report 
questions why the High Broadcasting Board (RTUK) has still 
not issued permission for Kurdish language broadcasting on 
private television stations.  The report urges changes in 
military regulations that would reduce the influence of the 
military in politics.  The report says that military 
statements should be limited to military, defense, and 
security issues, and should be made under the auspices of 
the government.  The report argues that Deputy Chief of 
General Staff (TGS) General Ilker Basbug went too far with 
his comments regarding the EU progress report in November 
2004, and notes that in March 2005 the TGS released a 
statement criticizing `Nevruz' celebrations.  In April 2005, 
Chief of the TGS General Hilmi Ozkok made detailed comments 
on domestic and foreign policy issues.  The report further 
claims that the case filed for the closure of the Egitim-Sen 
teachers' union was filed under military pressure.  The 
accession partnership accord calls on Turkey to normalize 
ties with all EU countries, including Cyprus.  It also urges 
Turkey to speed up privatization, especially for state-owned 
banks. 
 
Talabani, Barzani on Kurds' Independence:  Turkish papers 
quote Iraqi President Jalal Talabani as stating in an 
interview with "La Repubblica" that an independent Kurdistan 
is `only a  dream.'  Talabani said the Kurds in the north 
are striving only for what is possible and achievable. 
`Democracy and federalism will strengthen the unity of Iraq. 
It is possible that this will constitute a model for the 
Middle East,' Talabani said.  Talabani noted that Kurds in 
Turkey must prove wise enough to take advantage of the 
policies pursued by Prime Minister Erdogan, who has pledged 
to resolve their problems in a democratic manner.  `Turkey's 
Kurds must avoid violence, condemn terrorism, and put an end 
to armed activities.  They must run for the Turkish 
parliament in the elections, and join the public debate in 
their effort to claim their rights.  That is the only way 
for Turkey's Kurds to win in the end,' the President of Iraq 
said.  Meanwhile, Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader 
Massoud Barzani told the London-based "As-Sark al-Avsat" 
that if civil war breaks out among Shiites and Sunnis in 
Iraq, the Kurds will inevitably seek `full independence.' 
Barzani added, however, that as long as the Sunnis and 
Shiites in Iraq comply with the new constitution, the 
Kurdish population in northern Iraq will respect it as well. 
 
US Allegedly Used Chemical Weapons in Fallujah:  Turkish 
dailies report that some US soldiers told the Italian 
broadcaster RAI that the US had used chemical weapons during 
the military operation launched against Fallujah last year. 
A documentary aired on RAI claimed that US authorities had 
removed the evidence that would have proven the use of 
`white phosphorus bombs' against civilians in Fallujah.  The 
US rejected the charges, saying that phosphorus bombs were 
used only to illuminate targets during clashes. 
 
Pentagon Prohibits Torture of Captives:  The US Defense 
Department issued a policy directive prohibiting the 
application of physical or mental torture during military 
interrogations of detainees from Afghanistan and Iraq, 
Turkish papers report.  The directive calls for the humane 
treatment of all captured personnel. 
 
Istanbul Mayor Sacks Aides:  Istanbul Mayor Kadir Topbas, in 
a surprise move, sacked his aides known to be close to Prime 
Minister Erdogan, papers report.  In a statement yesterday, 
Topbas announced that under a new system, other municipality 
 
ANKARA 00006637  004 OF 005 
 
 
officials will not be allowed to sign documents on behalf of 
the mayor of Istanbul.  Papers speculate that deputy mayor 
Idris Gulluce, Secretary-General Ramazan Evren and his 
deputy Mihmail Mangan were forced to resign over 
disagreements with Topbas and claims of irregularities in 
the municipal administration.  Gulluce had been criticized 
for signing a controversial decision to authorize 
construction of a mosque in the Goztepe neighborhood and a 
new bridge over the Bosphorus without consulting Topbas. 
The fact that the popularity of the ruling AK Party had 
declined by 13 percent in Istanbul was another factor in the 
decision. 
 
Germany Sells 298 Leopard-2 Tanks to Turkey:  Germany agreed 
to sell Turkey 298 surplus Leopard-2 tanks, German officials 
said yesterday.  The German Defense Ministry declined to 
give a price for the sale, but it is known that Berlin sold 
333 of the same tanks to Greece last August for 270 million 
Euros.  The sale of tanks to Turkey drew sharp criticism in 
the past due to concerns over Turkey's commitment to human 
rights and its treatment of its Kurdish minority.  Such 
concerns have eased in light of recent Turkish reforms 
implemented as part of the country's EU drive. 
 
Al-Qaida Seeks Turkish Recruits:  An organization of German 
policemen (BDK) said that al-Qaida had called on Turks to 
join Holy War (Jihad) in websites launched in Turkish, 
"Cumhuriyet" reports from Frankfurt.  BDK chief Klaus Jansen 
warned that the terror organization may succeed in 
convincing young Turks with its `poisonous' messages. 
Jansen noted that Turks account for 2.4 million of Germany's 
total Muslim population of 3.2 million.  He stressed that 
Germany could face riots similar to those now taking place 
in France. 
 
74 Turks Killed in Iraq Since March 2003:  Information 
issued by officials at the Habur border gate indicates that 
74 Turkish nationals have been killed in Iraq since the US- 
led invasion of the country in March 2003.  The 74 Turkish 
nationals killed in Iraq include drivers, businessmen, and 
laborers.  Thirty-six of those killed lost their lives in 
traffic accidents.  Mosul has proven to be the most 
dangerous place for Turks working in Iraq, according to the 
figures.  Five Turkish nationals are currently missing in 
Iraq: Seyhmus Ilan and Ibrahim Kilicparlar (Mardin,) Seyhmus 
Karatas (Diyarbakir,) Mehmet Nuri Kurtok (Sirnak,) and Halef 
Kunefeli (Sanliurfa.) 
 
Independent MPs Join AKP:  Former Republican People's Party 
(CHP) lawmakers Naci Aslan and Muharrem Eskiyapan joined the 
ruling AK Party (AKP) at a ceremony with PM Erdogan on 
Tuesday.  The current distribution of seats in the 
parliament is as follows:  AKP 357, CHP 154, ANAP 22, SHP 4, 
DYP 4, HYP 1, Independent 4, Vacant 4. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Paris Burning 
 
"France in the Sickbed" 
Sami Kohen wrote in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" (11/9): 
"The blazing flames in Paris have helped the people of 
France and all over the world to see the serious illness 
within the French system.  The main reason for the dangerous 
spread of these incidents lies in the integration model of 
the French Republic.  In theory, France considers all its 
citizens equal and aims to eliminate the distinct identities 
of its immigrants.  In practice, however, this policy 
discriminates against immigrants of African origin.  For 
example, these immigrants do not have equal opportunity for 
 
ANKARA 00006637  005 OF 005 
 
 
employment.  . So far, neither religion nor ideology appears 
to be a significant factor in these incidents.  In other 
words, this is neither a `Muslim uprising' nor a `French 
intifada.'  Representatives of the Muslims living in the 
ghettos are criticizing those involved in the violence. 
Turkish Associations in France are giving similar messages. 
So at this point there is no need to refer these incidents 
as an indication of a `clash of civilizations'.  Avoiding 
such incidents in the future depends on the establishment of 
order in the French suburbs and in other European 
countries." 
 
"This is a Civil War" 
Erdal Guven argued in the conservative "Tercuman" (11/9): 
"The events in France have gone beyond popular unrest and 
have turned into a civil war.  The reason for the bloodshed 
in the streets concerns the denial of minority rights in 
France. Local administrations have been provided increased 
authorities, and now have the option of imposing a curfew. 
French politicians, interestingly enough, always know how to 
give lessons in democracy to everyone except themselves. 
This is reflected in their discrimination among citizens of 
France.  The fact is that France has become one of the most 
dangerous countries in the world. . These events are now 
spreading to other countries in the EU.  The recent street 
riots caused by ethnic groups in Germany and Belgium 
demonstrate that some other EU countries are also not 
granting equal rights to all of their citizens.  This is all 
very interesting, and comes at a time when the European 
Commission issues its `progress report' on Turkey and talks 
about shortcomings in democratization and human rights in 
this country." 
 
MCELDOWNEY