05ANKARA967
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 000967 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
PM Erdogan: We Are Strategic Partners With US - Aksam 2/21 
Cicek: We Are Strategic Partners With US - Turkiye 
Erdogan, Bush to Meet Briefly in Brussels - Hurriyet 
Bush Tours Europe to Find Support - Aksam 
Bush, Chirac Urge Syria to Withdraw From Lebanon - Milliyet 
Le Figaro: Turkey Gradually Becoming Fundamentalist - 
Hurriyet 
TIME: US Bargains With Iraqi Resistance - Sabah 
Israel Releases Palestinians in Goodwill Gesture - Aksam 
Palestine Celebrates Release of 500 Prisoners - Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Bush Extends Olive Branch to Europe - Cumhuriyet 
Bush to Europe: No Force Can Pull Us Apart - Zaman 
Bush to Europe: Let's Start a New Era - Yeni Safak 
US Seeks Peace With `Old Continent' - Cumhuriyet 2/21 
No Scheduled Bush-Erdogan Meeting in Brussels - Cumhuriyet 
2/21 
Sunnis, Boycotters of Iraqi Polls, Want to Join Iraqi 
Politics - Zaman 
Iraqi Sunnis in Search of a New Strategy - Yeni Safak 
Zawahiri: Security of West Depends on Respect for Islam - 
Yeni Safak 
Turkish Cypriots Vote For Solution -- Talat Wins `TRNC' 
Election - Zaman 2/21 
Syria Prepares to Pull Out of Lebanon - Zaman 
Jewish Settlers Resist Withdrawal, Pose Threat to Peace - 
Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Cicek: Strain With US is Over:  PM Tayyip Erdogan and FM 
Abdullah Gul traveled to Brussels on Monday to attend the 
NATO summit meeting.  Papers speculate that Erdogan may meet 
with President Bush, and Gul with Secretary Rice over lunch 
in Brussels.  Gul is expected to convey to Rice Ankara's 
uneasiness about rising anti-Turkish stories in the American 
press, "Cumhuriyet" reports.  "Sabah" claims that the Turks 
will respond to the American request to enhance Ankara's 
contribution to the `NATO Training Implementation Mission' 
in Iraq by sending more officers.  On Monday, government 
spokesman Cemil Cicek said after a meeting of cabinet 
ministers that the US and Turkey have enjoyed an unbroken 
historical relationship stretching back more than half a 
century.  There have been some `fault lines' in the past, 
Cicek acknowledged, `but this is now over.' Cicek added that 
both countries would benefit from a continuation of the 
relationship at all levels.  Responding to a question about 
the unusually `soft' tone PM Erdogan used in evaluating 
bilateral ties before Secretary Rice's visit to Ankara, 
Cicek said the substance of such statements should be heeded 
rather than their style.  `Turkey values, as has been proven 
many times, its relations with the United States,' Cicek 
stressed.  On Sunday, PM Erdogan strongly denied news 
claiming a strain in ties with the US after he met with 
local businessmen in Turkey's southeastern province of 
Gaziantep: `Our strategic partnership with the United States 
continues.  Secretary Rice has said the same thing,' Erdogan 
underlined.  Monday's "Radikal" claims that Turkey's 
National Security Council (NSC) will look for ways at its 
February 25 meeting to `normalize' relations between the US 
and Turkey.  MFA Undersecretary Ali Tuygan is to visit 
Washington in March, followed by NSC Undersecretary Yigit 
Alpogan, "Radikal" reports. 
 
Turkish Cypriot Elections:  Republican Turkish Party (CTP) 
leader Mehmet Ali Talat secured 24 of the 50 seats in the 
`Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus' (TRNC) parliament 
after obtaining 44.5 percent of the vote, but failed to gain 
an outright majority to set up a government on his own.  His 
main rival, the National Unity Party (UBP) of former prime 
minister Dervis Eroglu, got 19 seats, while Talat's 
coalition partner, Serdar Denktas's Democrat Party (DP), won 
6 seats.  Papers expect Talat to once again form a coalition 
with DP.  Talat called on Greek Cypriot President 
Papadopoulos to agree to revive the stalled peace process. 
A spokesman for the Greek Government said on Monday that 
Greece hoped for a more `constructive' stance from the 
Turkish Cypriots in northern Cyprus. 
 
Britain Prepares for Direct Flights to `TRNC':  Britain is 
to launch direct flights to northern Cyprus after July 1, 
the date Britain will take over the EU term presidency, 
"Zaman" reports.  The article is based on a report in the 
"European Voice," a brussels-based publication.  The UK is 
working on a formula to begin charter flights to the north, 
as Ercan Airport in the `TRNC' is not recognized by the 
International Civic Aviation Organization. 
 
Greek, Armenian Lobbies Support WSJ Article Against Turkey: 
Conservative/opinion maker "Zaman" reports that the Greek 
and Armenian lobbies in the US have distributed a recent 
article, `The Sick Man of Europe --- Again,' by Robert L. 
Pollock of "The Wall Street Journal" to US congressmen who 
are close to their causes.  Many Armenians in the US have 
congratulated Pollock, but  reaction from the Turks has been 
harsh, "Zaman" notes. 
 
Iraqi Turkmen `Regret' Not Teaming Up With Kurds:  Iraqi 
Turkmen Front (ITF) chairman in Erbil, Abdulkadir Bezirgan, 
said the ITF made a mistake by not entering into an alliance 
with the Kurds in last month's election in Iraq, 
"Cumhuriyet" and "Zaman" report.  `We could have entered the 
Iraqi parliament on a joint list with the Kurds, and split 
to form our own group later,' Bezirgan said.  He added that 
a number of other Turkmen-based political groups had 
cooperated with the Kurds and achieved a better result. 
Bezirgan claimed that some 1 million votes cast by Turkmen 
had `disappeared.' 
 
Erdogan Names New Culture And Tourism Minister:  PM Erdogan 
on Monday named Atilla Koc, a 59-year-old former bureaucrat, 
as Turkey's new culture and tourism minister to replace 
Erkan Mumcu, who last week resigned from the AK Party. 
Erdogan's unscheduled, two-hour meeting with President Sezer 
led to speculation that a long-awaited cabinet reshuffle 
might have been discussed, but Erdogan made no comment after 
the meeting.  The press speculates that Erdogan had proposed 
to move State Minister Besir Atalay to the Ministry of 
Education.  Under the alleged plan, current Education 
Minister Huseyin Celik would have become Minister of 
tourism, and Koc would have been appointed as State Minister 
to replace Atalay.  President Sezer reportedly rejected the 
formula.  Meanwhile, Malatya deputy Suleyman Saribas, a 
figure close to Mumcu, resigned from AKP yesterday.  More 
resignations will follow soon, papers report. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Transatlantic Relations 
 
"US Uneasiness" 
Melih Asik argued in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (2/22): "In 
fact, the anti-Americanism level in Turkey is not much 
different from that in France and Germany.  The BBC opinion 
poll rated anti-American sentiment at 82 percent in Turkey, 
whereas Germany and France came in at 77 and 75 percent, 
respectively.  Despite the lack of a significant difference, 
the US has chosen to `deal with' Turkey on this issue - not 
with the others.  Turkey has been placed under Washington's 
psychological pressure.  Obviously the US wants to put 
Turkey in the dock in order to wring some concessions out of 
this psychology - namely, the use of Incirlik Airbase.  If 
Turkey becomes influenced by these accusations and takes 
side with the US, it would mean being a partner to new 
massacres the US intends to carry out in Iran and Syria." 
 
"President Bush's Holy Mission" 
Uluc Gurkan wrote in the government-controlled, 
sensationalist "Star" (2/22): "US President Bush believes he 
has a holy mission to reshape the Islamic world in the 
Middle East.  He is on a mission from God, and to move it 
forward he has to launch new strikes against Syria and Iran. 
This is what he believes, but he does not know how to get it 
done. . If Bush manages to persuade EU leaders in Brussels, 
and if the EU identifies a common goal in the Middle East 
and acts together with the US, Turkey will have to follow 
suit.  Turkey's position will mostly be shaped by the stance 
of the EU, which could lead us into an open-ended adventure 
in this region.  Turkey should produce its own national 
policies instead of listening to what the US is saying. By 
creating a national policy, Turkey will be capable of 
affecting both the US and the EU.  Let us not forget how 
Turkey managed to overcome the embargo following the 1974 
military operation in Cyprus by sticking to its national 
policy line." 
 
"Turkish-American Relations Have Sunk Below the Level of 
March 1" 
Sedat Ergin observed in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (2/22): 
"Listening to Undersecretary Feith helps us to draw a 
conclusion regarding the US view of Turkish-American ties. 
Feith's logic is shaped by a judgment that insists that the 
Turks are mistaken.  He has a categorical view drawn in 
black and white terms.  This reflects the sentiment at the 
Pentagon that the US side has done everything correctly. 
Ankara, however, has lost trust over US actions, especially 
concerning US policy for Iraq, which poses a security threat 
to Turkey.  There are unkept promises including President 
Bush's commitment to work together with Turkey to prevent 
northern Iraq becoming a haven for terrorist attacks against 
Turkey.  Northern Iraq is still a safehaven for the PKK and, 
due to the increase in terrorist attacks in Turkey by the 
PKK, the US suffers from a credibility gap here. . The US 
also ignores the fact that Kurdish groups are working toward 
changing Kirkuk's demographic character in a systematic way. 
. The Bush administration continues to see the world through 
blinders, and the result is a vicious circle in bilateral 
ties.  The increase in conspiracy theories against the US in 
Turkey might stem from the growing mistrust of America among 
the Turkish public.  The US had better think about that." 
 
"A Subconscious Act" 
Okay Gonensin observed in the sensational-mass appeal Vatan 
(2/22):  "The Americans have become concerned about the anti- 
American atmosphere in Turkey.  US Secretary of State Rice 
was sent to Turkey in order to ease this tension.  Americans 
have great faith in statistics.  It is obvious that 
Washington is taking into consideration recent poll results 
showing that the percentage of Turks who are anti-American 
is higher than elsewhere in Europe.  The source of the anti- 
Americanism in Turkey is, this time, Ankara.  Top officials 
of the AKP government, due to their past, have 
subconsciously revealed their anti-Americana and anti-Jewish 
feelings.  This kind of obsession is fostered by the radical 
right in Turkey.  It has always been like this.  The radical 
left has always been anti-American as well, but has been 
careful not to let that spill over into anti-Semitism.  It 
is one thing to criticize US policy in the Middle East.  It 
is a different thing entirely to be  anti-American.  The 
same goes for Israel's policies in Palestine and anti- 
Semitism.  The difference here is not a nuance, but a basic 
principle." 
 
"Anti-Semitism" 
Umur Talu wrote in the mass appeal "Sabah" (02/20):  "So 
`the world's most influential newspaper' has called me anti- 
Semitic.  But I'm not laughing this time - I'm angry.  All I 
wrote was that Ambassador Edelman had had a hand in writing 
a report during the administration of George Bush Sr. that 
advocated an interventionist US foreign policy supportive of 
Israel.  I asked the question whether the Ambassador's roots 
may have played a role in this.  I never mentioned 
ethnicity, and certainly not Judaism, and yet I am accused 
of being anti-Semitic.  In fact, I have always supported the 
civilian and military opposition in Israel.  Jews have had a 
tragic history, including being the victims of genocide. 
There are some people - mostly in the Islamic world, but 
also in the US and Europe - who see a Jewish conspiracy 
behind every event. Douglas Feith, the Pentagon official who 
warned Turkey over the weekend, is being forced to resign 
because he wrote a report for the Israeli Prime Minister in 
which he proposed an aggressive Israeli foreign policy line. 
Did his roots play a role in this?  May, maybe not.  But 
when a secret document leaks from his office to the Israeli 
state, the question does come to mind.  It was probably at 
least one factor.  Hardliners like Pollock and Ambassador 
Edelman surely must understand this." 
 
"Criticizing the United States, and Fooling Ourselves" 
Yasemin Congar wrote from Washington in the mainstream 
"Milliyet" (02/20):  "There is a new report, published by 
the New York University Faculty of Law and a group of 
lawyers who defend clients at Guantanamo, that I would urge 
all turks to read.  It documents very persuasively that the 
United States has legitimized the use of torture in the 
Global War on Terrorism.  This is a legitimate criticism on 
one of the most important issues raised by the occupation of 
Iraq.  Criticism like this is not what is bothering US 
officials who deal with Turkey.  I cannot remember a single 
US official, for example, who has ever complained about the 
lack of action by the US on the PKK issue.  What concerns US 
officials is criticism in Turkey that is based on fantasy, 
lies, paranoia, ideological blindness, and conspiracy 
theories.  This is different from what we see in Europe, or 
even in the Arab world.  When political leaders produce 
phony US Government documents and claim there is a CIA plot 
against them, when writers accuse the CIA and Mossad of 
responsibility in the 9/11 attacks and the assassination of 
the former Lebanese Prime Minister, when journalists believe 
unquestioningly everything that is told to them by Turkmen 
groups about Kirkuk and northern raq, when Turkish generals 
accuse US forces in the murder of 5 Turkish security 
personnel in Mosul with no evidence, when politicians 
describe operations in Tal Afar and Fallujah as `genocide,' 
when Turks speculate about who may or may not be Jewish 
based on their surnames, and when our politicians call into 
question the legitimacy of the Iraq elections while the UN 
Secretary General and other world leaders say they could be 
 
SIPDIS 
a hopeful turning point for Iraq - these are the kinds of 
things that have brought us to this point.  This kind of 
anti-Americanism does more harm to Turkey than anyone else. 
Do we even see this picture?" 
 
"Robert Pollock's Column" 
Kursat Bumin wrote in the Islamist daily "Yeni Safak" 
(02/20):  "  Let me be clear:  there is plenty in current US 
foreign policy (let alone the past) that deserves to be 
criticized mercilessly.  I am not recalling the points that 
Pollock made because I agree with his article.  But we need 
to accept that some of the points he makes are not 
completely over the top.  Some of what he wrote - that the 
AKP is sneaking Islamism into Turkish politics - is more 
than over the top.  But Pollock is correct when he talks 
about some in Turkey who try to attribute everything 
(including the recent tsunami) to the United States, or on 
US support for the `Jewish agenda.'  His observations about 
Turkey seeing a conspiracy behing the use of the term 
`ecumenical Patriarch' is also on the mark.  So Pollock's 
column is essentially a blend of facts and some wrong-headed 
analysis. The fact that he identified our newspaper as one 
of the chief offenders is also not surprising.  I have been 
told by US officials, albeit in more polite and refined 
terms, that "Yeni Safak" is regarded as an anti-American 
paper.  My main point is this: there is plenty of legitimate 
criticism of the United States - for its ridiculous claim 
that it is bringing democracy to Afghanistan and Iraq, for 
its irresponsibility as a superpower to sign the Kyoto 
Protocol, and a number of other things.  These criticisms 
are seen elsewhere as well, including in Europe.  But this 
criticism takes on a different dimension here.  In fact, we 
need to pay attention to this - we seem just as angry in our 
criticisms of the European Union!  Is Ismet Berkan right? 
Have we really become a society of paranoids?" 
 
EDELMAN