05ANKARA4425
TRACKER 23827 - REPORT ON U.S. SPEAKER DANIEL
Mon Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

011104Z Aug 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/G/EUR - CSIEMONH; IIP/T/GIC - CLACOVEY; EUR/PPD - 
CTEAL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OIIP SCUL TU
SUBJECT:  TRACKER 23827 - REPORT ON U.S. SPEAKER DANIEL 
JACOBS, JULY 18 - 22, 2005 
 
 
¶1.  DESCRIPTION OF THE ACTIVITY: U.S. Speaker Daniel Jacobs 
visited Turkey July 18-22, 2005, for a four-day speaker 
program that brought him into contact with government, 
business, NGO, and academic audiences for presentations and 
discussions of U.S. Environmental Policy with special 
emphasis on climate change issues.  Jacobs was warmly 
welcomed at the Turkish Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
on Tuesday, July 19, where he gave a briefing to an audience 
of thirty-five participants largely made up of officials 
from the Ministry of Environment and Forestry and the 
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources; officials from the 
Ministry of Public Works, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Environment Section and other government agencies were also 
present.  Jacobs' presentation gave a concise and up-to-date 
overview of U.S. environmental policies related to climate 
change, highlighting federal and state responses as well as 
private-sector efforts to address issues of emissions 
control and clean energy sources.  Jacobs' presentation 
covered the G-8 Summit communiqu on climate change. 
 
That afternoon, an audience of thirty academics, NGO 
representatives, and business people turned out at an Ankara 
think tank for a presentation.  At both venues, 
participants' questions reflected keen interest in the 
issues and a receptivity to U.S. perspectives. Jacobs, who 
teaches courses on U.S. Environmental Policy and Law at 
George Washington University, also spoke to a group of 
Turkish lawyers about the role of the courts in enforcement 
of environmental legislation in the U.S. at an evening 
program at the Turkish-American Association.  In Istanbul, 
July 21-22, Jacobs made his presentation to the Turkish 
Industrialists and Businessmen's Association (TUSIAD) 
Environment Working Group; to TEMA, one of Turkey's largest 
environmental NGOs; and to a roundtable of academics and 
environmentalists.  He was interviewed briefly by a 
journalist from "Zaman," Turkey's leading Islamist-oriented 
 
¶2.  JUSTIFICATION AND OBJECTIVES:   In recent years in 
Turkey, the priority for the government has been economic 
growth.  As a result, Turkey is building up an enormous 
liability of economic costs it will face in the future with 
regard to environmental issues.  Turkey is far behind other 
European countries in efforts to address and reduce the 
causes of Global Climate Change.  Only last year did Turkey 
ratify the UNFCCC.  As a prospective member of the EU, 
Turkey will be forced to undertake the obligations of the 
Kyoto treaty, probably before full membership.  The public 
is not well-informed about the issue, and government 
policymakers and the business community are ill-prepared to 
undertake programs to reduce Green House Gas emissions. 
Moreover, as a result of the EU's December 17, 2004, 
decision to begin accession negotiations and a rising tide 
of anti-American feelings, U.S. policy on climate change and 
the leading role played by U.S. scientists and experts in 
addressing climate change are overlooked or dismissed.  The 
speaker program was organized to help counter some of the 
inaccurate portrayals of climate change issues in general 
and U.S. policy specifically; to encourage Turkey's 
participation in U.S.-led climate change initiatives; and to 
build support for U.S. positions. 
 
¶4.  AUDIENCES REACHED: Representatives of key ministries 
with environment-related portfolios; members of Turkey's 
leading environmental NGOs and business leaders in TUSIAD, 
an influential independent non-profit organization dedicated 
to the sound development of a competitive market and a 
democratic society in Turkey; academics working in 
environment-related fields; and law professionals, including 
practicing attorneys and academics in legal fields. 
Representational events gave Jacobs an opportunity to 
interact with Turkish interlocutors on a more informal 
basis. 
 
¶5.  RESULTS: Outstanding.  In a meeting with Embassy 
officers following Jacobs' presentation, the Deputy Under 
Secretary of the Ministry said that the Ministry wishes to 
 
SIPDIS 
have close cooperation with the United States on 
environmental matters, including such activities as 
workshops on drafting environmental legislation; 
consultation and workshops on disposal of wastes, including 
medical waste, solid waste from agricultural uses, and 
hazardous waste;  joint projects dealing with monitoring 
and control of industrial emissions; and inviting the U.S. 
environmental sector to invest in Turkey. 
 
Jacobs was an excellent speaker.  His presentations, 
delivered with the use of up-to-date and well-prepared power 
point visuals, elicited positive responses from officials 
familiar with climate change issues who were unaware of U.S. 
efforts in this area.  More than one participant stated, "We 
thought that climate change was not something the U.S. is 
interested in.  We now see that this is not the case," 
saying that they were surprised and pleased to learn of the 
many positive steps taken by both the public and private 
sectors in the United States with respect to emissions 
control and other climate change issues. Jacobs' 
presentations were  balanced, clear and substantive, 
covering issues from all perspectives. He really shone, 
however, in the Q&A and discussion sessions.  As a former 
trial attorney in the Environment and Natural Resources 
Division of the U.S. Department of Justice, Jacobs has 
worked as lead counsel in complex litigation related to 
enforcement of federal environmental statues.  His responses 
to complex and difficult questions were informative, 
credible and positive.  This program was very well received, 
and the credit belongs to Dan Jacobs. 
 
¶6.  NON-USG SOURCES OF IN-COUNTRY FUNDING: All sessions were 
co-sponsored either by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry or by an NGO or other organization, which provided 
the venues and logistical set-ups. 
 
¶7.  QUALITY OF U.S. SUPPORT AND AGENCY OFFICE:  Outstanding. 
Post once again thanks Cathy Siemonh at IIP/G/EUR and the 
program officers in IIP/T/GIC for their support for this 
project. 
MCELDOWNEY