06ANKARA2586
TIP IN TURKEY: FULBRIGHT SCHOLAR OUTLINES RESEARCH,
Tue May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: FULBRIGHT SCHOLAR OUTLINES RESEARCH, 
RECOMMENDS FURTHER FUNDING, FOCUS ON TRAINING 
 
Ref: (A) Ankara 2206; (B) Ankara 628; (C) 05 Ankara 7386 
 
¶1. (U) Ambassador hosted Fulbright scholar Dr. Cindy J. 
Smith May 5 for a lecture and discussion on trafficking in 
persons (TIP), attended by more than 60 government 
officials, international and domestic organization 
representatives, academics and others.  Smith, from the 
University of Baltimore, outlined her eight months of 
research with the Turkish National Police (TNP) studying TIP 
in Turkey, and gave recommendations for ways to address the 
problem.  She urged that programs such as those undertaken 
by the International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
continue, particularly focusing on training of police and 
court officials in prevention, protection and prosecution. 
 
¶2. (U) Smith reported in her lecture that she has conducted 
23 interviews and reviewed police files.  Emphasizing that 
further research was necessary, Smith presented the 
following preliminary findings: 
 
-- traffickers in Turkey typically control between one and 
three women and are often couples; 
 
-- approximately half of the traffickers are non-Turkish 
women, some of whom were trafficked in the past, and who 
appear to have played the primary role in trafficking women 
from their own home countries (male traffickers were 
predominantly Turkish); 
 
-- it was difficult to detect a connection to organized 
crime, given the small numbers of victims each group ran, 
though some evidence of informal cooperation among 
traffickers existed; and 
 
-- traffickers often made the victims sign a work contract 
and give up their passport. 
 
¶3. (U) Dr. Smith made four primary recommendations: (1) stop 
trying to estimate the numbers involving women trafficked or 
the money involved; (2) carry out further research into the 
particulars of trafficking here and elsewhere; (3) take a 
regional approach to the problem; and (4) conduct more 
training of police and court officials.  She argued that, 
while estimates on women trafficked or money involved 
initially may have helped officials and the international 
community mobilize to deal with TIP, focus on numbers today 
takes away valuable time and energy from dealing with the 
problem.  She called for further research to get a more 
accurate picture.  While praising Turkish officials' efforts 
to date, she also emphasized that a regional approach to 
combating TIP would be useful.  Most importantly, she argued 
for increased training of police and court officials, 
particularly relating to techniques to assure the 
prosecution of traffickers. 
 
¶4. (U) The liveliest debate ensued from Dr. Smith's 
recommendation that a focus on the numbers be eliminated. 
TNP Director of Foreigners, Refugees and Border Points 
Mehmet Terzioglu, who has bristled at exaggerated IOM 
estimates, agreed that a focus on practical issues should 
now take priority.  He and other TNP officials emphasized 
their efforts at regional cooperation, the success of the 
157 hotline, and agreed that further training would be 
welcome and useful.  Terzioglu reiterated his willingness to 
work with all other parties, particularly IOM.  IOM and NGO 
representatives defended their estimates and emphasized the 
importance of a regional approach.  IOM also made a plea for 
additional funding, as their victim's assistance program is 
in imminent danger of being closed due to lack of funds. 
 
¶5. (U) Comment: The strong attendance by Turkish officials 
and lengthy debate, along with the government's inclusion of 
human trafficking as a terrorist crime in its draft anti- 
terror bill (ref A), make clear how engaged the GOT 
continues to be in combating trafficking in persons. 
Another indication of engagement is that PM Erdogan has 
agreed to meet with IOM head Marielle Lindstrom and to 
support IOM efforts to raise funds.  At the same time, the 
Turks still require assistance to continue progress.  Dr. 
Smith's call for further training - particularly that aimed 
at helping prosecute the traffickers themselves - provides 
more compelling evidence that programs such as IOM's should 
continue to receive support.  Overall, this event served to 
focus attention on an important issue in Turkey that is 
usually lost in public debate on other foreign policy and 
domestic issues.  End Comment