06ANKARA1813
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Apr 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3016
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1813/01 0951235
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051235Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4542
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7067
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 0243
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0615
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5199
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4910
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1522
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMIUU/CDRUSAE IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001813 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 2006 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Parliament Discuss Violence in Southeast Turkey 
All papers:  Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu yesterday 
told a parliament gathering to discuss rising terror in 
southeast Turkey that talks were underway with Denmark to 
ban the Copenhagen-based Kurdish broadcaster Roj-TV.  Aksu 
said following the killing of 14 PKK terrorists by security 
forces in Bingol on March 25, Roj-TV had provoked people to 
rally for protest in the cities in the region and in 
Istanbul.  In the incidents, 15 were killed and 418 
arrested, Aksu said.  The main opposition CHP leader Deniz 
Baykal urged the government to take effective measures 
against terror, and called for direct state investments in 
southeast Turkey.  "It is impossible to solve the problem by 
dividing the nation along ethnic lines," Baykal said.  Prime 
Minister Tayyip Erdogan said in response to the request for 
a meeting by Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP that the DTP 
should first declare that the PKK is a terrorist 
organization.  Lawyer Hasip Kaplan, the deputy chairman of 
the DTP, told the press that Hamas was on the list of terror 
organizations, but that the AKP government met with its 
representatives.  Kaplan said that the AKP was adhering to a 
double-standard when on the one hand it wanted DTP to 
recognize the the PKK as terrorists while on the other hand 
holding meetings themselves with Hamas. 
 
Papers report two new investigations have been launched 
against the Mayor of Diyarbakir, Osman Baydemir, for 
propagandizing in support of an outlawed organization, and 
for giving municipal vehicles to PKK members during the 
rallies.  Police on Tuesday detained four provincial 
administrators of DTP in Diyarbakir. 
 
Concerns over New Turkish Anti-Terror Bill 
Radikal reports the EU welcomed the statement by Justice 
Minister Cemil Cicek that Turkey would adjust its definition 
of terrorism to fit EU rules while reforming its anti-terror 
law.  EU said it will give Turkey all necessary support, 
calling on the AKP government to stress human rights during 
the process.  Leftist Birgun, underlining intentions for 
restriction of travel, communications and some other areas 
in southeast Turkey, claims the new anti-terror bill drafted 
by the government would pave the way to emergency rule in 
the mainly Kurdish region.  Jurists said the bill included 
tighter measures against terrorism than another 
controversial anti-terror bill adopted by Britain. 
 
Serdar Turgut wrote in the tabloid Aksam on the draft anti- 
terror bill that it is normal and the rule of democracy that 
there will be differences of opinion between the civilian 
authority and the military in Turkey.  "These kinds of 
differences should not be exaggerated.  Everyone should 
understand that certain concessions should be made in order 
to fight against terrorism.  The AKP Government is rather 
hesitant to give any concessions because there are promises 
given to the EU, plus, the AKP is concerned that some of the 
concessions could affect religious freedom.  We can 
understand both these concerns but no one should put these 
concerns before the State's rights.  If one surrenders to 
this kind of concern, then terrorist activities will explode 
in the country.  The draft terrorism law shows that the 
civil authority and the military have already overcome the 
differences and agreed on the draft." 
 
Gul on Violence in Southeast Turkey, Iran 
All papers:  On Tuesday, Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul told 
media representatives in Ankara that a new wave of reforms 
would be disclosed soon.  Gul noted terrorist activities 
 
ANKARA 00001813  002 OF 004 
 
 
increase when there are favorable developments in the 
country like local broadcasts in the Kurdish language in 
southeast Turkey.  "We must not fall into the trap of the 
PKK.  The only way to live together in Turkey is with 
democracy; the terrorist organization aims to disrupt 
democratic and economic developments in Turkey," Gul said. 
The FM stressed that Turkey opposed the emergence of a 
nuclear power in its region, adding that later this week he 
would discuss with Turkish ambassadors and diplomats the 
recent developments in Iran.  Gul noted the US favored a 
diplomatic solution to the Iranian problem.  Turkey and Iran 
have the right to use nuclear energy for civilian purposes, 
Gul said, quoting IAEA chief Muhammad al-Baradei as saying 
that Turkey needed five nuclear power plants. 
 
Kirkuk Census in July Next Year 
Cumhuriyet reports the program of the new government to be 
formed in Iraq requires that in 2007, a census be held in 
Kirkuk on July 31 followed by a referendum on November 15. 
 
Bryza Visits Ankara 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Vatan, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman, Yeni 
Safak and others:  Deputy Assistant Secretary of State 
Matthew Bryza warned after wrapping up meetings in the 
Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) Turkey should meet its 
responsibility of opening its ports and airports to the 
Greek Cypriots, and called on the EU to end the isolation of 
Turkish Cypriots.  Bryza said it was up to the Greek Cypriot 
side to convince the UN Secretary General that they are 
ready to reengage in talks for a settlement.  Bryza said the 
US was doing everything it can with the Europeans to cut the 
support that is going to the PKK from Europe.  Bryza added 
that the US believed the Copenhagen-based Kurdish 
broadcaster Roj TV should be closed. 
 
Bakoyannis Meets Papadopoulos 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman and others 
report during her visit to Nicosia, the Greek Foreign 
Minister Dora Bakoyannnis briefed President Papadopolus 
about her talks in the US with Secretary Rice and UNSYG 
Annan.  Bakoyannis said Cyprus need to make use of the new 
momentum on the issue, urging Papadopoluos not to stay away 
form the negotiating table.  She also urged Turkey to meet 
its responsibilities and open Turkish ports and airspace to 
the Greek Cypriots.  Papadopoulos said if Ankara does not do 
so, a crisis between Turkey and the EU will be seen during 
the evaluation of the accession process in October. 
 
Ambassador Wilson on US-Turkey Ties 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman, Yeni 
Safak and others:  US Ambassador in Ankara, Ross Wilson, 
told a meeting of Turkish-American Businessmen Council 
(TABA) in Istanbul that Turkey made unbelievable reforms in 
judiciary, that state security courts and crimes committed 
against the state were scrapped, and that trials for torture 
began proceeding faster.  Cumhuriyet commented Wilson did 
not hide that there were problems in ties with Turkey, and 
stressed the partnership should be redefined.  Wilson said 
the Hamas visit to Turkey had caused disappointment in 
Washington, adding that bilateral ties in general had been 
"disappointing" over the past few years.  "We have been 
trying to rebuild the relationship over the course of the 
last 8-9 months," Wilson said. 
 
Returning home from a visit to the United States, Osman 
Ulagay writes in the mainstream Milliyet that just like the 
Bush Administration, the AKP government and PM Erdogan has 
entered into a period full of difficulties.  "AKP government 
relations continue to deteriorate with the EU, US and with 
 
ANKARA 00001813  003 OF 004 
 
 
Turkish voters which carried the party to power in the last 
elections.  On the other hand, the Bush Administration is 
going through a very hard period.  The fiasco in Iraq 
decreased American people's support for Bush to thirty 
percent; the Bush Administration was unable to determine a 
policy against Iran; there was great disappointment with the 
Hamas victory in Palestine and moreover, almost all of the 
South American leaders are anti-American.  Anything could be 
expected from a US Administration which is feeling cornered. 
If the AKP government puts further distance between itself 
and the US Administration just to give a message to its 
voters, we can end up in a rather different position in our 
relationship with the US.  And, it is not easy to guess who 
is going to benefit from all these developments." 
 
Citigroup Wants Turkey's Akbank 
Hurriyet cites a Wall Street Journal report claiming the US- 
based Citigroup, after losing Turkish Finansbank to the 
Greek National Bank, was now looking to buy the Sabanci 
Group's Akbank.  Radikal reports the Greek National Bank 
said after the purchase of Euro 2.3 billion that they had 
made an investment in Turkey's future.  The paper also 
carries the Greek daily To Vima comment that the purchase 
was a "helping hand" extended by PM Karamanlis to PM 
Erdogan. 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 8 AM 
 
Domestic News 
- Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said a new democratization 
package would be unveiled soon despite the rise in terror 
attacks.  Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu told the 
parliament that the PKK received international support.  CHP 
leader Deniz Baykal claimed some political movements and 
municipality officials were linked to the PKK. 
 
- Turkish jandarma found 10 kg of A-4 plastic explosives 
concealed in a sack in a graveyard in Istanbul, the 
Governor's Office said. 
 
- Istanbul Greek Patriarchate said the EU should press 
Turkey to recognize the ecumenical status of the 
Patriarchate. 
 
International News 
- PKK militants attacked Turkish businesses and shops in 
Berlin and London. 
 
- Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis paid a two-day 
visit to south Cyprus. 
 
- The Czech Senate will host a conference on Armenian 
genocide claims next week despite Turkish efforts to block 
the gathering. 
 
- The court trying Saddam Hussein said the former Iraqi 
dictator will face new charges of genocide against Kurds in 
the 1980s. 
 
- A federal jury has decided Zacarias Moussaoui, the only 
man on trial in the US for involvement in 9/11 attacks, was 
fit for execution. 
 
Economy News 
- EU to provide Euro 2 billion support for Turkish farmers. 
 
- Foreigners bought 21,000 homes in the Aegean region of 
 
ANKARA 00001813  004 OF 004 
 
 
Turkey over the last two years. 
 
- The World Economic Forum (WEF) will gather in Istanbul on 
November 23-24. 
 
 
 Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
  http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
MCELDOWNEY