06ANKARA2242
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2592
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2242/01 1141310
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241310Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5052
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7123
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 0360
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0671
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5227
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4940
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1555
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, APRIL 21, 2006 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
 
All papers:  Speaker of the Turkish Parliament Bulent Arinc 
said on the occasion of National Sovereignty Day (April 23) 
that there is no regime problem in Turkey, but there is a 
dispute over who controls the regime.  Arinc claimed that 
some state institutions are resisting reforms.  The 
parliament's functions are being restricted, Arinc charged, 
citing as an example the exclusion of the parliament from 
the preparation of the National Security Policy Document, 
also known as "the secret constitution of Turkey."  He said 
it implied that a secret and antidemocratic body is ruling 
Turkey.  Arinc complained that it has been impossible to 
eliminate a "problem-causing institution" such as the Higher 
Education Council (YOK) due to reactions from the elitist 
and anti-reform groups in Turkey.  Referring to the 
headscarf issue, the Parliament Speaker said secularism 
needs to be redefined, that the state cannot ban one sector 
of the society from exercising public rights that should be 
valid for everyone. 
 
Addressing the parliament the same day, the main opposition 
CHP leader Deniz Baykal lashed out at the government for 
politicizing state cadres, calling for the protection of the 
republic and secularism.  "The fact is that religious 
exploitation backed by the government continues to prevail, 
and it has become essential to protect the republic. 
Democracy cannot be strengthened by destroying the 
republic," Baykal stressed.  The ruling AK Party Deputy 
Chairman Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat said Arinc's speech was 
"excellent" and "a real political manifesto."  The CHP 
lawmakers blamed Arinc for creating tensions. 
 
General Ozkok: Turkish Troop Movement in the Southeast 
Routine 
All papers:  The Chief of the Turkish General Staff (TGS,) 
General Hilmi Ozkok, said at a reception held in Ankara that 
Turkish troop movements on the borders with Iraq and Iran 
were "routine."  On the possibility of cross border 
incursions into northern Iraq,  Ozkok said Turkey would 
avail itself of its rights if conditions required such a 
military operation.  Ozkok emphasized that the right to hot 
pursuit of terrorists was determined by the UN Security 
Council resolutions.  Papers continued reporting over the 
weekend that some 150,000 soldiers are being deployed in 
southeast Turkey, near the Iraqi border ahead of major anti- 
terror operations against the PKK in northern Iraq.  On the 
decision to disbar Ferhat Sarikaya, the Van Prosecutor who 
drafted the Semdinli indictment that charged the Land Forces 
Commander General Yasar Buyukanit for carrying out illegal 
military operations in southeast Turkey, Ozkok said the 
judiciary made a decision through its own free will, and 
that it is out of the question that the military applied 
pressure on the judiciary. 
 
President Abbas in Ankara 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others:  Palestinian Authority Chairman Mahmoud Abbas, 
who arrived in Ankara on a state visit yesterday, said he 
will discuss what Turkey can do to ease the enormous 
economic hardships Palestinian people faced.  Abbas will 
meet with President Sezer, Parliament Speaker Arinc, Foreign 
Minister Gul, and the main opposition leader Baykal on 
Monday, and meet with Prime Minister Erdogan, Turkish 
businessmen, and the press on Tuesday. 
Sabah says that Abbas will sign an agreement for financial 
aid to Palestine.  The aid will be controlled by Abbas, not 
by the Hamas government.  Abbas might hold a meeting with 
 
ANKARA 00002242  002 OF 003 
 
 
Secretary Rice on Monday, Sabah says. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Secretary Rice Due in Ankara 
 
SIPDIS 
All papers report over the weekend and today that during her 
call on Ankara on Tuesday, Secretary Rice will discuss Iran, 
but will not ask the Turks for air bases to use in 
operations.  Turks will tell Rice to wait and see the 
outcome of diplomatic efforts regarding Iran, urging the 
American side to seek legitimacy prior to a military 
operation.  Rice will urge Turkey to refrain from moves 
aimed at easing international pressure on Tehran.  Rice is 
expected to say that the US was cooperating with Turkey by 
sharing intelligence information, but that no military 
action against the PKK would be possible for the time being. 
Rice will also stress that Hamas is a terrorist 
organization, but is expected to note that Turkey had given 
the right messages to Hamas during the Palestinian group's 
Ankara visit.  Foreign Minister Gul is expected to tell 
Secretary Rice that it was Turkey's responsibility to work 
 
SIPDIS 
for a peaceful settlement on the crisis with Iran, stressing 
that Turkey has been telling Tehran that its policies are 
wrong.  Gul will defend the meetings Turks held with Hamas, 
saying that they were necessary to block the radical group 
from further radicalization.  Gul will also stress that 
Turkey's patience was running out on the PKK, and that all 
options for eliminating the terrorist threat would be 
considered if the US does not take the necessary measures to 
crush the terrorist organization.  The Turks and Americans 
are expected discuss Iraq and Cyprus as well.  Turkey 
appreciates US efforts to help ease the isolation of the 
Turkish Cypriots, but expects Washington to do more, say 
papers. 
 
Tufan Turenc, commenting in Hurriyet has low expectations 
for the visit: "It is very unlikely that there will be a 
tangible result from the Rice visit.  The US and Turkey 
currently have different agenda priorities.  The Bush 
administration is obsessively dealing with Iran as an 
immediate priority.  From Turkey's angle, the US has no 
chance of gaining sympathy from Turkish people unless it 
keeps its promises regarding the PKK.  The US should either 
solve the PKK problem on its own or should let Turkey handle 
it.  This is the clear fact that the US administration 
should face." 
 
Washington-based Ali Aslan, writing Islamist-opinion maker 
Zaman, wants Secretary Rice to bring the issues of human 
rights and democracy back to the agenda with Turkey: 
"Washington has always pursued a double standard when it 
comes to controversial figures.  Washington expresses 
discontent when certain countries' behavior serves its 
interests, and keeps a strategic silence when it does not. 
This policy has also been applied to Turkey.  The anti- 
democratic structure was ignored by Washington during the 
entire cold war era.  The Bush administration is still 
maintaining a strategic silence on Turkey's internal affairs 
related to undemocratic practices.  Let's hope that Dr. 
Rice, during her Ankara visit, brings up human rights and 
democracy issues which have been off the bilateral agenda 
for a long time. " 
 
Washington-based Milliyet columnist Yasemin Congar believes 
that the Rice visit will provide an opportunity for Ankara 
and Washington to "enhance the bilateral dialogue about the 
future of Iraq and also will create a chance to harmonize 
bilateral rhetoric on the Iran issue." However, Congar warns 
"Rice should not be expected to express support for Turkey's 
intention to conduct a cross border operation in northern 
Iraq.  She is not going to give a green light for that. 
Even though the US has been more vocal regarding 
 
ANKARA 00002242  003 OF 003 
 
 
comprehensive cooperation against PKK, this does not mean a 
brand new radical step will be taken.  The US will not 
approve a cross border operation by Turkey in Iraq which 
would take place despite Baghdad and Barzani's opposition." 
 
TV News 
(NTV, 8.00 a.m.) 
 
Domestic News 
- More than 600 barrels containing toxic waste have been 
removed from ground in Tuzla near Istanbul. 
 
- Six terror suspects, including a foreigner, have been 
captured in the southeastern city of Gaziantep.  The 
suspects, believed to have links with al-Qaida, were 
reportedly preparing for bomb attacks in the city. 
 
International News 
- Shiite Hawad al-Maliki has been appointed the new prime 
minister in Iraq, ending months of sectarian disagreement in 
the formation of a new cabinet.  President Bush said he told 
Iraq's new leaders that they had a responsibility to unite 
the country and that the new government was an important US 
milestone.  "Democracy in Iraq will set a powerful example 
for people and for the world who are desperate for freedom," 
Bush said. 
 
- Time Magazine claims ahead of this week's UN Security 
Council deadline for Tehran to suspend its nuclear program, 
US officials have been busy planning political and economic 
sanctions on Iran. 
 
- Osama bin Ladin, in a new audiotape aired by al-Jazeera, 
called on Muslim fighters to go to Sudan to fight against 
"crusader thieves". 
 
- Greek President Papoulias said Turkey's EU accession might 
be blocked if Ankara declines to abide by the European 
criteria. 
 
- Turkish businessman Muhammed Fethi is reported to have 
been killed in the northern Iraqi city of Kirkuk.  The 
report has not yet been confirmed by the Turkish embassy in 
Baghdad or by the Foreign Ministry in Ankara. 
 
 
 Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
  http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON