07ANKARA25
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1987
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0025/01 0081438
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081438Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0498
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7708
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1884
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1491
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5653
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5383
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2036
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JANUARY 8, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Gul on the PKK, Possible Visit to Washington 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul told mainstream Hurriyet that Turkey 
has asked the US to handover the PKK leaders Murat Karayilan and 
Cemil Bayik, but Americans said their priority was the confusion in 
Iraq, which prevents a division of troops from tackling the PKK 
problem.  Gul said Turkey's expectation was the closure of PKK camps 
in Iraq, the arrest of terrorists sought by Interpol, and the 
cutting of financial sources of the terrorist organization. 
"Americans say they are not ready to meet Turkey's expectations in 
northern Iraq, and they feel ashamed," Gul emphasized.  Gul also 
said he will visit Washington, without elaborating further. 
Hurriyet says the visit expected next month will be a crucial one in 
which all terror-related matters will be discussed, adding that if 
expectations are not met, Turkey will act on its own to handle the 
issue. 
 
Struggle against the PKK 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, and Zaman reported over the weekend that 
the Turkish special anti-terrorism envoy, retired general Edip 
Baser, responded to press questions in Istanbul with regard to a 
recent statement by Prime Minister Erdogan claiming no concrete 
outcome had been recorded in the fight against the PKK through the 
"special envoys" mechanism.  "I don't know what the PM meant in that 
statement; I also don't know anything about the contents of the 
talks with Americans on terrorism.  I won't quit my job, because I 
believe there are still things that I can do," said Baser.  Baser 
noted his position as special envoy was in no way an obstacle for 
Turkey to launch military action, adding Turkey would do whatever it 
deemed necessary, including cross-border military incursions into 
northern Iraq. 
 
Meanwhile, Monday's Zaman reports that according to the Turkish 
National Police, despite the ceasefire it announced in October, the 
PKK has launched 72 attacks since then, killing six troops, wounding 
another 32, whereas Turkish security forces killed 22 terrorists and 
captured 266.  Security forces also seized 218 bombs, 51.5 kg of 
C-4, 24.5 kg of A-4, 7.45 kg of TNT, and 3.86 kg of RDX explosives. 
Zaman also claims the Copenhagen-based Roj-TV has been used by the 
PKK to convey messages to its militants in Turkey and northern Iraq. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq 
Gungor Mengi observes in the mass appeal Vatan that gaining control 
of oil is the real motives of the US in Iraq: "President Bush and 
supporters of the Iraq war were claiming that Iraq was on the verge 
of attacking the US with atomic bombs.  The opponents were 
commenting that this was just a pretext for gaining control over the 
world's third most oil-rich country.  The new law on Iraqi oil is 
just a clear indication of the naked truth.  The details are very 
interesting if not sickening, and nobody can claim any more that 
America is not after an energy monopoly.  The invasion of Iraq is 
actually not Washington's last adventure to gain control over Gulf 
oil.  There will be more ahead.  The Bush administration failed to 
keep its pledge of democracy for Iraqis, but at least there is now a 
gift for the American-British oil companies.  The British 
Independent writes the recent oil law will strengthen the 'it was 
all about oil' argument.  In fact the whole thing is like both Bush 
and Blair being caught red-handed, but it is unlikely that they will 
feel embarrassed." 
 
Oral Calislar observes in Saturday's edition of the 
nationalist-leftist Cumhuriyet that a division of Iraq is 
unavoidable: "Saddam's execution sped up the conflict between Sunnis 
and Shiites, making it practically impossible for them to live under 
a united Iraq.  The division of Iraq has become a de facto reality. 
On the other hand, Iraq's division will not be a good thing for US 
policy.  Those who believe that the US policy is to divide Iraq 
eventually do not see the fact that a divided Iraq helps Iran get 
 
ANKARA 00000025  002 OF 003 
 
 
stronger, and does not help the US.  The theory that the 
Sunni-Shiite conflict is part of a US plan does not have credence 
for me.  Nevertheless Iraq is going through a division for sure. 
Turkey has been careful on the Iraq issue and took care to be seen 
as available to cooperate on Iraq's stability with the regional 
countries.  The only exception on this very correct policy line is 
the Kurdish issue.  When it comes to the Kurds, Turkey prefers to 
settle issues via the US.  In fact, the US is incapable of solving 
its own problems in this region, let alone to help Turkey on the 
Kurds.  Turkey should develop a bilateral and comprehensive 
relationship with the Kurds in the region to establish mutual trust 
and friendship.  The solution is our job, not Washington's." 
 
Lokmaci Overpass Crisis in TRNC 
Weekend papers, all papers:  Turkish Cypriot President Mehmet Ali 
Talat met with TGS chief Gen. Buyukanit and FM Gul in Ankara on 
Friday.  Following his two hour meeting with FM Gul, Talat told 
reporters that "the TRNC decision to demolish the Lokmaci overpass 
is still relevant."  Talat also dismissed press reports that 
Turkey's General Staff, which has around 40,000 soldiers in Cyprus 
to back the Turkish Cypriot state, was against his proposal. 
However, on Saturday, Gen. Buyukanit criticized TRNC President 
Talat's unilateral move to demolish bridge over Ledra, in order to 
open a new crossing with the Greek Cypriot administration, by saying 
"we are not against to the opening of Lokmaci gate.  However, these 
kinds of steps should be mutual and concurrent with steps by Greek 
Cypriot side."  Meanwhile, Greek Cypriot leader Papadopoulos said he 
is ready to demolish the wall in front of the National Guard 
observation post at Ledra within 24 hours, once necessary 
preconditions for the secure movement of people are fulfilled by the 
Turkish side.  He described some of the preconditions as withdrawal 
of the Turkish troops from the region, the unmanning of the area, 
the restoration of adjacent buildings and the de-mining.  Today's 
mornings TV newscasts report the scheduled meeting of Turkish and 
Greek Cypriot religious leaders meeting today for goodwill and 
unconditional inter-religious dialogue between the two communities 
has been cancelled. 
 
Armenian Genocide Resolution 
Hurriyet and Milliyet:  In an interview with Milliyet, Turkey's 
Ambassador to the US, Nabi Sensoy said that the so-called Armenian 
genocide resolution will come up on the agenda of the House of 
Representatives but unless President Bush signs it, it will not 
become legislation.  Hurriyet reports that US House of 
Representatives member Adam Schiff announced that he is going to 
present the House with a draft on the Armenian genocide issue. 
Schiff also said that "the US should recognize the genocide" and he 
is "very hopeful that the draft will pass the congress under the new 
leadership." 
 
Meanwhile, Yasemin Congar reports in Milliyet that the Washington 
based International Armenian Politics Research Group is arranging a 
conference in Yerevan on January 13-14, to discuss the economic and 
social results of the opening of the Turkish-Armenian border. 
Experts from eight different countries, including Turkey, will 
attend the conference. 
 
 
TV News: 
(NTV, 7.00 A.M.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The first cabinet meeting of the new year to be held Monday will 
discuss combating PKK terrorism and the mechanism of special 
US-Turkey anti-terrorism envoys. 
 
- President Sezer is to pay an official visit to Italy on January 
8-10 to meet with his Italian counterpart Giorgio Napolitano.  Sezer 
will also attend the official opening of the exhibition "Turkey: 
 
ANKARA 00000025  003 OF 003 
 
 
7,000 Years of History" at the Italian Presidential Palace. 
 
- Turkish Finance and Tourism ministries continue work on the 
"Spanish model" for sale of assets to foreigners. 
 
- Education Minister Huseyin Celik said 40,000 new teachers will be 
appointed in 2007. 
 
International News 
 
- President Bush's new Iraq plan envisages deployment of 20,000 
extra troops to Iraq as well as the allotment of USD 1 billion for 
employment of Iraqis. 
 
- Nancy Pelosi, the first woman Speaker of the US Congress, warned 
to cut Congressional funds if President Bush proposes deploying 
additional troops to Iraq. 
 
- According to The Independent, the "lion's share" of Iraqi oil will 
go to the United States and Britain. 
 
  - The Observer reports all British nationals visiting the United 
States will have their fingerprints taken and archived. 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
MCELDOWNEY