07ANKARA3004
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4783
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #3004/01 3521307
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181307Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4721
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8565
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3659
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2542
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6316
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6139
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2718
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 18, 2007 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Reaction to Turkish Air Raids Continues 
 
All papers report on a TGS statement claiming the targets of 
Sunday's air operations in northern Iraq were selected "after it was 
established that they were definitely not civilian residential 
areas."  General Aydogan Babaoglu, who commanded the operation, told 
mainstream Sabah that the warplanes did not strike civilians and 
that reports to the contrary are "ill-intentioned." 
 
Papers report that the Iraqi Parliament condemned Turkish operations 
in northern Iraq. 
Iraq summoned the Turkish Ambassador in Baghdad to protest the 
operation.  Kurdish leader Massoud Barzani strongly criticized the 
Turkish attacks and US support for the air raids, saying the US 
should "check its morals," while it "defends the sovereignty of Iraq 
and the Kurdish region, which is under the Americans' 
responsibilities."  The Kurdish region's Prime Minister, Nechirvan 
Barzani, said the Turkish operations constituted a "hostile act" 
which "violated Iraq's sovereignty."  Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar 
Zebari said one woman was killed and four other civilians were 
injured in the Turkish operations, and urged Ankara to coordinate 
future cross-border strikes with Iraq to minimize civilian 
casualties. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet and Sabah, liberal Radikal and Islamist-oriented 
Zaman say Turkey's diplomacy regarding the PKK in northern Iraq, was 
successful.  The United States and Russia issued messages of 
support, while the European Union made a call for restraint.  The US 
said it was informed of the raids in advance, but did not give 
consent.  Papers quote Pentagon Spokesman Bryan Whitman, "the US 
continues to assist with providing information to the Turkish 
government that will help them deal with the situation in northern 
Iraq," however, Whitman declined to say whether US intelligence 
provided specific targets to the Turks.  European Enlargement 
Commissioner Olli Rehn's spokeswoman Kristina Nagy said "the EU 
understands that Turkey has to protect its citizens," stressing, 
however, that excessive force should not be used in future 
operations.  Russia's ambassador to Turkey reportedly announced that 
Russia supports Turkey's fight against terror. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Raids on Northern Iraq 
Mainstream daily Milliyet carried this op-ed: (12/18):  "The main 
result of yesterday's operation is Turkey's psychological supremacy. 
 Because of this surprise military operation, the PKK's operational 
capabilities were seriously damaged.  It is also important to note 
that this operation was carried out in coordination with the US.  It 
is no secret that some of the intelligence used in this operation 
was provided by the US.  Given this development, Turkish-American 
military relations have entered into a period of normalization. 
This operation itself should be considered a tangible result of the 
most recent Bush-Erdogan summit.  Even the EU expressed support for 
Turkey's right to defend itself.  All of this shows that the Turkish 
government pursued the right approach on the PKK issue.  The 
international community is showing its understanding of the issue, 
which gives the Turkish government a unique opportunity to find 
creative solutions.  We hope that the AKP government finds ways to 
initiate a comprehensive solution in a peaceful manner, including 
legislation for militants to return home." 
 
Okay Gonensin commented in mainstream daily Vatan (12/18): "Military 
success deserves appreciation, but civilian politicians must 
complete the equation with political success.  Given the current 
picture, politicians should take steps to minimize the influence of 
the PKK and provide an open atmosphere in which to discuss the 
Kurdish problem.  If the DTP distances itself from the PKK, its 
contributions to these discussions can still be useful.  Another 
useful tool to build mutual confidence is to establish relations 
with the northern Iraqi administration.  The PKK realizes that they 
 
ANKARA 00003004  002 OF 003 
 
 
are no longer secure in northern Iraq.  Especially at this stage, 
Turkey's political steps are more important than ever before." 
 
Ertugrul Ozkok commented in mainstream daily Hurriyet (12/18): "The 
operation served everyone's benefit and came after Turkey won the 
hearts and minds of the international public concerning the PKK. 
Turkey also managed to persuade the US, who has also gained hearts 
and minds in Turkey.  Turkey's government, military, and civilians 
unanimously agree that it is time to find humanitarian solutions to 
the Kurdish issue.  Regardless of what you call it, whether 
'amnesty' or 'bringing militants back home,' Turkey should 
unconditionally embrace everyone who chooses to stay away from 
blood." 
 
Pro-Kurdish Party Leader Detained on His Return Home 
All papers report Nurettin Demirtas, the leader of the pro-Kurdish 
DTP, was apprehended by police at Ankara's Esenboga Airport Monday 
evening.  Demirtas' return to Ankara followed weeks of speculation 
that the DTP leader considered remaining in Europe in order to avoid 
prosecution for fraud in Turkey.  His arrest comes after prosecutors 
brought charges that he falsified a medical report in order to avoid 
compulsory military service.  Prosecutors are seeking a two to 
five-year prison sentence for the DTP leader, who maintains his 
innocence.  DTP party group Chief Ahmet Turk criticized the 
detention, saying that Demirtas was not trying to escape prosecution 
and that Demirtas should have been taken to the prosecutor's office 
before he was taken into custody by police.  Demirtas already served 
10 years in prison for being a member of the outlawed PKK.  He was 
elected the leader of the DTP two months ago, replacing the more 
moderate Ahmet Turk. 
 
Stabbed Priest Franchini Recovering in Izmir 
All papers report that the Roman Catholic priest who was stabbed on 
Sunday, Adriano Franchini, said he feels fine and the attack should 
"not be exaggerated" or connected to other attacks.  Franchini's 
wounds were not life-threatening.  The priest, who leads the Church 
of the Virgin Mary in Ephesus, was attacked by 19-year-old Ramazan 
Bay after Sunday's mass at Saint Antoine Church in Izmir. 
Mainstream Hurriyet says the assault on Franchini was the fourth 
against Christian clerics in Turkey over the last four years. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A boat carrying illegal migrants sank near the Aegean tourist town 
of Bodrum on Monday.  So far, eight bodies have been recovered. 
 
- The Turkish General Staff (TGS) said in a statement that Greece 
was violating the Lausanne Treaty of 1923 and the Paris Treaty of 
1947 by arming Rhodes and twelve other Aegean islands "before the 
eyes of the whole world." 
 
- Eighteen armored vehicles to be handed over to the "Olive Group" 
Security Company in Baghdad were seized by Turkish officials at the 
Habur border gate.  The vehicles will be sent back to Britain. 
 
- State Minister Mehmet Simsek said the Turkish Central Bank 
headquarters will be moved to Istanbul from Ankara. 
 
International News 
 
- A key international donors' conference aimed at stabilizing the 
Palestinian economy opened in Paris Monday. French President Sarkozy 
opened the conference by calling for the establishment of an 
independent Palestinian state by the end of 2008.  Foreign Minister 
Ali Babacan said Turkey will contribute USD 150 million to 
Palestine's development program over the next three years. 
 
 
ANKARA 00003004  003 OF 003 
 
 
- Russia began to deliver nuclear fuel to Iran's first nuclear power 
station on Monday. 
 
- Vladimir Putin has agreed to become Russia's prime minister, a 
development which comes at the request of his chosen successor, 
Dmitry Medvedev. 
 
- Nechirvan Barzani, Prime Minister of the regional Kurdish 
government in northern Iraq, said the Kurdish Regional Authroity 
will accept a six-month postponement of the referendum on the future 
of the oil-rich city of Kirkuk. 
 
WILSON