07ANKARA2792
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0020
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2792/01 3231356
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191356Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4396
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8502
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3551
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2467
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6267
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6073
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2665
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Secretary Bodman Joins Azerbaijan-Turkey-Greece Natural Gas Pipeline 
 
SIPDIS 
Opening 
All papers report that yesterday, Prime Minister Erdogan, 
Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev and Greek Prime Minister Kostas 
Karamanlis inaugurated a pipeline that will carry Azeri natural gas 
from Turkey to Greece.   US Energy Secretary Samuel Bodman and 
Georgian Energy Minister Alexander Khetaguri joined the inaugural 
ceremony.  Erdogan and Karamanlis, in a symbolic gesture, shook 
hands on the bridge over the River Meric (Evros), which divides the 
two countries. 
 
Eventually, the pipeline will carry12 billion cubic meters of gas 
per year to Greece from Azerbaijan's Shah Deniz field.   The rest 
will be prepared for re-export to the rest of Europe.  The cost of 
the Turkish part of the pipeline is estimated at USD 144 million. 
 
Papers describe the opening of the pipeline as "historic," 
underlining that it was the second most important Turkish step in 
energy after the opening of Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline.  The 
pipeline will be extended to Italy, transforming Turkey into an 
energy bridge for transporting natural gas to Europe. 
 
Erdogan said in his speech at the ceremony that the project is an 
important step for building one of the four main routes for shipping 
natural gas to the EU.  He emphasized that the energy projects would 
boost welfare, peace and stability in the region, along with 
strengthening the ongoing rapprochement between Turkey and Greece. 
"Our goal is to contribute, mainly with the Nabucco Project, to 
Europe's energy security with projects to be developed in the 
future," Erdogan said.  Karamanlis praised the "harmonious 
cooperation" between Greece and Turkey, and reiterated support for 
Turkey's EU entry bid.  Aliyev said Azerbaijan would join the 
European common market for the first time, and added he believed 
this cooperation project would serve as a model for other countries 
in the region.  Bodman hailed the pipeline as "a significant 
development, one that builds a new energy bridge between East and 
West."  Bodman said the pipeline provides "diversification" for 
consumers and suppliers who will all benefit from the resulting 
competition and noted the project was a great success for Turkey, 
Greece and Azerbaijan and will provide new job opportunities in 
Central Asia.  Liberal Radikal and Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
claim Secretary Bodman was included in the ceremony upon the 
insistence of the Turks, and also that he suggested Turkmenistan and 
Kazakhstan should eventually be included in future natural gas 
talks. 
 
On Saturday, mainstream Hurriyet reported on Secretary Bodman's 
comments to the Turkish-American Business Council in Istanbul on 
Friday.  Bodman said Turkey's regional leadership role was of great 
significance and that the country has become a critical transit 
point for energy in the world.  He noted the US would continue to 
support Turkey as an important transit line for oil and natural gas. 
 Bodman also emphasized Turkey's great opportunities to develop new 
and clean types of energy, including solar energy.   The Secretary 
said he hoped Turkey would become a full member of Global Nuclear 
Energy Partnership. 
 
Closure Case against DTP Protested 
All papers report 25 people were detained when 6,000 pro-Kurdish DTP 
supporters clashed with riot police during a rally held in the 
southeastern province of Batman.  The demonstration was organized to 
protest a lawsuit seeking to shut down the DTP.  Former Kurdish DEP 
deputy Leyla Zana, referring to the PKK's imprisoned leader Abdullah 
Ocalan, stated "I know that one day he will join us and you will be 
able to listen to him."  In Sanliurfa, a group of 200 DTP supporters 
also taged a peaceful demonstration.  In Istanbul, a small group of 
Freedom and Democracy Party (ODP) members held a short protest march 
to denounce the case against DTP. 
 
ANKARA 00002792  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Weekend papers report the chief prosecutor's office has filed a 
lawsuit asking for the closure of Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP. 
The 121 page indictment directs 141 accusations against party 
officials.  The prosecutor claimed the DTP has become "a focal point 
of activities against the sovereignty of the state and unity of the 
country."  The prosecutor asked for five year political bans for 221 
DTP activists, including eight members of parliament.  The 
indictment cites the abduction of eight soldiers by the PKK, saying 
the incident was used by the DTP for propaganda purposes and warns 
that "ethnic civil strife" could break out if the party is not shut 
down.  The prosecutor needs the support of seven of the 11 
Constitutional Court justices to carry out the ban. 
 
Editorial Commentary on DTP Closure 
Ferai Tinc commented in mainstream Hurriyet (11/19): "Following the 
investigation against the pro-Kurdish DTP, Prime Minister Erdogan 
clarified the government's position that the party should not be 
closed and democratic discussions should continue. 
Certainly, it is the duty of a government to expand and extend 
democratic platforms as much as possible.  Yet, it is also very 
difficult for the government to deal with a party that has set 
itself up for closure.  This weekend's nationwide DTP rallies 
demonstrate an intentional strategy to increase tension; the DTP is 
deliberately provoking a closure even while both the opposition and 
the government do not support a party closure.   At this point, the 
DTP parliamentarians have a vital task and responsibility.  They 
better take advantage of the government's constructive attitude and 
be helpful and positive in this process." 
 
Hasan Bulent Kahraman commented in mainstream Sabah (11/19): 
"After the recent elections, Kurdish politics have come to an 
historic turning point.  Kurdish voters, by preferring the ruling 
AKP, demonstrated their desire for new approaches that seek 
democratic solutions, thereby dismissing the Ocalan/PKK factor. 
However, in the aftermath of the election, the pro-Kurdish DTP has 
made a lot of mistakes.  Evidently, Ocalan was trying to corner the 
AKP government by radicalizing the Kurdish issue.  The connection 
between the DTP and PKK is certainly not a secret, but it is 
disturbing.  The DTP failed to work for democratization and failed 
to distance itself from terrorism.  Nevertheless, this party should 
remain in the political arena and should not be closed.  Turkey is 
capable of making some significant steps to settle the Kurdish issue 
despite the DTP's connections to the PKK.  The judiciary process is 
one thing to watch, but the political process should continue." 
 
Northern Iraqi Administration will not Object to a Limited Operation 
 
Milliyet, Hurriyet, Radikal, and Yeni Safak report that, following a 
meeting between Massoud Barzani and representatives of other 
northern Iraqi political parties who had visited Turkey recently, 
Secretary General of the Kurdistan Islamic Union Selahaddin Muhammed 
 
SIPDIS 
Bahaddin told the media that they will not interfere in a possible 
Turkish operation into northern Iraq on the condition that the 
operation will be limited and will not threaten civilian areas. 
 
Turkish General Staff Denies the Ban on Retired Generals 
Sabah, Milliyet, Vatan, Radikal, Zaman, Cumhuriyet and others: 
Following reports over the weekend claiming that retired generals 
are banned from making comments or giving interviews to the media, 
the Turkish General Staff (TGS) issued a press statement on its 
web-site on Sunday.  The press statement said that 'an amendment on 
this issue was sent to the Defense Ministry on April 30, 2007 and it 
has no link with recent developments.  The change that was 
introduced does not impose a general restriction on retired military 
personnel, but aims to preserve the tradition of loyalty in the 
Turkish military.  The statement also said that "the Turkish 
military cannot hold any sentiments other than respect and gratitude 
to its retired personnel.  However, certain individuals, though few 
in number, attack the Turkish Military with an unacceptable hatred 
 
ANKARA 00002792  003 OF 003 
 
 
and hostility through the media.  Many times this is under the 
influence of fundamental views.  Keeping such individuals away from 
the Turkish military is a natural institutional protective 
measure." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said a cross-border operation 
into northern Iraq must be conducted; otherwise Turkey will be lose 
its credibility. 
 
- On November 23, Prime Minister Erdogan and AKP lawmakers will hold 
a three-day meeting to discuss constitutional reforms. 
 
- Interior Minister Besir Atalay, in a meeting with the governors of 
11 provinces in southeast Turkey, stressed democracy will not be 
sacrificed to combat terror. 
 
- Energy Minister Hilmi Guler said Turkey has to make USD 130 
billion energy investments in the next ten years. 
 
International News 
 
- The opposition Democratic Party of former ethnic Albanian 
guerrilla leader Hashim Thaci won the November 17 parliamentary 
elections in Kosovo. 
 
- US Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte said President 
Musharraf must lift the state of emergency he declared this month 
and release all political detainees in Pakistan. 
 
- The death toll from a cyclone that devastated Bangladesh has 
surpassed 2,200 officials said Sunday. 
 
- Over the weekend, Iraq's parliament ordered an inquiry into the 
delay of a referendum over whether the oil-rich city of Kirkuk will 
join the Kurdish region in the north. 
 
WILSON