07ANKARA2765
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5810
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2765/01 3181138
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141138Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4355
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8494
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3539
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2458
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6258
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6066
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2656
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Peres-Abbas Address the Turkish Parliament 
All papers report that Tuesday was an "historic" day for Ankara 
because Israeli President Shimon Peres and Palestinian Authority 
Leader Mahmoud Abbas came together and addressed the Turkish 
parliament.  Peres and Abbas both conveyed messages of peace, a 
precursor to the upcoming Annapolis summit where they will outline 
their conditions for peace. 
 
Peres, Abbas and Gul signed an agreement establishing an industrial 
investment zone in the West Bank.  Turkish firms will invest in the 
zone, which is expected to create 10,000 jobs for Palestinians. 
Land will be provided by the Palestinian Authority, the compounds 
will be constructed by Turkey, and Israel will ensure the safety of 
the zone.  Peres called it a "win-win" project.  Gul told emphasized 
that the project will encourage political compromise and settlement 
in the Middle East. 
 
Addressing the Turkish Parliament, Peres and Abbas said the Middle 
East conference in Annapolis, Maryland, in late November will 
provide a chance to restart the peace process.  As Peres addressed 
the Turkish Parliament, he said Jews will always remember the help 
that was extended to them by the Ottoman Empire.  However, he noted 
that Iran remains a source of concern while Turkey is "a source of 
hope," and that both the Middle East and Europe need Turkey.  He 
also said Turkey could work for the release of the Israeli soldiers 
abducted by Hezbollah last year.  He also commented that Turkey 
could help normalize the life of Palestinians.  Peres invited Turkey 
to join the Annapolis conference, while stressing that Israel wants 
a two-state solution, with Turkey as "a partner and producer" in 
this process. 
 
Abbas told the lawmakers he supports the American efforts to revive 
the peace process.  Abbas said Turkey and Palestine were the members 
of the same camp, and that both countries support peace and reject 
radicalism.  "We have warned many times that the expansion of Jewish 
settlements and the construction of a security wall would undermine 
peace and trust in the region.  Eastern Jerusalem remains part of 
the territory occupied in 1967.   There will be no Palestinian state 
in a capital other than East Jerusalem," said Abbas. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Peres-Abbas Meeting 
 
Okay Gonensin wrote in the mainstream Vatan (11/14):  Turkey can 
become the center for peace in the region  "The meeting of Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders in Ankara, Turkey's sensitive handling of 
bilateral relations with Syria and Iran, and even the Saudi King's 
visit to Turkey are all the proof of this important vision." 
 
During the last 25 years, Turkey has proved to the world that it has 
a global vision.  Turkey is becoming the main base for regional 
peace, which will strengthen Europe's regional effectiveness, as 
well. There is only one issue that spoils this vision - Turkey is 
unable to establish internal peace.  Only when Turkey is fully 
democratic and peaceful will it be able take important 
responsibilities in the region." 
 
Sami Kohen commented in the mainstream Milliyet (11/14):  "The 
hardest part of active policy in the Middle East is to walk the same 
path and to show the same stance all the time.  Since the 
conjuncture and the balances in the region change very often, 
diplomacy is constantly subject to fine-tuning.  Turkey also faces 
this kind of problem and, often, must fine tune its strategies.  The 
latest example to this situation was seen during the Peres-Abbas 
meeting in Ankara this week.  The world closely followed 
developments in Turkey as President Gul brought these two leaders 
together to sign an economic cooperation agreement and address the 
parliament.  During this important visit, Turkey demonstrated that, 
from now on, it was on Abbas' side rather than standing with Hamas. 
 
ANKARA 00002765  002 OF 003 
 
 
Following the AKP's rapprochement with Hamas and the dialogue 
established by the government last year, today we prove that Turkey 
fine-tuned its pragmatic stance on this issue." 
 
Papers: Turkish Jets Attack Targets in Northern Iraq 
All papers report Turkey made a "first test" for a cross-border 
operation with Turkish artillery and fighter jets hitting the PKK 
shelters in northern Iraq.  Mainstream Milliyet says the strikes 
indicate the US seems to have started to supply Turkey with 
intelligence, reporting that yesterday American helicopters 
conducted reconnaissance flights over the areas attacked by Turkey. 
Turkish artillery shells mountainous areas in Derkar and Batufa as 
well as the PKK camps in Haftanin, reports Milliyet. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports Turkish fighter jets attacked 
empty villages in Pirbela, Birsaka, Avashin and Norgole. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan told journalists that he did not know 
anything about the air strikes, and military sources have not 
confirmed the attacks.  The chief of the Turkish General Staff (TGS) 
General Yasar Buyukanit told journalists in Brussels that he was 
unaware of air strikes in northern Iraq. 
 
Erdogan: A Military Operation against Northern Iraq Near 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan said that during his 
meeting with Bush earlier this month, he told the US President that 
Washington has to choose between Barzani and Iraq or Turkey.  On 
Tuesday, Erdogan told the AKP administrative board that a military 
operation into northern Iraq was "near."  Erdogan said operations 
against the PKK will be finalized before winter approaches, and 
added the military general staff will soon be given political 
directives for operations.  Erdogan also said Kurds in Turkey were 
not a "minority," but a fundamental element of the country, 
stressing it is unfortunate that members of the pro-Kurdish DTP 
cannot feel pride in their country and its people.  "The DTP has 
entered a dead end street; they're obviously being manipulated," 
Erdogan emphasized. 
 
Turk: A Political Lynch Campaign Kicked-off against DTP 
All papers continue coverage of the latest developments with regard 
to some of Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP lawmakers' alleged ties 
with the outlawed PKK.  DTP lawmaker Fatma Kurtulan rejected the 
photo showing her as a PKK militant, and told the press she will sue 
the newspapers that said she was trained in a PKK camp.  The party's 
newly elected chairman, Nurettin Demirtas, said the medical report 
exempting him from military service was given by a military hospital 
in Ankara, and that it was not forged.  Addressing his party group 
in parliament Tuesday, DTP party group chairman Ahmet Turk said 
there was a "plot" against his party, which, he noted, might amount 
to a political lynch campaign as seen in the reports claiming 
Kurtulan had been trained in terror camps.  Turk warned that harming 
the DTP will not be good for Turkey. 
 
Hamas to be Invited to Jerusalem Meeting in Istanbul 
Under the headline "New Hamas crisis at the doorstep," the 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports a representative of Hamas 
will be invited to "International Jerusalem Meeting" to be held by 
the Turkish Voluntary Organizations Foundation (TGTV) in Istanbul 
from November 15-17.  Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) sources said 
they were not aware of the initiative, adding the meeting was 
organized by civic organizations.  Approximately 3,000 participants 
including former US Attorney General Ramsey Clark will be invited to 
the meeting.  TGTV is the umbrella organization of mostly 
conservative 150 NGOs, and former Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu 
and Deputy Prime Minister Cemil Cicek are among the founders of the 
foundation, says Cumhuriyet. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
ANKARA 00002765  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
- Four Turkish soldiers were killed in clashes with the PKK 
terrorists in Gabar Mountains in Sirnak province on the border with 
Iraq on Tuesday. 
 
- Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin said the government plans to 
amend article 301 of the penal code before the end of 2007, 
stressing it would not be scrapped. 
 
- Former UNSYG Kofi Annan said the Middle East cannot cope with a 
new conflict, warning that a Turkish cross-border incursion into 
northern Iraq would be an "adventure." 
 
- A delegation of the representatives of the Kurdish parties in 
northern Iraq has come to Turkey to discuss Turkey-Iraq ties and the 
fight against the PKK. 
 
International News 
 
- The "long march" from Lahore to Islamabad against the state of 
emergency and the suspension of the constitution starts without 
Benazir Bhutto who has been placed under house arrest.  Bhutto said 
President Musharraf must resign. 
 
- French President Sarkozy told members of the European Parliament 
that Turkey's EU accession was an issue to be discussed after 15 
years. 
 
- France is to face a transport strike that is set to last for days 
and could become the biggest the country has seen in over 10 years. 
 
 
- More than 30,000 birds and countless fish have been killed by oil 
spilling from a tanker that shipwrecked Sunday in the Black Sea. 
WILSON