07ANKARA1027
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3235
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1027/01 1221321
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021321Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1921
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8029
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2615
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1911
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5891
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5658
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2269
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, MAY 2, 2007 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Court Annuls Turkish Presidential Election, AKP Calls for Polls on 
June 24 
All papers report Turkey's Constitutional Court declared the first 
round of the presidential poll invalid and that Prime Minister 
Erdogan subsequently proposed an early general election be held on 
June 24 or July 1. The Constitutional Court ruled not enough 
parliamentarians were present when the first round of the 
presidential vote was held in the 550-seat assembly.  Erdogan said 
yesterday "The parliamentary system has been blocked; we are 
urgently going to the people," proposing an early general election 
be held "on June 24 or July 1."  Erdogan also said his ruling AKP 
wants the Turkish people, not parliament, to elect the president. 
He said AKP also suggests reducing the term of parliament to four 
years from the current five years. 
 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak claims the government will hold a 
referendum on a package of constitutional amendments if the 
opposition declines to support the changes.  Opposition Anavatan 
Party leader Erkan Mumcu pledged unconditional support for 
constitutional reforms.  The main opposition CHP leader Deniz 
Baykal, however, opposed Erdogan's proposal for electing the 
president in general elections, saying such an implementation will 
pave the way for the introduction of a "semi-sultanate" in Turkey. 
 
 
On Wednesday morning, AKP submitted a bill to the parliament on 
holding parliamentary elections on June 24.  AKP MP Salih Kapusuz 
said his party will also send to parliament today a proposal for 
having the president elected for a five-year term, renewable after 
another five years, directly by voters and not by the parliament. 
 
Editorial Commentary 
Mehmet Yilmaz writes in the mainstream daily Hurriyet: "One of the 
main obstacles against resolving the current political crisis stems 
from the fact that Turkey does not have a political party which can 
address the demands of millions who are rallying against the 
government.  The rallies are organized by NGOs as opposed to a 
political party because we have no party one that can attract the 
attention of the masses.  Let's be clear about the main opposition 
party.  CHP is doomed to lose elections as long as Baykal remains 
the leader.  Neither supporters of CHP nor the center right voters 
concerned about the rise of the Islamists support Baykal.  All of 
this, I hope, gives a message to Baykal: leave your seat to an 
emerging and promising young leader right now if you really want to 
prevent a recurrence of the current political situation after the 
elections." 
 
Hincal Uluc writes in the mainstream daily Sabah: "Secular Turkey 
must find its political leader as soon as possible.  Otherwise, 
those impressive numbers at the street demonstrations will not be 
converted into votes.  If the supporters of secularism go through 
the elections without proper leadership, they will end up presenting 
an election gift to the Islamist AKP." 
 
Mustafa Unal comments in the intellectual Islamist-oriented Zaman: 
"The [April 27] military warning cast a shadow on the court 
decision, and opposition parties paved the way for this.  Regardless 
of point of view, it is certain this will be a litmus test for 
Turkish democracy.  One side represents supporters of democracy -- 
wounded due to the military warning -- and the other side represents 
a group who support 'less democracy' to put it mildly.  The problem 
comes not only from the threat of the military acting against the 
people's will but also from some politicians who seek a coup. 
Nevertheless, Turkey should not live with pessimistic scenarios. 
Turkey is capable of overcoming this turbulence as well.  The 
solution is very clear: immediate elections and an immediate call to 
hear the people's will." 
 
 
ANKARA 00001027  002 OF 003 
 
 
May Day Riots Paralyze Istanbul 
All papers report Turkish riot police detained more than 900 
demonstrators while at least 30 protestors were injured in Istanbul 
on Tuesday as they tried to march to Taksim Square in the heart of 
the city.  Police fired tear gas and water canons on some groups 
trying to access Taksim and detained several people.  Forty-one 
schools were shut down in the area for the day in anticipation of 
turmoil.  Public transport was paralyzed in the city as the 
authorities blocked roads, cancelled ferry services and closed metro 
stations.  The Istanbul stock exchange began trading later than 
usual because of the traffic gridlock.  Organizers later complained 
at a press conference that a large number of people were taken into 
custody and treated roughly.  People are treated like terrorists, 
says liberal Radikal under a page-one headline, "Police terror for 
the people of Istanbul," adding the city "ground to a halt because 
of rigid measures taken by the police."  Istanbul Governor and 
police chief were strongly criticized for shutting down parts of the 
city and the use of excessive force by riot police. 
 
Minister Aydin to Represent Turkey at Iraq Summit 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Zaman and others report Turkey 
will be represented by State Minister Mehmet Aydin at the May 3-4 
expanded Iraq neighbors conference in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, due to 
the domestic political developments in Turkey preventing Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul to participate.  At Sharm al-Sheikh, Turkey is 
expected to express its concerns over Kirkuk and the PKK. 
 
Turkish University to Host Turkey-Armenia Congress 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports a group of Middle East Technical 
University (METU) students in Ankara will hold a congress, "Turkish 
Universities' Approach to Turkey-Armenia Ties," from May 4-6.  METU 
students will explain their projects to reduce strain between the 
two countries at the congress which will not discuss Armenian 
genocide allegations. 
 
US 2006 Country Reports on Terrorism 
Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Yeni Safak and others report 
the US State Department 2006 Country Reports on Terrorism described 
the PKK as the "most prominent among terrorist groups in Turkey." 
"The PKK maintained an active presence in Greek Cyprus and 
reportedly used the island as both a fundraising and transit point. 
Among Kurdish-origin Turkish settlers in the north, the PKK 
reportedly enjoys significant support," papers cite the report. 
Liberal Radikal says the report contains criticism of Turkey and 
Prime Minister Erdogan for its continued failure to act against 
Yasin al-Qadi, a Saudi terrorist financier included in the UN list. 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 7.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A rally in support of secularism will be held May 5 in the Aegean 
city of Manisa. 
 
- A delegation headed by the Kurdish party DTP leader Ahmet Turk has 
met with Iraqi President Jalal Talabani in Dokan town in northern 
Iraq to discuss a solution to the PKK problem through dialogue. 
 
- AKP MP from Konya Ibrahim Hakki Askar has resigned from his party, 
dropping the number of the ruling party seats in parliament to 352. 
 
 
- A Turkish military helicopter crashed on Tuesday while trying to 
make an emergency landing north of Diyarbakir, injuring both pilots. 
 
 
International News 
 
 
ANKARA 00001027  003 OF 003 
 
 
- Millions of people participated in May Day demonstrations around 
the world yesterday on international Labor Day, May 1. 
 
- A report on the state of media freedom released by Freedom House 
rates Turkey under "partly free" countries, noting a dramatic rise 
in legal harassment was seen in the country where almost 300 
journalists and writers were prosecuted for "insulting Turkishness" 
under Article 301. 
 
- Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister George Lillikas has rejected the 
proposal of Turkish Cypriot "Foreign Minister" Turgay Avci for 
meeting in a third country. 
 
- Iraqi officials said they have received reports that Abu Eyyub 
al-Masri, the leader of al-Qaida in Iraq, was killed by Sunni 
tribesmen. 
 
WILSON