07ANKARA2246
TURKEY: THUMBNAIL BIOS OF 60TH GOVERNMENT
Fri Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6086
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHAK #2246/01 2431430
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311430Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3591
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TU
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC//USDP:PDUSDP/ISA:EUR/ISA:NESA//
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5//
RUFOADA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UK
RHMFIUU/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 002246 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: THUMBNAIL BIOS OF 60TH GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: Ankara 2235 
 
¶1. (U) Thumbnail biographical sketches of the 25 ministers who 
comprise Turkey's 60th Government, as presented August 29, 2007 
President Gul are below in para 2.  Ministers are already in place 
and functioning; the government will seek a parliamentary vote of 
confidence on September 5. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Brief biographies of ministers are as follows: 
 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
------------------------------------- 
Born in Istanbul in 1954, Erdogan graduated from Marmara University 
Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences.  He is a former 
Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality Mayor and a founding member of 
the governing Justice and Development Party (AKP).  He is chairman 
of AKP.  Erdogan entered parliament in 2002 on the AKP ticket from 
Siirt and was re-elected in 2007 from Istanbul.  He formed the 59th 
government.  He is married with 4 children and speaks very little 
English. 
 
State Minister and Deputy PM Cemil Cicek 
------------------------------------------ 
Cicek was born in Yozgat in 1946.  He graduated from Istanbul 
University Faculty of Law in 1971 and practiced law for ten years. 
He was Yozgat Mayor and started his political career in the 
center-right Motherland Party (ANAP).  He was State Minister in the 
governments of Turgut Ozal, Yildirim Akbulut and Mesut Yilmaz and 
was a member of the Turkish Grand National Assembly (TGNA) 
Constitutional Committee.  He was elected as an Ankara deputy on the 
AKP list in the November 2002 elections and served as Justice 
Minister and government spokesperson in 58th and 59th governments. 
As State Minister, he will be responsible for relations with 
parliament, coordinating policy on Cyprus, chairing the 
Counter-Terrorism Higher Board, coordinating public management 
reform works and coordinating boards and issues related to human 
rights.  Cicek speaks some English and French and is married with 
three children. 
 
State Minister and Deputy PM Hayati Yazici 
------------------------------------------- 
Yazici was born in Cayeli in 1952.  A graduate of Istanbul 
University Faculty of Law, he worked as a judge and was PM Erdogan's 
lawyer.  Yazici, a founding member of AKP, was first elected to 
parliament on the AKP ticket in 2002 and re-elected from Istanbul in 
¶2007.  As State Minister, Yazici will be responsible for relations 
with the Council of State and has oversight over the Customs 
Undersecretariat, Directorate General of Foundations, Directorate 
General of Social Assistance and Solidarity and the Promotion Fund 
Board.  He is married with two children. 
 
State Minister and Deputy PM Nazim Ekren 
----------------------------------------- 
Born in Istanbul in 1956, Ekren is a graduate of the Bursa 
University Faculty of Economics, with a PhD from Marmara University. 
 He also attended classes at Manchester Business School and became a 
Professor at Marmara University.  He served as Director General of 
Vakiflar Bank and was a founding member of AKP.  Ekren entered 
parliament in 2002 on the AKP ticket.  As State Minister, he is 
responsible for coordination of economic issues and has oversight 
over the State Planning Organization, the Turkish Board of 
Statistics and the Southeastern Anatolia (GAP) Regional Development 
Administration.  He is married with two children. 
 
State Minister Mehmet Aydin 
---------------------------- 
Aydin was born in Elazig in 1943 and is a graduate of Ankara 
University's Faculty of Theology.  He received his doctorate from 
Edinburgh University Department of Literature and Philosophy 
Department in Scotland.  Aydin served as Dean of September 9 
University, Theology Faculty, in Izmir.  In the 59th government he 
was head of the Directorate General of Religious Affairs (Diyanet). 
As State Minister, he will be responsible for coordinating 
information and technology activities.  He speaks English, French 
and Arabic and is married. 
 
State Minister Murat Basesgioglu 
--------------------------------- 
Basesgioglu was born in Kastamonu in 1955.  He graduated from 
Istanbul University Faculty of Law and worked as a freelance 
attorney for seven years in Kastamonu.  He entered politics in 1984 
 
ANKARA 00002246  002 OF 005 
 
 
on the ANAP ticket, and served as Minister of Interior in the 55th 
government led by Mesut Yilmaz.  He was elected on AKP ticket in the 
November 3, 2002 general elections and assigned as Minister of Labor 
and Social Security.  As State Minister, he will be responsible for 
coordination of collective bargaining with the public sector. 
Married with two children, Basesgioglu does not speak English. 
 
State Minister Kursad Tuzmen 
----------------------------- 
Tuzmen was born in Ankara in 1958.  He is a graduate of Ankara's 
Middle East Technical University Faculty of Management and has a PhD 
from Illinois University.  He served Foreign Trade Under Secretary. 
Before that he served as Director General and Deputy Director 
General at the State Planning Organization and the Treasury State 
Planning Organization, respectively.  Tuzmen entered Parliament on 
the AKP ticket in 2002.  He is a former Environment and State 
Minister.  As State Minister, he will be responsible for 
coordinating construction and engineering esrvice abroad and has 
oversight over the Foreign Trade Undersecretariat.  He speaks 
English and is married with two children. 
 
State Minister Nimet Cubukcu 
---------------------------- 
An AKP deputy for Istanbul, Cubukcu was born in 1965. She graduated 
from Istanbul University Faculty of Law and is a founding member of 
AKP.  She was a member of Parliament's commission for the 
investigation of graft.  At the last AKP congress she was given a 
post on the AKP administrative council.  Cubukcu served as State 
Minister in the 59th Government and played a leading role in shaping 
arrangements related to women in the new penal code.  As State 
Minister, she is affiliated with directorates dealing with the 
disabled, women, the elderly and family issues.  She is married and 
has a son. 
 
State Minister Mehmet Simsek 
---------------------------- 
Simsek was born in the town of Gercus in Batman province, the 
youngest of 9 children.  His mother died when he was 5 years old. 
His parents were not literate.  He graduated from Ankara 
University's Faculty of Political Sciences and traveled to Britain 
for post-graduate studies on a state scholarship.  He worked as an 
economist in the US Embassy in Ankara.  In 1997 he won a Diversity 
Visa to the US.  He worked at UBS Bank in NYC, then moved to London 
to join Merrill Lynch as head of its Europe, Middle East and Africa 
Economic and Strategic Research Department.  As State Minister, he 
will be responsible for the Treasury Undersecretariat and associated 
with the Central Bank.  He speaks fluent English.  He is married. 
 
State Minister Mustafa Said Yazicioglu 
-------------------------------------- 
Born in Surmene in 1949, Yazicioglu is a graduate of Ankara 
University's Faculty of Theology.  He earned a PhD from the 
Sorbonne.  Yazicioglu became a Professor at Ankara University's 
Faculty of Theology and is former president of the Religious Affairs 
Director and former Dean of Ankara University's Faculty of Theology. 
 He entered parliament on the AKP ticket in 2002.  As State 
Minister, he will be responsible for the problems of Turks living 
abroad and for relations with the Turkic republics in Central Asia. 
Affiliated institutions include the Directorate General of Religious 
Affairs (Diyanet) and the Turkish International Cooperation and 
Development Agency.  He speaks French and Arabic and is married with 
two children. 
 
Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin 
---------------------------------- 
Sahin was born in Karabuk in 1950.  He graduated from Istanbul 
University's Faculty of Law and practiced law for a while as a free 
lance attorney.  He was first elected to parliament on the Welfare 
Party (Refah) ticket in 1995 from Istanbul.  A founding member of 
AKP, he was re-elected to parliament in 2002 and 2007 on the AKP 
ticket.  Sahin was Deputy PM in the 59th government.  He is married 
with four children. 
 
Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul 
---------------------------- 
Gonul was born in Erzincan in 1939.  After graduating from Ankara 
University's Political Sciences Faculty in 1962, he earned his 
master's degree from Southern California University.  He joined the 
Interior Ministry and served as a sub-governor and governor in 
several sub-provinces and provinces.  Gonul then served as Chairman 
of the Court of Accounts (Sayistay).  He was elected to parliament 
 
ANKARA 00002246  003 OF 005 
 
 
on the Felicity Party (Fazilet) ticket in the April 1999 elections, 
joined AKP in 2002 and was re-elected in 2002 and 2007.  He is 
married with three children.  He speaks English. 
 
Interior Minister Besir Atalay 
------------------------------- 
Born in Keskin in 1947, Atalay graduated from Ankara University's 
Faculty of Law and did his post-graduate studies in the same 
faculty.  He worked as a professor at Erzurum's Ataturk University 
and at Marmara University, and served as Department Head of Planning 
at the State Planning Organization.  A founding member and former 
Rector of Kirikkale University, Atalay was Coordinator of the Ankara 
Social Studies Center.  Prior to entering politics, he founded the 
ANAR and Pollmark polling companies.  Atalay entered Parliament on 
the AKP ticket in 2002 elections and  was assigned as State Minister 
with the portfolio of State Statistics Institute, Promotion Fund, 
Press and Publications Directorate, TIKA (Turkish Cooperation and 
Development Administration), Social Assistance and Solidarity Fund, 
TRT, Anatolian News Agency and RTUK.  He speaks some English and is 
married with three children. 
 
Foreign Minister and Chief Negotiator Ali Babacan 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Babacan was born in Ankara in 1967 and graduated from Middle East 
Technical University in 1989.  He went to the U.S. in 1990 on a 
Fulbright scholarship.  From 1990-92 he completed his MBA at 
Northwestern University Kellogg School with a focus on marketing, 
organization and international business administration.  He has been 
in the trade business in Ankara since 1994.  Babacan entered 
parliament in 2002 on the AKP ticket and served as State Minister in 
charge of economy.  He was then tasked as Chief Negotiator with the 
EU, a portfolio he carried concurrently with his ministerial 
position.  He speaks English and is married with two children. 
 
Finance Minister Kemal Unakitan 
--------------------------------- 
Born in 1946, Unakitan graduated from the Ankara Academy of 
Economics and Commercial Sciences.  He worked as a Finance Ministry 
Inspector, then Deputy Director General and Director General at SEKA 
Cellulose Factories, then a state-run enterprise.  He was an 
Executive Board member of the Family Finance Company.  A friend of 
the PM's, he entered Parliament on the AKP ticket in 2002, after 
which he was assigned as Minister of Finance, a post he retains in 
this government.  Unakitan speaks English.  He is married with three 
children. 
 
Education Minister Huseyin Celik 
-------------------------------- 
Born in Gurpinar township of Van in 1959, Celik graduated from 
Istanbul University's Faculty of Literature.  He obtained master's 
degrees from Van's Centennial University in Turkish Literature and 
from London University in Turkish Politics.  He received his 
doctorate from Istanbul University's Social Sciences Institute.  He 
served as Science and Literature Department Head at Centennial 
University.  He first entered Parliament on the True Path Party 
(DYP) ticket in the 1999 elections.  A founding member of AKP, Celik 
was re-elected to parliament on the AKP ticket in the 2002 and 2007 
elections.  He was Culture Minister in the 58th government and 
Education Minister in the 59th government, a portfolio he retains in 
this government.  Celik is married with three children. 
 
Public Works Minister Faruk Nafiz Ozak 
--------------------------------------- 
Ozak was born in Trabzon in 1946 and is a graduate of the Black Sea 
Technical University Faculty of Civil Engineering.  He is former 
President of the Trabzonspor soccer team.  Ozak entered Parliament 
on the AKP ticket in 2002 and was named Public Works Minister in 
2005, a portfolio he retains.  He speaks English and is married with 
two children. 
 
Health Minister Recep Akdag 
--------------------------- 
Born in Erzurum in 1960, Akdag graduated from Ataturk University's 
Medical Faculty and subsequently worked at different administrative 
positions within Ataturk University's Medical Faculty.  Akdag 
entered parliament on the AKP ticket in 2002 and served as Health 
Minister in the 59th government, where he dealt with Avian Influenza 
outbreaks.  He speaks English.  Hs is married with five children. 
 
Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim 
----------------------------------------- 
 
ANKARA 00002246  004 OF 005 
 
 
Born in Refahiye in 1955, Yildirim is a graduate of Istanbul's 
Technical University Ship Construction and Maritime Sciences 
Faculty.  Received his master's at World Maritime University.  He 
was Director General of Istanbul Sea Buses Administration.  A 
founding member of AKP, he entered Parliament on the AKP ticket in 
2002 and served as Transportation Minister in the 59th government. 
He speaks English and French and is married with three children. 
 
Agriculture Minister Mehdi Eker 
-------------------------------- 
Eker was born in 1956 in Bismil, graduated from Ankara University's 
Veterinary Faculty, received a Master's Degree from the British 
University of Aberdeen on agriculture economics, and received his 
PhD from Ankara University's Health Sciences Institute.  He moved to 
the Agriculture Ministry following his service in the Istanbul 
Municipality, and served as Deputy Director General in Agriculture 
Production and Development Department, and as Director General in 
the Agriculture Protection and Control Departments.  Eker was 
serving as the Agriculture Ministry Advisor before entering 
politics.  He is married with three children.  He speaks English. 
 
 
Labor Minister Faruk Celik 
-------------------------- 
Born in Yusufeli in 1956, Celik is a graduate of Bursa High Islamic 
Institute as well as Yildiz Technical University's Business 
Administration Department in Istanbul.  He worked as a teacher 
before starting up a private commercial business.  He first entered 
Parliament from Bursa in the 1999 elections on the Fazilet ticket. 
A founding member of AKP, he was re-elected in 2002 and 2007 on the 
AKP ticket.  He is married with four children. 
 
Industry and Trade Minister Zafer Caglayan 
------------------------------------------- 
Caglayan was born in Mus in 1957 and graduated from the Gazi 
University Faculty of Engineering in 1979.  He entered business life 
in 1980 and is the owner of Akel Aluminum Company.  He was elected 
to the Ankara Chamber of Industry as a member in 1987 and was 
elected Chamber President in 1995.  He entered politics on AKP 
ticket in the 2007 general elections.  He is married with two 
children. 
 
Energy Minister Hilmi Guler 
--------------------------- 
Born in Ordu in 1949, Guler is a graduate of Middle East Technical 
University's Metallurgy Engineering Department.  He received his PhD 
from the same university.  He served as project engineer and group 
leader at TUSAS, and as an executive board member of TUBITAK.  He 
served as Director General of Etibank.  A founding member of AKP, he 
entered parliament in 2002 from Ordu and was re-elected in 2007. 
He served as Minister of Energy and Natural resources in 59th 
government and retains his portfolio.  Guler speaks English.  He is 
married with two children. 
 
Culture and Tourism Minister Ertugrul Gunay 
--------------------------------------------- 
Gunay was born in Ordu on the Black Sea coast in 1948.  He graduated 
from Istanbul University's Faculty of Law and started to work as a 
freelance lawyer in Ordu.  He joined the center-left Republican 
People's Party (CHP) in the early 1970s and became Ordu provincial 
chairman in 1974.  Between 1977-1980 he was CHP's MP from Ordu. 
From 1986-1987, he was Social Democrat Populist Party (SHP) Ankara 
Provincial Chairman, and SHP Secretary General from 1990-91.  He 
then returned to CHP and was Secretary General of the party between 
1992-1994.  Gunay challenged CHP chairman Baykal at the party 
convention after the 1999 general elections and  was then expelled 
from the party due to differences of views with the party 
administration.  He entered parliament on the AKP ticket in 2007 
elections.  He is a strong environmentalist.  He speaks English and 
is married with two children. 
 
Environment and Forestry Minister Veysel Eroglu 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Born in Afyon in 1948, Eroglu entered the Faculty of Civil 
Engineering at Istanbul Technical University.  From 1980-81 he was 
employed at the same university as an assistant lecturer (having 
gained his doctorate), and from 1984-1986 he continued as Associate 
Professor.  In 1991, he became Head of the Department of 
Environmental Engineering, with the title of full Professor.  He 
served as Director General of Istanbul's Water and Sewage 
Institution and State Waterworks Institution.  He is the author of 
 
ANKARA 00002246  005 OF 005 
 
 
more than 250 academic works.  Eroglu entered Parliament on the AKP 
ticket in 2007.  He is married with four children. 
 
WILSON