08ANKARA1664
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5744
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1664/01 2621049
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181049Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7483
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9179
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4753
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3243
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6872
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6713
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3283
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001664 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
German Court Convicts Deniz Feneri Suspects 
All media outlets report three suspects working for the 
Germany-based, Islamist-oriented Deniz Feneri charity have been 
convicted by the Frankfurt Regional Court for fraud and embezzlement 
of charity funds.  Mehmet Gurhan, chairman of the charity until 
November 2006, was sentenced to 5 years 10 months in prison.  Mehmet 
Taskan, the chairman of the organization after Gurhan, received 2 
years 9 months.  Firdevsi Ermis, the charity's accountant, got a 
sentence of a one year 10 months.  The convicted suspects, who had 
made plea bargained their sentences, said they would not appeal the 
ruling.  German judge Johann Muller said the charity, set up in 
Germany in 1999, collected donations totaling 41.4 million Euros 
between 2002 and 2007.  Muller said 16.9 million Euro of the 
donations were transferred to Turkey to support the 
Islamist-oriented Kanal 7 Television and that the decisions over 
spending charity funds were made by Zekeriya Karaman, Ismail Karahan 
(Kanal 7 advertisement manager), Mustafa Celik (Kanal 7 shareholder 
and chief editor of the channel,) and Zahid Akman (chair of Turkey's 
radio and television board, RTUK).  He said the Turkish government 
declined German support in the investigation.  Muller also said the 
Deniz Feneri charities in Germany and Turkey worked together. 
Mainstream Hurriyet, Vatan and the leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
quote judge Muller as saying, "Deniz Feneri organizations in Germany 
and Turkey were founded with the same system.  Behind the scenes are 
Zekeriya Karaman, Ismail Karahan, Mustafa Celik, and Zahid Akman. 
The real perpetrators are in Turkey." 
 
Government spokesman Cemil Cicek said Turkey would give no backing 
to the criminals, and that Turkish prosecutors were expected to act 
on the irregularities.  Opposition deputy group chief Kemal Anadol 
said the AKP should prosecute the Turkish suspects responsible for 
the irregularities in the Deniz Feneri charity.  CHP secretary 
general Mustafa Ozyurek warned that prosecutors and judges in Turkey 
should be allowed to probe the matter without interference from the 
ruling AKP government. 
 
Akman Accused of Fraud in Separate Case in Germany 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet and mainstream Hurriyet report the 
Frankfurt prosecutor's office has launched a separate investigation 
of Turkey's radio and television board, RTUK Chair, Zahid Akman over 
fraud in a Frankfurt housing society founded by Akman and 18 other 
partners.  The housing company, OFWG, took money from over 1,000 
Turks living in Germany, pledging to give them cheap houses.  The 
participants in the building society never got their houses, and 
their money was never put into the bank account of the society. 
Shortly afterwards, OFWG declared bankruptcy.  The prosecutor 
accuses Akman of fraud and embezzlement, and underlines that Akman's 
"partners" were convicted in the Deniz Feneri case, report papers. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Deniz Feneri Germany Case and Turkey 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "The Deniz 
Feneri investigation, as the judge put it, was the biggest fraud 
case in Germany's history. Turkey cannot afford to ignore such a 
shame, and it should not.  Turkey must follow the Deniz Feneri case 
with a comprehensive investigation of its in-Turkey links.  The 
Turkish government and judiciary must consider this an obligation. 
Otherwise, it will not be easy for the AKP to come out of this 
cleanly." 
 
Yasin Dogan wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak: "The Deniz Feneri 
verdict in Germany should be taken seriously but it also has to be 
considered as individual crimes. Whoever does wrong deserves to be 
blamed, however, that does not mean defaming a certain group or 
institution.  The Deniz Feneri debate has other dimensions such as: 
a Germany which is hostile and skeptical about Turkish foundations 
in Germany; the Dogan Media Group who is coordinating with CHP; and 
 
ANKARA 00001664  002 OF 004 
 
 
some international NGOs who question the efficiency of Turkish 
foundations during international disasters." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan: "The German judiciary 
fulfilled its responsibilities and concluded the Deniz Feneri case. 
Now, it is time to find the main suspects of this case in Turkey. 
However, PM Erdogan's recent attitude shows that he is not very 
willing to capture the real criminals in Turkey.  He has been 
accusing the media of rushing into things and urging them angrily to 
wait for the verdict.  Well, now the case has concluded and has 
shown that we did not rush into things.  The government, using 
political immunity as an excuse, has turned the parliament into a 
shelter for criminals.  We all are waiting for the "clean hands" 
operation to start soon." 
 
Cuneyt Arcayurek writes in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: 
"Donations raised by the Deniz Feneri charity in Germany were 
carried to Turkey by Zahid Akman to be used for political aims. 
Deniz Feneri was set up in Turkey to cover such irregularities and 
was granted by the AKP the status of an organization working for 
public good.  The organization has strong support by the ruling AKP. 
 Former Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc even gave them the Ataturk 
award.  PM Erdogan, who should be held accountable, declines doing 
so.  Zekeriya Karaman is free, and Zahid Akman doesn't even think of 
resigning from his post at RTUK." 
 
The World Association of Newspapers (WAN) Letter to PM Erdogan 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that WAN sent a letter to PM Erdogan 
urging him to withdraw his threats towards the Dogan Media Group and 
to reiterate his commitment to the press freedom. 
 
General Basbug Meets with TV Representatives 
All papers report that TGS Chief General Basbug met with Ankara reps 
of TV channels and news agencies yesterday.  Mainstream Sabah 
reports that during the meeting General Basbug requested the media 
members not call him "commander" or "Ilker Pasha" (a traditional 
honorific for Turkish Generals), but just to use his family name, 
"Basbug."  General Basbug gave the same messages to the TVs that he 
gave to newspapers the previous day.  Regarding the military's visit 
to the two retired Generals incarcerated in Kandira prison in 
connection with the Ergenekon investigation, Basbug said "necessary 
permission was obtained from the relevant offices.  I did not ask 
for permission from the Prime Minister.  The Prime Minister heard 
the news from the TVs." 
 
Phone Conversation Links Ergenekon with US Consulate Attack 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Erhan Kargin, one of the 
assailants killed in the attack, had phone conversations with the 
Ergenekon suspects.  This reveals that the attack on the Consulate 
was instigated by Ergenekon suspects and their aim was to create 
political chaos in Turkey, notes Zaman.  The paper adds that the 
suspects who were in touch with Erhan Kargin were linked to the 
nationalist association Kuvayi Milliye while, at the same time 
trying to infiltrate to Islamic Ismail aga sect in Istanbul.  This 
infiltration attempt was explained in detail in the Ergenekon 
indictment prepared by prosecutor Zekeriya Oz. 
 
Ergenekon Suspect Retired General Eruygur Hospitalized 
Sabah, Zaman, Cumhuriyet, Vatan, Hurriyet, Milliyet and others: 
Today's papers report that retired General Eruygur was hospitalized 
yesterday after falling and suffering a brain hemorrhage yesterday. 
He was transferred to Kocaeli University hospital from the high 
security Kandira prison yesterday.  Hospitial officials said that 
"Eruygur fell because of his hypertension and suffered a head 
trauma.  Eruygur doesn't have a life threatening condition, but 
remains in critical condition."  Zaman reports that Eruygur suffered 
from a neck fracture as well.  Sabah reports that TGS Chief General 
Basbug, during his meeting with journalists, signaled that Eruygur 
could be transferred to the military hospital GATA if necessary. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001664  003 OF 004 
 
 
State-Owned AIG 
Media continues to cover the global economic meltdown and mainly 
comment on its potential impact on the Turkish economy.  In 
mainstream Hurriyet, Erdal Saglam reminds readers about the upcoming 
Turkish local elections and warns: "The AKP government's economic 
choice is vitally important.  If the Turkish economy gets very bad, 
the government will be responsible for it, not the current global 
crisis."  Papers highlight the U.S. government's effort to save AIG 
from the current crisis by becoming a shareholder.  Radikal says 
"AIG is now a state-owned company" while Islamist Yeni Safak fronts 
"U.S. has become the Turkey of 2000 crisis and started owning the 
companies."  Cumhuriyet front page story reads: "The American System 
is Cracking" adding that economic crisis since last July has led to 
the demise of three investment banking firms, and there are only two 
left now. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Economic Meltdown 
 
Erdal Saglam wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "In the very near future 
as the global economic crisis begins to effect Turkey deeply, the 
AKP government will have to make a choice.  The current fight with 
one of the media groups indicates the government's determination to 
do anything and everything to increase its votes through populism. 
Thus the AKP's economic choice is vitally important.  In other 
words, if the Turkish economy goes very bad the government will be 
responsible for it, not the current global crisis." 
Attack on U.S. Embassy in Yemen 
Media coverage of the terrorist attack on the U.S. Embassy in Yemen 
dominates international news coverage.  Many outlets note the U.S. 
is a repeat target in Yemen and note that "Yemeni Islami Jihad" 
claimed responsibility.  Mainstream Hurriyet carries the headline, 
"First a Bomb, and then a Rocket," as "Islamist Jihad has claimed 
responsibility for the attack," which marks, "the eighth attack, 
including the July attack against the U.S. Consulate in Istanbul, 
against a U.S. diplomatic mission over the last five years." 
Mainstream Milliyet writes, "The attack reminds one of the July 
attack against the U.S. Consulate in Istanbul," but notes, "the U.S. 
sees the hallmarks of Al-Qaeda" in the Yemen attack yesterday. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes, "In Yemen, the Target is Once 
Again the U.S." and points out, "this is the second time in six 
months that Islamist militants have targeted the U.S. Embassy in 
Yemen even though the Embassy compound is protected like a castle." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman writes, "In Yemen, the U.S. Embassy is 
Attacked Again."  Leftist Taraf reports, "The U.S. is Targeted for a 
Second Time in Yemen."  Cumhuriyet notes that Yemeni officials have 
determined that Al-Qaeda is behind this attack.  Milliyet also 
carries a list of terrorist attacks against the U.S. in Yemen since 
¶2000. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish stock exchange index, affected by the global meltdown, 
dives to its lowest level in 2008. 
 
- The Turkish Parliament will launch the new legislative year on 
October 1. 
 
- President Abdullah Gul will travel to Germany October 14 for the 
opening of International Book Fair in Frankfurt. 
 
International News 
 
- Suicide bombers blew up a car outside the gate of the U.S. Embassy 
in Yemen's capital, Sana'a, killing 16 people and six assailants. 
 
- Syria's Foreign Ministry said indirect talks between Syria and 
Israel have been postponed at the Israeli's request. 
 
ANKARA 00001664  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
- Russia's Foreign Ministry condemns the NATO chief's visit to 
Georgia, saying it showed "Cold War reflexes" and will further 
destabilize the region. 
 
WILSON