08ANKARA189
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3186
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0189/01 0321431
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011431Z FEB 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5100
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8652
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3822
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2659
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6391
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6217
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2798
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000189 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2008 
 
ANKARA 00000189  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Building Blast Kills 22 in Istanbul 
All papers report more than 20 people were killed when an explosion 
ripped through a building housing an unlicensed fireworks factory in 
Istanbul.  Fourteen of the deaths occurred when the victims gathered 
to watch the fire triggered by a boiler explosion. The five-storey 
plant was located in the Davutpasa neighborhood of Istanbul. 
Although municipality officials discovered the unlicensed factory 
last week, they did not shut the plant down.  Instead, they asked 
the owner to obtain a license.  Papers ask how the factory managed 
to transport such a sizable amount of explosives without obtaining 
the required permission from the police.  Many plants in the area 
skip the weekly boiler inspections in order to reduce maintenance 
costs.  Papers criticize authorities for making 'scandalous' 
remarks, such as Istanbul Governor Muammer Guler's complaints that 
unlicensed plants continue to operate, and Mayor Kadir Topbas' 
charge that citizens decline to file complaints. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Fireworks Plant Blast-Caused Deaths 
Umur Talu wrote in mainstream Sabah (2/1):  "Turkey is witnessing 
the heartbreaking results of a regime that turns a blind eye to 
slavery.  One day we hear reports from the east of children who are 
forced into temporary agricultural work and, as a result, who die in 
traffic accidents while they commute to these jobs. The next day, we 
hear news of female workers being burned to death while they work in 
illegal businesses in Istanbul.  While everyone rightly screams with 
each martyr's death, why are officials not taking precautions to 
prevent forced labor?  These slaves are uninsured, overworked, 
poorly paid, intimidated, injured, and sometimes even blown into 
pieces.  Which NGO, reporter or politician is drawing attention to 
this issue?  I don't know who will care, but those people who were 
burned alive, blown into pieces or crushed under debris yesterday in 
Istanbul were the children of this country.  They lost their lives 
because of sheer negligence." 
 
University Rectors Oppose Freeing Turban Ban in Universities 
All papers report university rectors have mobilized to oppose the 
ruling AKP and opposition MHP plans to ease the ban on the Muslim 
headscarf for female students.  The rectors argue the reform runs 
contrary to the principles of the secular republic.  Istanbul 
University Rector Professor Mesut Parlak told academics yesterday 
that the headscarf adjustments posed a significant threat to the 
public.  In addition, Parlak complained that the universities were 
not asked for their views regarding the matter.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports some of the academics expressed concern that the headscarf 
regulation is a first step in Turkey's transformation into an 
Islamic state.  Papers report that the student senates of several 
other universities across Turkey issued statements to condemn the 
headscarf adjustments.  The Aegean University Senate released a 
statement saying that the headscarf "was not a symbol of freedom, 
but rather an obstacle to freedom."  On Friday, the inter-university 
board of rectors will hold a meeting to discuss the AKP-MHP turban 
plans.  Papers report academics from universities in Ankara told CHP 
lawmakers Kemal Anadol and Hakki Suha Okay that the headscarf 
reforms submitted to the parliament's approval were designed to 
undermine Turkey's secular system. 
 
Meanwhile, CHP leader Deniz Baykal told a private television channel 
the headscarf has emerged as "a new definition of Islam." 
Responding to a question about whether the military was a mechanism 
for protecting the republic, Baykal said he saw the Turkish people 
as the only guardians of Turkey. 
 
Erdogan on the Turban Controversy, Terror and Turkey-Greece Ties 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan said Thursday evening in 
his televised monthly address that lifting the headscarf ban was a 
matter of individual freedom.  "It is possible to resolve these 
problems with common sense, by ensuring the widest possible social 
compromise.  No state can advance if it sees its citizens as a 
 
ANKARA 00000189  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
threat," said Erdogan.  Erdogan also referred to a major police 
operation against the illegal 'Ergenekon' gang, and emphasized that 
Turkey's institutions are determined to combat illegal gangs.  The 
PM said the PKK organization was isolated and miserable today, 
"thanks to the political, military, diplomatic and economic measures 
taken."  He also noted, "The investments we have made in southeast 
Turkey over the last five and a half years have raised hopes for the 
future.  This change means a loss of ground for the terrorist 
organization; this is why the PKK wants to create a chaotic 
atmosphere.  They want to change this positive course."  Recalling 
the recent visit of Greek PM Karamanlis to Turkey, Erdogan said the 
Aegean dispute, Cyprus, and minority problems were the top issues 
Turkey and Greece are addressing.  "We have reiterated our political 
will to cooperate in resolving our problems and I believe this 
process will yield positive results for both countries," said 
Erdogan. 
 
Protestants in Turkey Complain of Rising Attacks 
Mainstream Sabah reports the Union of Protestant Churches has 
released a report saying in 2007, protestants in Turkey were the 
target of 19 attacks.  The murder of three protestants in Malatya 
plays a prominent role in the report.  The report also complains 
that protestants in Turkey are under surveillance for their 
missionary activities. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Revitalization of Turkey-US Ties 
Hasan Mesut Hazar observed from Washington in 
conservative-nationalist Turkiye (2/1):  "Turkey's new lively 
foreign policy has thawed relations with Washington. Revitalized 
relations began with PM Erdogan's visit to the US on November 5, 
¶2007.  Erdogan's meeting with Bush, and the bilateral cooperation 
that resulted against the PKK, marked a turning point in bilateral 
relations. This impacted Turkish public opinion immediately and 
positively.  The Deputy Chief of General Staff, General Ergin 
Saygun, is having meetings in the US regarding defense issues and 
counterterrorism.  General Saygun's impressions about the bilateral 
relationship are also very positive.  The US media has also noted 
this recently revitalized relationship; news and commentaries about 
Turkey have increased noticeably in the US media.  In addition, 
there is a delegation from Turkish Parliament visiting the US at the 
moment.  Some members of this delegation delivered remarks at a 
panel sponsored by the Brookings Institute entitled 
'Turkish-American Relations, From the Past to the Future.'  All of 
these visits clearly show the lively improvement in this strategic 
bilateral relationship.  Moreover, US Ambassador to Turkey Ross 
Wilson talked to Turkish journalists in Washington yesterday and 
stressed that the US believes this spring-like weather will 
continue." 
 
Editorial Commentary on a Possible Talabani Visit to Turkey 
Cengiz Candar wrote in the economic daily Referans (2/1): "Iraqi 
Kurdish sources close to Jalal Talabani say the Iraqi President may 
visit Turkey around February 20.  The issue of inviting Talabani to 
Turkey was raised in the last National Security Council (MGK) 
meeting, with the military and civilian wings of the Council 
agreeing to the invitation.  Back in 2004, Turkish Foreign Ministry 
(MFA) Spokesman Namik Tan traveled to Suleymaniye to meet Talabani 
in a visit interpreted as a 'gesture,' indicating Turkey had no 
objections to Talabani being the President of Iraq.  However, the 
'anti-Kurd reflexes' within the Turkish state system began after 
Talabani settled in Baghdad as President, and they blocked him from 
visiting Turkey.  Iraq's two Shiite prime ministers, Ibrahim Jafari 
and Nuri al-Maliki, have both visited Turkey several times, but 
Talabani has not been able to do the same.  If Talabani visits 
Ankara, the sides are expected to discuss a new era in relations 
concerning northern Iraq.  In addition, a new 'institutional aspect' 
is expected in the relationship between Ankara and Erbil.  In that 
sense, a visit by Talabani is also expected to pave the way for the 
reestablishment of ties with Barzani. President Talabani would be 
welcomed at Cankaya with full military honors and his visit would 
 
ANKARA 00000189  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
melt the ice between Iraq and Turkey." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A military court in the eastern city of Van has launched a case 
against the eight Turkish soldiers who were held by the PKK in 
October for allegedly surrendering to the PKK during the attack in 
Daglica.  On October 21, terrorists killed 12 soldiers and wounded 
16 others in the Daglica attack, and eight soldiers went missing 
after clashes on October 22.  The soldiers were later brought to 
Turkey on November 4. 
 
- On Thursday, security forces captured a PKK militant at Habur Gate 
who was attempting to cross into Turkey at the Iraqi border. 
Sources said he was sent to Turkey to stage attacks. 
 
- The Council of State (Danistay) has rejected a lawsuit filed by a 
parent whose daughter was not allowed to participate in university 
entrance exams because she wore a headscarf. 
 
International News 
 
- The Armenian National Committee of America (ANCA) announced it 
would support Democratic candidate Barack Obama in US presidential 
elections. 
 
- A senior al-Qaeda leader in Afghanistan, Abu Laith al-Libi, 
reportedly died during a missile attack in northern Pakistan. 
 
- The Swedish Aviation Institution has decided to allow regular 
civilian flights from Sweden to northern Iraq. 
 
MCELDOWNEY