08ANKARA1809
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8061
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1809/01 2911139
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171139Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7708
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9237
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4842
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3300
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6918
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6762
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3334
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001809 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 17, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Five More Soldiers Killed in Clashes with PKK 
All papers:  Four soldiers were killed in clashes with the PKK in 
Kavakli, which is located in the southeast province of Hakkari. 
Helicopters with reinforcements were sent to the region, but one of 
the helicopters, which was carrying soldiers and Kayseri 1st 
Commando brigade commander General Omer Faruk Kucuk, crashed due to 
a technical failure.  A soldier died in the crash, bringing the 
Thursday's military death toll to five. General Kucuk and 15 
soldiers were injured slightly in the crash.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports that the pro-Kurdish Firat News Agency first reported 
yesterday that three soldiers were killed in the clashes.  However, 
following the TGS statement on the crashed helicopter and the 
martyrs, Firat News Agency changed its report and said that the 
helicopter was "downed by PKK militants."  Tabloid Posta reports 
that 18 PKK terrorists were killed during the operations. 
Mainstream Sabah notes that the 2nd Army Commander General Necdet 
Ozel went to Van by a private military plane yesterday and from 
there, together with Gendarmerie Commander General Yurdaer Olcan, 
traveled to Hakkari. 
 
Meanwhile, Tercuman and Cumhuriyet report that the military 
prosecutor's office gave Taraf newspaper a three-day deadline to 
hand over all their documents related to the Aktutun attack and 
warned Taraf that if they do not hand over the documents, the 
relevant documents will be taken by force. 
 
PM Erdogan Extends Support to General Basbug 
Sabah, Hurriyet, Aksam, Tercuman, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Turkiye and 
others:  Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan expressed support to Chief of 
General Staff General Ilker Basbug who harshly criticized the media 
for their reports that the military had prior knowledge of the 
October 3rd terrorist attack on the Aktutun military outpost. 
Mainstream Hurriyet quoted Erdogan as saying "No one has the right 
to pull the military down.  No one should encourage terror.  We are 
standing on the right side and the rest is the others' concern." 
Mainstream Milliyet says that PM Erdogan "spoke just like General 
Basbug" and said "everyone, including the press, should act 
carefully."  Cumhuriyet quotes Erdogan saying "The media has the 
right to criticize, but there is also the right to respond to 
criticism.  There are ethical rules by which the independent media 
must abide." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Basbug's Response to Criticism of the 
Military 
 
Nazli Ilicak wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "General Basbug did not 
respond to Taraf's allegations of negligence in Aktutun.  Instead of 
giving harsh statements and lining up all his force commanders 
behind him, he should have met with the PM and explained the 
military's sensitivity to such news.  And PM Erdogan, instead of 
supporting the General's harsh statement, should have talked to the 
media with his Defense Minister and of course, used milder language 
that that of Basbug.  Yesterday, Taraf presented more documents in 
relation to the Aktutun attack.  There are still many unanswered 
questions.  But this time, the Prime Minister, not the TGS Chief, 
should speak to the press at a press conference, right after the 
investigation is completed on the case." 
 
Ihsan Dagi observed in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "The military is not 
being criticized.  Questions about how the military does its job are 
very healthy.  Armies in other democratic countries will respond to 
such questions.  It seems that the military doesn't think this 
country is run by a democratic regime.  The principle of 
accountability is a requirement in modern administrative structures, 
particularly in democracies.  It will be impossible for the media to 
speak out at all if those who ask questions about the Aktutun attack 
are treated as pro-PKK.  A strong military is one that excels in its 
job, and not one that intimidates the people, journalists and 
 
ANKARA 00001809  002 OF 003 
 
 
politicians.  An institution that sees criticism as treason is 
dysfunctional.  It must not be forgotten that General Basbug's 
statement this week reminds us of the protective value of a 
democratic regime." 
 
Fikret Bila questioned in mainstream Milliyet:  "Why did General 
Basbug, who is known for his calm attitude, use such a strong tone 
in his statement to the media yesterday?  General Basbug always 
keeps in close contact with the families of the martyrs.  As the 
military's chief commander, he considers every single soldier as his 
own child and reiterates at every opportunity that 'the commanders 
are the ones who suffer deeply from each martyr's death.  Their pain 
is almost as acute as that of the martyrs' families."  General 
Basbug used a controlled tone in his statement to show everyone that 
the fight against terrorism is not a game.  He also showed the 
Turkish military's determination to win this fight.  He used such a 
tone to give the right message to certain media organizations in 
order to show that their slander campaign did not intimidate the 
military.  And finally, using this tone wasn't a tactic to 'black 
out' the facts of Aktutun.  General Basbug promised that he will 
share the facts with the public when the necessary investigation is 
completed.  People who know General Basbug well know that Basbug 
will fulfill this promise too." 
 
Justice Minister on Detainee's Death by Torture 
Media outlets report Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin told the 
press yesterday the ruling AKP government maintains its policy of 
"zero tolerance" regarding the torture of detainees at the hands of 
security officials.  Detainee Engin Ceber died from a brain 
hemorrhage he sustained after being beaten and tortured by policemen 
and prison guards.  Ceber, a leftist activist, was sentenced to 
serve time in Metris prison in Istanbul for distributing a leftist 
publication.  Professor Gencay Gursoy, head of the Turkish Union of 
Physicians, said Ceber died from wounds sustained during "a beating 
with sticks wrapped in fabric."  Gursoy said "it seemed the 
policemen were specially trained on torture methods."  Ceber's two 
friends taken into custody on September 28 along with the activist 
said they went through the same torture Ceber was subjected to. 
They said the torturers even took their photos, with policemen 
sitting on them on the ground "like in Abu Ghraib prison." 
 
Meanwhile, papers report parliament's commission for human rights 
will set up four sub-committees to inspect prisons and police 
stations. 
 
Court Blocks Access to Vatan Website over Islamist Writer's 
Application 
Mainstream Vatan reports a court in Silivri, Istanbul blocked access 
to its website at the request of Islamist community leader and 
writer Adnan Oktar due to readers' comments about his community. 
Oktar, a controversial community leader and strong critic of 
Darwin's evolution theory, had so far managed to block access to 61 
websites through court orders, saying they had defamed him.  Oktar 
is the author of "Atlas of Creation," in which he advocates 
creationism in the book which had been distributed for free to 
renowned academics, politicians and institutions around the world 
earlier this year.  Last month a Turkish court barred access to the 
website of "evolutionist" Oxford professor Richard Dawkins after 
Oktar complained it had defamed him.  Turkish courts have blocked 
access to more than 800 websites, including YouTube, this year for 
insulting "Turkishness" or the founder of modern Turkey, Ataturk. 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Ergenekon suspect retired general Sener Eruygur, who is being 
treated in Kocaeli University Hospital for a brain hemorrhage, was 
 
ANKARA 00001809  003 OF 003 
 
 
transferred to a military hospital in Istanbul. 
 
- An IMF delegation headed by IMF's Turkey desk chief Lorenzo 
Giorgiani is in Istanbul for talks. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan will kick off a tour the eastern and 
southeastern provinces over the weekend. 
 
International News 
 
- Iran launches military exercises to "demonstrate the might and 
combat readiness of Iran's Air Force." 
 
- Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki says the "hegemonic" 
nature of the US economy affected other economies, triggering global 
financial meltdown. 
 
- Italy begins charter flights to northern Cyprus. 
WILSON