08ANKARA1897
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0329
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1897/01 3051522
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 311522Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7853
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9271
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4916
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3345
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6947
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6791
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3366
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001897 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Somali Pirates Hijack Turkish Ship 
All papers: Somali pirates carrying heavy weapons attacked the ship 
"YA/SA Neslihan" in the Gulf of Aden and captured 20 Turkish crew 
members.  The ship belongs to Yalcin Sabanci of the Sabanci family 
and it was carrying 77,000 tones of iron ore to China.  Reportedly, 
the pirates snuck up on the ship with speed boats before they 
climbed aboard.  The captain of the ship only could send a message 
saying, "We are being hijacked."  Mainstream Vatan reports that the 
pirates off the shores of Somalia have hijacked 73 ships this year. 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that Turkish Foreign Ministry called on 
NATO security forces to help rescue 20 Turkish crew members. 
 
World Economic Forum/IMF 
News outlets cover the World Economic Forum by highlighting the 
remarks from the participants, including by PM Erdogan.  Islamist 
Yeni Safak reports Prime Minister Erdogan called for international 
cooperation and unity.  Liberal Radikal notes Ersin Ozince called on 
the government to take steps to improve Turkey's financial 
credibility. 
 
In "Energy Support from America," Yeni Safak also noted Assistant 
Secretary of Energy Jeff Kupfer's participation to the conference by 
reports, "The U.S. administration is trying to set up a working 
mechanism in order to support Turkey's projects on energy." 
 
All papers also highlight Minister of State in charge of economic 
affairs Mehmet Simsek's remarks on the possibility of making a 
stand-by agreement with the IMF.  Reports quote Minister Simsek 
during the WEF meetings in Istanbul, who reiterated the good shape 
of the Turkish economy and the government's consideration of making 
a stand-by agreement with the IMF as a precaution.  Turkey and the 
IMF will continue their talks during the G-20 meetings, the Minister 
added.   Milliyet calls those remarks a move "Toward Agreement with 
IMF" while Radikal considers the approach "a green light to the 
IMF." 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "International interest in 
the World Economic Forum in Istanbul this year was rather high. 
This year's forum coincided with the global financial crisis. 
Turkey is the key country to transfer the natural gas from the 
Center Asia to the world markets.  Turkey's strong and deep 
relationship with the region is a big advantage for Turkey.  As a 
European diplomat said at the forum, "Facing a strong winter with no 
gas will be enough reason for Europe to speed up Turkey's EU 
negotiations." 
 
Murat Belge wrote about "The IMF and Style" in leftist Taraf: 
"Since the PM warned the IMF that Turkey would only consider an 
agreement as long as "they don't tighten their grips on our 
throats," I've seen several people caution against such language. 
The Bretton Woods Conference that established the IMF is not a 
socialist council that deals out an excessive amount of sympathy. 
The PM himself and his party is in an historical situation regarding 
Turkey's political policy and they say they represent civil society. 
 They should be objective and it is in the interest of the 
government to give a real voice to the people.  Some of the things 
this party says are not in its own interests or in the interests of 
the Turkish people." 
 
Fuller: We Are No Longer an Ally 
News outlets are surprised by the comments of former CIA official 
Graham Fuller at the Jamestown Association's conference on Turkey 
and the Caucasus after the war in Georgia.   Mainstream Hurriyet 
carries the headline, "From Now On, We Are No Longer an Ally," and 
reports, "Fuller said that the bilateral friendship and working 
relationship between Turkey and the U.S. will continue," but noted, 
"the two countries have different foreign policy goals," as "the 
U.S. prefers isolationist policies towards countries like Iran and 
 
ANKARA 00001897  002 OF 003 
 
 
Syria," while Turkey "seeks to expand its influence through improved 
relations with its neighbors."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in 
"Turkey is no longer an American Ally," that "For the first time in 
a century, Turkey is emerging as a formidable regional power."  In 
"From Now On, Turkey is a Regional Power," Islamist Yeni Safak 
reports, "As one of the CIA's highest ranking officials and a man 
who knows Turkey, Fuller says relations between the U.S. and Turkey 
are good, but Turkey is no longer an ally."  Liberal Radikal carries 
the headline "Fuller: Turkey is no longer an American Ally," and 
reports, "Fuller also criticized U.S. hegemony after 9/11." 
 
U.S. Elections 
All news outlets feature confident reports on the presidential race 
in the U.S. as if Obama is the inevitable winner.  Coverage ranges 
from shockingly wide margins of victory in national polls to Obama's 
plans for his phantom cabinet.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "If 
Obama Wins, He Will Include Republicans in His Cabinet."  In 
addition, the paper notes, "Because of the global economic crisis 
and the situations in Afghanistan and Iraq, it will be necessary for 
(Obama to take) initiative early on."  Mainstream Milliyet reports, 
"With 96 hours remaining until Election Day," Obama is, "in the 
final stretch of an election marathon that began in February 2007." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "Time is Running Out for 
McCain," that "Observers say that, barring some extraordinary event, 
Obama is the likely winner."  Leftist Taraf quotes former President 
Bill Clinton in its headline, "It's Clear that Obama Will Be 
President."  Liberal Radikal reports in "The Heart of White America 
Says Obama Could Take 55% of the Vote," and notes, "At Harvard, the 
Ivory Tower, Obama joy is stirring," because "some polls show Obama 
to be at least ten points ahead." 
 
Columnist Ferai Tinc of mainstream Hurriyet notes, "The winner will 
have to deal with a colossal economic crisis and foreign policy will 
remain an important priority.  No matter who wins, Turkey will be 
asked to settle its Kurdish problem because the United States 
considers this problem as a contributor to instability in northern 
Iraq.  It looks like the level of support from the new American 
administration toward the AKP government will depend on the steps 
taken by Ankara in this regard." 
 
Anti-U.S. Demonstrations in Syria 
All news outlets focus coverage of the protests in Damascus and 
highlight the chilling slogans chanted against the U.S. Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports, "In Syria, A Protest of Curses against the U.S." 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak carries the headline, "Syria's Rage 
Grows," as "tens of thousands of Syrians fill the streets to condemn 
the U.S. attack on Syrian soil."  Mainstream Milliyet notes that 
protestors shouted slogans such as "Where is the U.N.?" and "The 
U.S. is the Face of Zionism," as "the crowds were a cross-section of 
society, including students, workers, and religious leaders." 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "due to security reasons, the U.S. Embassy 
in Damascus was closed."  Leftist Taraf reports, "Syria's Rage Fills 
the Streets," as protesters shouted "No to American Terror.' 
Liberal Radikal reports, "Syria is overflowing with Rage at the 
U.S." 
 
Editorial opinion on PKK and Kurdish Issue 
 
Rusen Cakir wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "Since General Basbug took 
charge of TGS, some great changes in the state's stance against 
terrorism are evident.  Nevertheless, there are still a few missing 
details like a refusal to acknowledge the "Kurdish issue," a lack of 
understanding regarding the structure of the PKK and its ability to 
recruit youth, and concerns regarding the relationship with the 
Iraqi Kurds.  However, it is still not very clear what will be asked 
from Barzani and Talabani, what they will they say, what will they 
do, and what will happen if they don't keep their promises." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist leaning Zaman:  "I am of the opinion 
that contacts with KRG President Massoud Barzani are positive, but I 
 
ANKARA 00001897  003 OF 003 
 
 
do not think that these contacts will result in anything concrete. 
The Kurdish leaders in Iraq, i.e. Barzani and Talabani, seek an 
independent Kurdish state.  Both of these leaders are playing with 
time in order to reach this ultimate goal.  Despite Talabani-Barzani 
promises of "active" support to Turkey, they are not putting an end 
to PKK presence in northern Iraq.  At the same time, will contacts 
with Barzani lead to an end to the PKK?  But, what have past 
leaders, like 10th President Sezer, actually gained from not 
inviting Talabani to Ankara?" 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal:  "The military's 
and the AKP's suggestion to establish an Undersecretary for 
terrorism is not a solution to the Kurdish problem. What must the 
administration do?  After tens of thousands of our citizens have 
lost their lives, the least we can do is find a modern legal 
solution to the issue.  The struggle with 'terror' and 'terrorists' 
is not the duty of the military, but of the government." 
 
TV News 
CNNTurk 
 
Domestic 
DTP leader Ahmet Turk rejects reports that his party sought the 
establishment of Kurdish federation in Turkey. 
 
The reading of Ergenekon indictment continues in the court. 
 
The head of DTP branch in Midyat, Aziz Bilgin, was arrested for 
inciting hatred. 
 
The police officer responsible for the death of a young person in 
Antalya says that the killing was an "accident." 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan brings together Afghanistan's President 
Karzai and Pakistan's Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani in Istanbul 
to discuss cooperation for stability and development in the region. 
 
 
Three students were taken into custody in Ankara for staging 
protests against President Abdullah Gul. 
 
The suit filed against Osman Hayal for membership in a terror 
organization is combined with the suit against the murderers of 
Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink. 
 
Bursa Directorate for Social Services prepares to object to a 
forensics report saying that the 14-year old girl raped by Islamist 
writer Huseyin Uzmez suffered no emotional or physical damage. 
 
Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul, paying a visit to Israel, says Israeli 
drones will be delivered to Turkey in the beginning of 2009. 
 
 
World 
Kurdish leader Massoud Barzani, during a visit to Washington, sends 
a message of friendship to Turkey. 
 
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will visit Egypt, Jordan, 
Israel and Palestine next week. 
 
Bill Clinton, America's 42nd president told a rally in Florida, 
"Barack Obama represents America's future, and this man should be 
our president." 
 
65 people are killed and about 300 injured in 12 bombings across the 
eastern Indian state of Assam. 
 
WILSON