08ANKARA1607
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7681
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1607/01 2521412
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081412Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7381
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9151
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4702
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3211
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6845
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6686
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3256
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001607 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Football Diplomacy: President Gul Pays Historic Visit to Yerevan 
The top news story today is President Gul's weekend visit to Yerevan 
for the World Cup qualifying match between Turkey and Armenia. 
Media coverage is very positive about the meeting, with most media 
noting Gul's comments that the visit "tore down the psychological 
walls" blocking Turkey's relations with Armenia and that Gul felt he 
had to go to Yerevan because the invitation was "an opportunity not 
to be missed."  Mainstream Hurriyet carries the headline, "Football 
Helps Mend Fences between Turkey and Armenia."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reported over the weekend, "President Gul opened a new chapter 
in relations with Armenia when he accepted the invitation from 
President Sarkisian to attend the game," and calls the meeting of 
the two presidents "an historic turning point."  In addition, the 
paper noted "French President Sarkozy and French Foreign Minister 
Kouchner praised the visit," as Sarkozy called Gul's visit 
"courageous" and Kouchner said "The EU is pleased."  Zaman also 
notes "Turkey accepted the invitation to the match to show that 
Turkey was not responsible for creating deadlock in bilateral 
negotiations with Armenia," and "to show that Turkey sees a 
difference between the Armenian government and the Armenian 
Diaspora." Liberal Radikal reported the meeting "inspired hope" as 
the two leaders discussed their "common history and common culture." 
 In addition, Radikal reports Georgian Foreign Minister Nalbandian 
told the paper, "This meeting marks the first step in the process of 
addressing the problems affecting relations between Turkey and 
Armenia," and while Armenia respects the Armenian Diaspora's views, 
"the Armenian government makes its own decisions regarding political 
issues."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports President Gul "called 
for a discussion of dialogue, not a discussion regarding genocide." 
Mainstream Aksam reports, "Gul told reporters the issue of 
'genocide' did not come up in the discussions between the two 
presidents." 
 
President Gul also told reporters he and President Sarkisian will 
conduct a second round of talks soon in New York during the UN 
General Assembly meetings later this month.  Gul emphasized that 
they agreed to move forward towards the resolution of their 
problems. President Gul also invited his Armenian counterpart to 
attend a rematch game between two national teams in Turkey on Oct. 
14 next year. 
 
Some papers also gave extensive coverage to the meeting between the 
Turkish and Armenian foreign ministers after President Gul left 
Yerevan. In, "Intensive Night Shift in Yerevan," Sabah reports that 
Foreign Ministers Babacan and Nalbandian met 2.5 hours and discussed 
a wide range of issues, including developments in the Caucasus. 
Radikal carries an interview with Armenian Foreign Minister 
Nalbandian indicating his confidence the two presidents "have paved 
the way" toward future successful relations. 
 
Radikal columnist Cengiz Candar agreed with Foreign Minister 
Nalbandian, and he wrote today: "President Gul's visit was 
historically important. But there has to be some concrete results to 
call it historic in real terms.  The most imminent concrete steps 
should be the establishment of diplomatic ties and the opening the 
borders." 
 
Taraf daily carried an interview with a retired Turkish Ambassador 
Volkan Vural in which he was quoted as saying "Turkey put itself in 
a difficult position by ignoring the events of the past.  There is a 
problem and politicians should resolve it, not historians.  The 
genocide claim has become an industry but Turkey should be able to 
apologize for the agony that Armenians experienced." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia Relations 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "President Gul's 
visit to Armenia broke a long-standing taboo in Turkey.  Now is the 
 
ANKARA 00001607  002 OF 004 
 
 
time to talk about real issues.  Turkey should continue efforts to 
deal with our bilateral problems instead of deny them.  The problems 
in Cyprus could have been settled right after the 1974 military 
intervention.  ASALA terrorist acts began after Turkey failed to 
deal with the Cyprus issue, and PKK terrorism erupted after the 
ASALA problem.  None of this is a coincidence.  Turkey will liberate 
itself once it manages to release itself from the self-inflicted 
burdens it carries on its shoulders." 
 
Fatih Cekirge wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "In the aftermath of 
President Gul's trip to Yerevan, there are indications of a new era 
in relations between Azerbaijan and Armenia.  Turkey seems to be 
playing the role of intermediary in this era.  Gul is going to Baku 
soon.  It will not be surprising to find the two sides discussing a 
new road map for the future of Karabakh." 
 
Yasin Aktay wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "Turkey finally 
realized that no progress can be achieved unless foreign policy 
issues are revised across the board.  As Turkey skillfully 
accomplishes this from the EU to the Middle East and from the 
Caucasus to Armenia, it gets even closer to the ideal of 'peace at 
home and peace in the world.'  President Gul made a risky and a 
brave decision to go to Yerevan; this decision will bring many 
positive consequences." 
 
Semih Idiz observed in mainstream Milliyet:  "As recent developments 
indicated, Azerbaijan can no longer rely on a military plan to 
include Karabakh in its territory.  Russia will not allow such thing 
to happen.  The developments also made clear that the U.S. will not 
fight against Russia for Azerbaijan.  Azerbaijan is in need of 
political support from the U.S.-NATO axis now more than ever before. 
 Thus, Baku should evaluate issues with a broader perspective and 
not overreact to Gul's visit to Yerevan any longer." 
 
Papers: PM Erdogan Cited in Deniz Feneri Money-Laundering Case 
All media outlets report over the weekend and today that German 
prosecutor Kerstin Lotz says Mehmet Gurhan, a manager for the 
German-based Deniz Feneri charity, acknowledged that charity 
donations raised in Germany for tsunami victims were transferred to 
Prime Minister Erdogan.  Weekend papers said the German prosecutor 
would also ask the Turkish Justice Ministry to investigate 
additional related charges against Radio and Television High Board 
(RTUK) President Zahid Akman and Kanal 7 TV managers Zekeriya 
Karaman, Ismail Karahan, and Mustafa Celik, who were all 
shareholders in the companies set up within the framework of the 
organization.  The suspects are accused of laundering 41 million 
Euros in raised donations in Germany to Turkey.  The indictment 
claims the charity funds went to Istanbul and not to the intended 
recipients, who were victims of disasters in Pakistan and Darfur. 
Between 2003 and 2006, Deniz Feneri couriers carried 14 million 
Euros to Istanbul, which was allegedly given to Zederiya Karaman, 
manager of Islamist-oriented television channel Kanal 7, a media 
outlet with close ties to the AKP government.  The prosecutor also 
said the Turkish government heavily pressured officials Germany to 
drop the case when the investigation into Deniz Feneri was launched. 
 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said "The AKP government seems to 
be closely linked to these charges," of money laundering.  "Did you 
take the money or not," Baykal asked PM Erdogan.  Opposition MHP 
deputy chairman Atilla Kaya said the claims were "very serious," 
adding the PM was acting with a "psychology of guilt." 
 
PM Erdogan Targets Media Mogul in a Public Spat 
Sunday papers report Erdogan lashed out at Aydin Dogan and the media 
mogul's Dogan Media Group, saying Dogan launched a smear campaign 
against the government, the AKP, and his family because Dogan's 
demand for re-zoning in order to construct multi-storey residences 
within the compound of the Hilton Hotel in Istanbul was rejected. 
Erdogan told Aydin Dogan he has five days to reveal "the actual 
 
ANKARA 00001607  003 OF 004 
 
 
reason behind the media group's campaign against the government." 
On Sunday, Aydin Dogan accused the PM of "political blackmail" and 
attempting to silence the free media.  "History will judge the PM 
who silences the free press in Turkey as a dictator," Dogan said. 
Mainstream Hurriyet on Sunday accused the PM of quarreling with 
journalists instead of taking the German indictment seriously. 
Mainstream Milliyet quotes several German parliamentarians of 
Turkish heritage who criticize Erdogan.  Lale Akgun, SPD Federal 
Parliament lawmaker, said she "congratulates" the Dogan Group papers 
for "paying wide attention to the scandal," and stressed "Turkish 
prosecutors should cooperate with German prosecutors." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Deniz Feneri Investigation 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "PM Erdogan used the last 
two days to curse and threaten the Dogan media group and Aydin Dogan 
for reporting on the "Deniz Feneri" case.  He is trying to silence 
all media until the court case ends in Germany.  Now we understand 
why the AKP government tried so hard to take over the Sabah-ATV 
media group.  What lies under the PM's aggressive threats?  All 
these threats alarm us because these threats show the powers of the 
state are being used incorrectly.  This appears to be a case of 
potential future blackmail." 
 
Mehmet Barlas wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Turkey has witnessed 
conflicts between politicians and the media before.  In fact, public 
spats between Aydin Dogan and PM Erdogan are nothing new.  No one 
has benefited from these conflicts in the past.  In pluralist and 
liberal democracies, media figures and politicians should adopt more 
careful attitudes towards each other." 
 
Mustafa Balbay in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "Throughout the 
continuing Ergenekon investigations, PM Erdogan has pledged that 
underground gangs will be eliminated.  The same Erdogan displays a 
totally different attitude regarding the Deniz Feneri investigation 
-- he can't even stand the reports in the papers.  A considerable 
part of the media works, in a way, as the AKP's special media 
branch, like a mouthpiece of the AKP.  If Erdogan rendered the Dogan 
Media Group ineffective, he'd have complete control over all media 
in Turkey.  After the Constitutional Court decided not to close the 
AKP, it was hoped that the PM and the AKP administration would learn 
its lessons and act in a more balanced way, but we see that is not 
the case." 
 
Six Killed in PKK Attack in Semdinli 
Sabah, Milliyet, Zaman, Cumhuriyet, Vatan, Hurriyet and others: 
Papers report that three soldiers, including a first lieutenant, and 
three village guards were killed in a clash between security forces 
and the PKK in Semdinli, Hakkari on Sunday.  Two more soldiers were 
slightly injured in the clash.  Papers note that a large-scale 
operation was launched to capture the terrorists.  Mainstream Sabah 
reports that on its web site, the Turkish General Staff stated that 
9 PKK members were killed during operations last week. 
 
Opposition Leaders Reject Meetings with Babacan 
Sabah, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Hurriyet, Vatan and others:  Foreign 
Minister Ali Babacan began holding talks with political party 
leaders regarding the Third National Program.  Sabah says Babacan 
met with opposition party BBP first and explained the program to the 
party's leader Muhsin Yazicioglu.  He will meet with opposition 
party DSP leader Zeki Sezer today.  The leaders of the CHP and MHP, 
the two largest opposition parties, rejected Babacan's request for 
an appointment.  CHP leader Baykal passed the request to his deputy 
Onur Oymen; MHP Leader Bahceli passed the request to his deputy 
chairman Osman Cakir. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
ANKARA 00001607  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
- Ankara Mayor Melih Gokcek confirms municipality officials inspect 
restaurants and shops selling alcohol, but adds the inspections were 
related to "safety and hygiene." 
 
- Turkey will expand labor union freedoms within the framework of 
the EU harmonization process. 
 
- Despite the high growth reported over the recent years, Turkey has 
made poor progress in catching up with average per capita income in 
EU countries. 
 
International News 
 
- EU Commissioner Olli Rehn told a meeting of EU foreign ministers 
in France Turkey's efforts for resolution of regional crises would 
help ease reservations about Turkey's EU membership. 
 
- During a summit in Italy, Vice President Dick Cheney accuses 
Russia of selling arms to countries who support terrorists. 
 
- John McCain and Barack Obama will visit Ground Zero in New York on 
Thursday to mark the seventh anniversary of the 9-11 attacks. 
 
WILSON