08ANKARA1563
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1596
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1563/01 2421057
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291057Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7299
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9126
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4670
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3190
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6826
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6667
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3237
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001563 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, AUGUST 29, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Military Leaders Call for Respect for Secularism, Unity 
All papers report on the incoming Turkish General Staff Chief 
General Basbug's speech during his induction ceremony yesterday. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet's headline reads "Tough Messages from 
General Basbug" and reports "Basbug wanted the authorities to 
seriously consider the public's concerns regarding the overwhelming 
influence of religion in today's society."  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports, "General Basbug warned that religious communities were 
getting stronger and stronger each day."  Basbug said "a section of 
our society is concerned about secularism and this concern should be 
taken into serious consideration.  This is an obligation for social 
tranquility within the scope of pluralist democracy understanding. 
The nation-state should be preserved and everyone should remain 
loyal to the Constitutional definition of secularism.  General 
Basbug commented on the ongoing U.S. and Turkish military 
cooperation by saying, "Our cooperation with the U.S. military is 
perfect.  It is one of our most important duties to preserve this 
cooperation since Turkey-US relations have gained importance." 
 
Caucasus-related Diplomatic Traffic in Turkey 
Mainstream Sabah reports that Foreign Minister Babacan will meet 
with Georgian FM Tkeselasvili on August 31st and with Russian FM 
Lavrov on September 2nd in Istanbul.  Azerbaijani FM Memmedyarov 
will have meetings with Minister Babacan in Ankara today.  During 
these meetings, Turkey is expected to convey its discomfort with 
Russia's recognition Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent 
states.  Minister Babacan recently talked with the foreign ministers 
of the U.S., the UK, Germany and France over the phone and stressed 
the concerns regarding Russia's attitudes. 
 
Russia/Caucasus 
Turkish media outlets illustrate Russia's show of force yesterday as 
efforts to step up the rhetoric game.  Mainstream Vatan carries the 
headline, "Here is the New Eastern Block," as "Russia forms a bloc 
of Asian giants" which include, "India, China, Kazakhstan, and 
potentially Iran."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carries the 
front-page headline, "Russia Makes a Show of Force" as "Russia's 45 
ton Topal missile makes its debut at a ceremony in front of the 
Kremlin."  Mainstream Aksam carries the headline, "Russia Challenges 
the West with an Inter-Continental Missile." In a related article, 
Yeni Safak also notes, "The EU says Sanctions Are Coming," while 
Russia responds, "You are sickening!"  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports, "The EU is preparing sanctions against Russia," while 
Russian Prime Minister Putin "accuses the U.S. of provoking the war 
in order to influence the presidential elections." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "The EU's is 
the 'Power with a Sick Imagination.'"  Liberal Radikal carries the 
headline, "Putin says Bush Attacked for McCain," in a reference to 
Putin's interview with CNN last night. 
 
Papers also note Russia did not get the support it wanted from the 
Shanghai Union yesterday.  Leftist Taraf carries the headline, 
"Russia Doesn't Get Its Wish," from the Shanghai meeting because, 
"Heads of State at the Shanghai Organization Summit call for respect 
for every country's territorial integrity and no use of force in 
local clashes." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "The 
Shanghai Union decides to not to fully back Russia." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman carries the headline, "Russia Could Get What 
It Wanted from Shanghai," as "the declaration does not criticize 
Georgia," and "China did not recognize South Ossetia and Abkhazia's 
independence due to the implications their recognition could impact 
efforts for Tibetan independence."  Mainstream Milliyet reports "The 
EU will hold an emergency meeting on Monday to debate sanctions 
against Russia," but notes, "France, Germany, Italy, and Spain are 
all dependent on Russia for energy." Mainstream Hurriyet's headline 
reads, "No Support from the Shanghai Summit for Russia." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak calls the support "measured." 
 
 
ANKARA 00001563  002 OF 004 
 
 
Ediorial Opinion on Current Developments in the Caucasus 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "The Black Sea 
region is experiencing its most serious crisis in the last 20 years. 
 Russia is not backing down, while NATO is having difficulty shaping 
a unified strategy against Russia.  In this context, Turkey's role 
is more important than ever before.  Ankara has the capacity to 
mediate between Russia and the United States to lower the tension. 
The Georgian Foreign Minister will come to Istanbul on Sunday and 
the Russian Foreign Minister will come to Istanbul on Monday.  Both 
visits can be a starting point for efforts to prevent a further 
conflict." 
 
Muharrem Sarikaya wrote in mainstream Sabah :  "Current events in 
the Caucasus have left Turkey trapped between Georgia and Russia. 
During the speeches at this week's military hand-over ceremonies, I 
realized that Turkey has expected tensions to reach to this point. 
Now, the question is whether the situation in the Black Sea will 
calm down by autumn.   According to high level government officials, 
diplomatic circles and academics, the US and NATO will not violate 
the Montreux Convention.  Russia trusts Turkey.  The solution for 
this crisis lies with Turkey's impartial approach." 
 
Sami Kohen observed in mainstream Milliyet:  "Turkish Cypriot Leader 
Talat is empowered by the Western world's recognition of Kosovo's 
independence and now the Russian recognition of Abkhazia and South 
Ossetia.  Maybe these developments will force the Greek side to act 
more realistically in talks with the Turkish side.  Or, if no 
solution is reached after the negotiations, just like they 
recognized their favorite countries, it will push the Western 
countries and Greeks to recognize northern Cyprus' independence as 
well." 
 
Cengiz Aktar wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "The interim period after 
the Cold War is almost over and now a new "lukewarm war" is 
starting.  The US is fully involved in their upcoming elections and 
Western Europe relies on Russia for energy.  Now, Russia is speaking 
a very dangerous language of its own.  In this atmosphere, Turkey 
should determine its own policies.  Will Turkey be like Russia and 
believe peace can be established only by war?  Or will Turkey be 
like the EU and believe in resolving the issues in diplomatic 
ways?" 
 
Cyprus/Talat in Ankara 
All papers report the visit of Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali 
Talat and highlight his meeting with President Gul.  Coverage draws 
a parallel between the Cyprus situation and the Russian recognition 
of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.  Islamist-oriented Zaman carries the 
headline, "Developments in the Caucasus Could Affect Cyprus," as 
Turkish Cypriot Leader Mehmet Ali Talat visited President Gul 
yesterday and told journalists during a press conference, "We are 
watching developments in South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Kosovo, and East 
Timor."  Sami Kohen of mainstream Milliyet says "Talat's hand is 
strengthened," as developments in the Caucasus "will likely force 
the Greek side to be more realistic."  Milliyet also notes, 
"President Gul called attention to the similarities between South 
Ossetia and Cyprus." 
 
During a joint press conference with President Gul, Talat answered a 
question in this context by saying "I think the Russian recognition 
of South Osssetia and Abkhazia will have an impact on the Cyprus 
issue, but I can't make a prediction in which direction that would 
be."  President Gul also responded, "However, the Cyprus issue is 
not a result of the Cold War era.  There is an ongoing UN 
negotiation process, and I think everybody will realize the 
legitimate rights of Turkish Cypriots as the talks progress." 
Mehmet Ali Talat's visit came before the proximity talks with Greek 
Cypriots scheduled for September 3.  He met with President Gul, PM 
Erdogan and FM Babacan, papers noted. 
 
Turkey/Armenia 
 
ANKARA 00001563  003 OF 004 
 
 
Liberal daily Radikal carried a follow up interview with President 
Gul regarding Turkish relations with Armenia.  President Gul 
expressed a positive tone about Sargsyan's remarks on 
Turkish-Armenian relations and added: "We are all living in the same 
region, and we want to solve problems with our neighbors.  Turks and 
Armenians have lived for many years on this soil."  Regarding the 
re-establishment of diplomatic ties between the two countries, 
President Gul expressed support for regional peace efforts and 
emphasized the importance of mutual dialogue.  "We believe that the 
frozen crises in the Caucasus, such as the Nagorno-Karabakh, should 
be dealt with through dialogue and courage in order to have a 
peaceful impact on the region and bring stability." However, Gul 
indicated no decision had been made on whether he will attend the 
September 6th soccer match in Armenia. 
 
Radikal also asked political party figures whether President Gul 
should accept the invitation.  Parliamentarians from opposition CHP 
and MHP emphasized that the solution to the Karabakh issue should 
remain Turkey's priority. Ruling AKP's Deputy Group Chairman Bozdag 
refused to comment, "It's not suitable for me to comment on this 
issue, it is up to President Gul to decide."  Mainly pro-Kurdish DTP 
Co-Chairman Emine Ayna expressed support for dialogue and said "If 
the President goes to Yerevan, it will be a very positive step." 
 
Editorial Opinion on Turkey-Armenia 
Hakki Devrim wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Armenian 
President Sargsyan's recent statement about relations between Turkey 
and Armenia deserves appreciation for its distinguished quality. 
Turkey has to take advantage of this very important quality at the 
highest level and President Gul must accept the invitation to go to 
Yerevan for the soccer match.  I am literally tired of Turkey's 
usual attitude of deferring important problems into the future 
instead of dealing with them directly." 
 
Editorial Opinion on Turkish Human Rights and Democracy Debates 
Ertugrul Ozkok wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "When I heard about the 
beating of a shop owner in Ankara's Kecioren Municipality, I kept 
waiting for a statement from the Municipality and/or from the 
Interior Ministry.  However no statement of any kind came from the 
officials.  The actual security camera footage verifies the 
horrifying nature of the incident.  It looks like a group of mafia 
figures brutally beat a shop owner in the nation's capital to punish 
him for selling alcohol. Even the American Embassy felt uneasy about 
this, while Turkish leaders, including the Interior Ministry and 
other government officials, preferred to turn a blind eye.  The 
mentality that limits democratization to the headscarf issue and the 
Ergenekon case makes Turkey's accession to the EU a far-fetched 
dream." 
 
Barack Obama/US Elections 
Mainstream Hurriyet carries the front page headline, "Martin Luther 
King's Dream Comes True" and all papers pay particular attention to 
Barack Obama's unique contribution to American politics as the first 
African-American presidential candidate.  Mainstream Milliyet 
carries the headline, "Obama Makes History."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports, "A former soldier who fought in Iraq and lost her legs came 
to the convention to support Obama," as "A Black Man Writes 
History."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says, "Obama is ready for 
the Presidency."  Far right Ortadogu carries the headline, "There Is 
No Stopping Obama," as "for the first time in a U.S. presidential 
election, a black candidate will compete." 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
Ferda Paksut, the wife of Constitutional Court vice-president Osman 
Paksut, was interrogated as part of the Ergenekon investigation. 
 
ANKARA 00001563  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
15 people were injured during clashes with municipality security 
forces in Bakirkoy. 
 
A group of PKK terrorists opened fire on a civilian truck in 
Semdinli, killing the truck driver and injuring two soldiers and 
three village guards. 
 
 
International News 
 
Georgia's parliament approves a resolution calling on the government 
to cut diplomatic ties with Russia. 
 
The National Convention of the Democratic Party in Denver nominates 
Barack Obama as its candidate for the November elections. 
 
NATO hands over responsibility in Kabul to Afghan troops. 
 
German Chancellor Angela Merkel tops Forbes magazine's list of the 
world's 100 most powerful women for the third year running. 
 
WILSON