08ANKARA2004
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4865
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2004/01 3241515
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191515Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8054
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9320
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5039
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3408
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6987
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6840
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3410
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The Highly Anticipated Phone Call Comes (Milliyet) 
Media outlets prominently feature U.S. President-elect Barack 
Obama's telephone conversation Monday with Turkish President 
Abdullah Gul.  Obama's comments play positively in the Turkish media 
and are featured on the front pages of all papers.  Gul's office 
released a statement about the call that said, "During the 
conversation, President-elect Barack Obama stated that he admires 
Turks and Turkey; that he has been following what's being done in 
Turkey with appreciation; and that he believes Turkey has the right 
to fight against terrorism as part of its right to self-defense, 
emphasizing the importance of a special alliance relationship 
between Turkey and the United States." In addition, the statement 
emphasized the two leaders "mutually expressed their will to work 
together and to have close consultations concerning regional 
issues."  Mainstream Sabah carried the headline, "The First Message 
is against the PKK," as Obama's "first message for Turkey was 
positive and supportive." Sabah also reports that opposition CHP 
Vice Chair Onur Oymen responded to news of the phone call by saying, 
"ties between the U.S. and Turkey may improve once Obama assumes the 
U.S. presidency" because "Bush left Turkey alone in the fight 
against terror." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Despite 
Erdogan's numerous attempts to meet Obama, Obama did not meet with 
Erdogan, but called President Gul."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
carries the banner headline, "Obama tells Gul, 'I have great 
admiration for Turkey and the Turkish people.'"  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman quotes Obama in its headline, "We Stand with Turkey in the 
Fight against Terror."  Leftist Taraf calls President Gul "a fan of 
Obama."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye carries the front-page 
headline, "Obama Extends Support to Turkey: You Have the Right to 
Fight Terror." 
 
Baykal Recruits Women with Headscarves into CHP, Bahceli Speaks on 
Alevis 
Media outlets report opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal addressed 
his party group meeting in parliament yesterday and responded to 
criticism that he is recruiting women with headscarves into the CHP. 
  Baykal said these women joined the CHP because "they believe the 
AKP deceives them."  In addition, Baykal emphasized, "These people 
are not trying to impose their lifestyle on the others.  They live 
according to their beliefs, and they understand that the party who 
manipulates religion to win public support has nothing to do with 
religion." 
 
Meanwhile, opposition far right MHP leader Devlet Bahceli said 
yesterday his party was ready to help resolve the social and 
political problems faced by Alevis in Turkey, and urged all to show 
goodwill to that end.  Bahceli said the MHP was ready to start a new 
process of mutual understanding in order to resolve the problems 
faced by Alevis.  Over the weekend, tens of thousands of Alevis 
rallied in Ankara and called for the abolishment of the religious 
affairs directorate Diyanet and of compulsory religious instruction 
in schools.  They also demanded the recognition of the Alevi Cem 
Houses as places of worship.  On Tuesday, State Minister Said 
Yazicioglu retracted his earlier remarks dismissing the demands of 
the Alevis as "extreme" and stressed the government should help the 
Alevis.  Mainstream Milliyet finds the statements of Baykal, Bahceli 
and Yazicioglu as "important developments" in Turkish politics. 
 
Turkey-US-Iraq Hold Trilateral Meeting in Baghdad 
Mainstream Sabah reports that Interior Minister Besir Atalay will go 
to Baghdad today to participate in a trilateral meeting with the 
U.S. and Iraq.  Turkey's Iraq envoy Murat Ozcelik, along with 
military and intelligence officials, will accompany Atalay to 
Bagdad.  Representatives of the Kurdish Regional Government will 
attend the meeting together with Iraq's interior Minister Jawad Al 
Bolani.  U.S. Ambassador to Baghdad Ryan Crocker, along with U.S. 
military officials, will represent the American side.  The issue at 
the top of the meeting's agenda is the fight against the PKK.  A 
 
ANKARA 00002004  002 OF 003 
 
 
memorandum of understanding is expected to emerge from the meeting. 
 
Iran Launches Operation against PJAK 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports that Iran conducted an 
operation against PKK and PJAK installations in Kermanshah region. 
Reportedly, many terrorists were killed and four of them surrendered 
during the operations.  Iranian sources reported that all of the 
terrorists who were killed were of Turkish origin. 
 
America's Agenda is to sell Planes to Iraq (Cumhuriyet) 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says that, following the signing of the SOFA 
between Baghdad and Washington, Ankara "is concerned about the 
impact of the security deal on the exchange of intelligence with the 
U.S. in the fight against terror."  Unidentified diplomatic sources 
told Zaman it was "too early to comment" on the impact of the SOFA 
on Turkish air operations on PKK targets in northern Iraq. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says in January 2009, the U.S. will 
transfer authority over Iraqi airspace to the government in Baghdad, 
but the U.S. "will actually continue controlling the air corridor 
until Iraq forms its own air force."  In addition, the paper claims, 
"Iraq will buy F-16 and F-15 fighter jets as well as C-5 cargo 
planes from the U.S., which will cost Baghdad $6 billion," says 
Cumhuriyet. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq/SOFA 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "A U.S. withdrawal from 
Iraq will bring new problems as well as new opportunities for 
Turkey.  Everything depends on the withdrawal conditions and on the 
role the U.S. will give Turkey during the withdrawal process.  It is 
quite possible that following the withdrawal, Turkey will be asked 
to take care of security in northern Iraq.  Regarding the security 
issues, there is a possibility a joint mechanism will be formed in 
Incirlik similar to the 'Operation Comfort.'  However the American 
and the Regional Kurdish Government's stance against the PKK is the 
most important factor affecting future steps.  Following the U.S. 
withdrawal, Turkey can think of improving its economic ties with the 
KRG in return for eliminating the PKK in northern Iraq.  If the U.S. 
withdraws its troops without taking the necessary measures then Iraq 
will be pushed further towards chaos.  The U.S. is responsible for 
eliminating all these risks before they withdraw." 
 
Somali Pirates Catch the Big Fish (Radikal) 
Media outlets feature sensationalist reports on the latest big catch 
for Somali pirates.  NTV reports "The Pirates Cannot Be Controlled," 
while CNN-Turk notes, "Somali Pirates Have Captured 7 Ships in the 
Past 12 Days."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "Once again 
NATO is unable to counter the threat from Somali pirates."  Leftist 
Taraf reports, "The Pirates Outdo Themselves," as "they captured the 
largest ship yet and brought it to the Eyl port," in reference to 
the pirates' boarding of a Saudi oil freighter.  Liberal Radikal 
carries the headline, "The Somali Pirates Catch the Big Fish," but 
the article notes, "There is no plan to rescue the ship or the 
crew," and "despite the U.S. and NATO thumbing their noses at the 
Somali pirate threat, the pirates caught the big one." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Somali Pirates 
 
However, commentators see the larger threat the pirates pose to 
global security.  Sami Kohen of mainstream Milliyet writes in 
"Terror on the Seas," that "Somali President Abdullah Yusuf does not 
have control of the country," but "the world is also showing its 
incompetence.  NATO has been ineffective in securing the waters even 
though it has a naval presence in the area." 
 
Erdal Safak of mainstream Sabah writes, "The pirates (like the PKK) 
want to establish their own state within the climate of an already 
unstable state.  The pirates launch attacks from this unstable state 
and threaten international stability.  Thus, the reasons Turkey 
conducted cross-border operations are the same as the reasons why 
 
ANKARA 00002004  003 OF 003 
 
 
the world must protect international shipping routes.  All open 
waters are on the road to becoming like northern Iraq!" 
 
Ibrahim Karagul of Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes, "The U.S. 
claims al Qaeda is taking over Somalia, but their naval base in 
Djibouti has done nothing to respond to repeated SOS calls from 
ships threatened by pirates.  This means the U.S. is setting the 
stage for a military operation in Somalia and the U.S. will request 
forces from the countries whose ships have been hijacked." 
 
Editorial Commentary on G-20 
 
Hadi Uluengin wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The G-20 has agreed to 
postpone a tangible action plan until Spring 2009.  Understandably, 
the current U.S. administration does not want to make a full 
commitment before Obama takes charge.  Nevertheless, the most 
important outcome of the meeting was the successful realization of a 
summit between developed and developing countries, which proved the 
power and the influence of developing countries." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- President Abdullah Gul will visit Israel and Palestine on January 
6-8. 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP leader Ahmet Turk said Prime Minister Erdogan 
seeks to establish a single party regime by calling for "one nation 
and one flag." 
 
- Due to increases in energy costs, electricity consumption in the 
first half of November 2008 dropped by 6.5 percent compared to 
November 2007.  In 2001, when Turkey was stricken by an intense 
financial crisis, electricity consumption declined only by 1.1 
percent. 
 
International News 
 
- French President Nicolas Sarkozy and former British Prime Minister 
Tony Blair will host a meeting of international leaders in January 
to discuss the global economic crisis. 
 
- A Hong Kong-flagged bulk cargo ship is hijacked in the Gulf of 
Aden. 
 
- Iraq says it will hold provincial elections on January 31. 
 
SILLIMAN