08ANKARA1224
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1441
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1224/01 1900353
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080353Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6774
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9004
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4444
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3058
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6709
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6542
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3120
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JULY 7, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Retired Generals Charged with Links to the Ergenekon Network 
All news outlets reported over the weekend and today that retired 
Generals Sener Eruygur and Hursit Tolon were charged with 
"establishing and administering a terror organization" and sent to 
prison on July 5th by an Istanbul court.  The court ordered the 
arrests of 10 suspects, including Ankara Chamber of Commerce (ATO) 
president Sinan Aygun and retired Colonel Hasan Atilla Ugur. 
Meanwhile, 11 suspects were released, including leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet's Ankara Bureau Chief Mustafa Balbay and retired Admiral 
Ilker Guven.  A total of 21 suspects, including Tolon, Eruygur, 
Aygun and Balbay, were detained on July 1 on suspicion of links to 
the ultra-nationalist Ergenekon gang, which allegedly sought to 
overthrow the current government. 
 
Mainstream Vatan says the documents seized in Eruygur's office 
contain plans to reconstruct the state after a possible military 
takeover.  One of the alleged plans transforms the National Security 
Council (MGK) into a ministry.  Today's Taraf says the coup plotted 
by Eruygur was his third coup attempt after two previous foiled coup 
attempts in 2003 and 2004.  Papers report Eruygur is refusing to 
speak before he is officially indicted, while speculation indicates 
Tolon was allegedly in charge of garnering support for the coup from 
civic organizations.  In addition, papers report the Ergenekon 
network allegedly formed a team of 30 former PKK terrorists to carry 
out assassinations. 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal told the private Habertuk TV 
Sunday night the charges in the Ergenekon probe were, "fictitious," 
and the investigation was, "political."  Baykal claimed the 
investigation was "retaliation" for the closure case against the 
AKP, and that the PM was behind the investigation.  Baykal noted a 
new Turkey would emerge once the Constitutional Court reaches a 
decision on the closure case against the AKP.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet quotes unidentified European diplomats as saying it is 
not clear whether the unprecedented Ergenekon detentions were "signs 
of democratization" or "an operation aimed at liquidating political 
adversaries."  Weekend papers reported the Istanbul prosecutor 
needed additional time to prepare the indictment in the Ergenekon 
investigation. 
 
Balbay Released in Ergenekon Investigation 
All papers report that over the weekend, Cumhuriyet daily's Ankara 
Bureau Chief Mustafa Balbay was released after he spent five days in 
detention on claims of links to the Ergenekon network.  Balbay said 
he was interrogated by the Istanbul prosecutor for many hours 
without knowing the charges under which he was detained.  Balbay 
said he was a "victim of terror," according to papers.  Mainstream 
Milliyet's front-page headline reads, "The Prosecutor Even Asked 
about Balbay's Lunch with the American Ambassador."  However, 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Balbay said he attended the 
lunch along with the Ankara representatives of Islamist-oriented 
Zaman, economic daily Referans, and mainstream Milliyet. 
 
Mainstream Vatan columnist Mehmet Tezkan writes the latest 
developments show that opposition against the government is seen as 
a crime.  "Balbay is charged with membership in a terror 
organization simply because he fulfills his duties as a journalist. 
This is a Putin-type democracy," writes Tezkan. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Ergenekon 
 
"The Last Exit before Ergenekon" 
Ekrem Dumanli commented in Islamist-oriented Zaman (7/7):  "The 
Ergenekon indictment was supposed to be released last Friday but it 
was postponed for one week.  The 2500-page indictment will be a 
turning point regarding the issue of the 'deep state.'   However, 
people have already determined the sides they will defend.  Some 
will say 'this indictment reveals all kinds of deep dark secrets' 
 
ANKARA 00001224  002 OF 003 
 
 
while others will say, 'there is nothing to the charges in the 
indictment.'  Both attitudes here are wrong.  The Ergenekon 
indictment is not and cannot reveal all the secret organizations 
within the state.  Nevertheless, all media should realize that this 
case should not be treated lightly.  First of all, this case was 
accepted by the prosecutor's office because of concrete incidents; 
certain information was confiscated which could be accepted as 
evidence.  However, some media organizations are trying to distort 
the Ergenekon case.  Here is my warning for them:  You are facing a 
dangerous, secret organization.  If you don't fight against them, 
you'll reveal your preference for a dictatorship.  Let me remind you 
of some facts.  Those who were arrested were not put into jail 
because of they were exercising their freedom of thought, as some 
media organizations claimed.  These individuals were accused of 
terrorist acts that sought to create an environment of chaos.  No 
matter what one's rank or mission might be, nobody should step 
outside the boundaries of law and use weapons, which were purchased 
with public tax funds, against the nation.  Those who were arrested 
already know why they are charged.  This investigation had nothing 
to do with alleged feelings of revenge.  A new era has begun in 
Turkey because of the Ergenekon investigation.  From now on, Turkey 
will not be a country where military coups take place every ten 
years and military officers avoid trial.  If retired commanders are 
arrested along with journalists and businessmen for establishing a 
secret organization and plans for a coup, then this demonstrates the 
strength of the state and the nation." 
 
"A Dark Tunnel" 
Tufan Turenc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (7/7):  "The Ergenekon 
investigation is just like a dark tunnel. The prosecutor has not 
been able to complete the indictment for 13 months.  Most of the 
suspects who have been in prison for the last 12 months don't even 
know what they are accused of.  As a matter of fact, some lawyers 
have called for an investigation against prosecutor Zekeriya Oz for 
his failure to prepare the indictment.  Milliyet columnist Can 
Dundar was also interrogated by Oz and I was horrified when I read 
Can's column describing the meeting with prosecutor Oz!  Can Dundar 
says that the prosecutor continuously played with his prayer beads 
during 2.5 hours meeting, which struck me as suspicious.  Oz is a 
Fethullah Gulen follower and he arrests opponents of the AKP 
government.  I really hope that the judicial process will eliminate 
all the concerns about the investigation process." 
 
The 'Abant Platform' Prescribes Solution to Turkey's Kurdish 
Question 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
the "Abant Platform" meeting of intellectuals, academics, activists 
and journalists over the weekend offered a "prescription" for 
resolving Turkey's Kurdish question.  The final declaration of the 
meeting suggested that prejudices should be dispelled, all 
restrictions to free speech should be removed, education in mother 
tongues should be recognized, and economic measures should be 
implemented in southeast Turkey.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports the meeting also called for the Turkish government to 
improve ties with the Kurdish Regional Government in northern Iraq. 
 
 
Talabani: The PKK Should Either Disarm or Leave Iraq 
All papers report Iraqi President Jalal Talabani told Elefterotipia 
daily in Athens, "PKK members should leave northern Iraq if they 
refuse to lay down their arms."  Talabani also held the PKK 
responsible for turmoil in northern Iraq.  He asked, "Would Greece, 
for instance, tolerate a guerrilla group that was sheltered in 
Albania and launched attacks from there onto Greek soil?" Mainstream 
Hurriyet quotes Talabani as praising the AKP, saying Turkey's ruling 
party has always pursued a "friendly and transparent policy" toward 
Iraq.  He noted even if the court decides to ban AKP, a new party 
will replace it and would again win the majority in the Turkish 
Parliament. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001224  003 OF 003 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia 
 
"The Invite from Yerevan" 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah (7/7):  The Armenian president 
invited President Gul to the soccer game on September 6th.  Everyone 
wonders whether this development might lead to a process that will 
open the border and improve relations with Yerevan.  However, Turkey 
did not shut down its border gate because of the 1915 controversy, 
but because the Armenian rebels in Nagorno-Karabakh declared their 
unilateral independence.  Unless the Nagorno-Karabakh controversy is 
resolved in a way that pleases Azerbaijan, Turkey should not open 
the border gate or establish diplomatic relations with Armenia.  The 
Minsk group should make both sides reach a consensus concerning 
Nagorno-Karabakh; otherwise a very bloody war will be inevitable 
soon." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Tuesday, the parliament will discuss a motion to extend the 
mandate of Turkish peacekeepers in Lebanon. 
 
- Foreign Minister Ali Babacan will represent Turkey at the 
"Developing 8 (D-8)" meetings in Malaysia on Monday. 
 
- The OECD says unfavorable international conditions and domestic 
political uncertainty will increase Turkey's risk premium. 
 
International News 
 
- Turkish Cyprus leader Mehmet Ali Talat said he "almost reached 
compromise" with Greek Cyprus leader Demetris Chistofias on a 
timetable for reunification talks on the island. 
 
- French Presidential advisor Henri Guaino said "Turkey will no 
doubt join the Mediterranean Union at the July 13 Mediterranean 
summit in Paris." 
 
- Iran says a top PJAK member was killed in an operation against the 
terror organization on Iran-Iraq-Turkey border. 
WILSON