08ANKARA309
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1398
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0309/01 0501422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191422Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5271
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8689
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3892
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2705
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6420
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6249
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2832
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000309 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey Recognizes Kosovo 
All papers report Minister Ali Babacan announced on Monday Turkey's 
recognition of Kosovo.  Turkey's decision followed the recognition 
by the US, Britain and France.  Prime Minister Erdogan phoned 
Kosovo's Prime Minister Hashim Thaci to emphasize his hopes that 
independence will yield positive results.  Erdogan added that Turkey 
valued peace and stability in the Balkans.  Turkish Cyprus leader 
Mehmet Ali Talat voiced hopes that Kosovo's independence will have a 
positive impact on security and cooperation in the Balkans.  "Those 
who object to the independence of Kosovo should remember that no 
nation can be forced to live under the sovereignty of another 
nation," Talat said. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet expects Turkey to open an embassy in Pristina. 
A group of protesters yesterday threw stones at the Turkish Embassy 
in Belgrade in reaction to Ankara's recognition of Kosovo's 
independence, papers report.  "A free Kosovo has divided the world," 
says a headline in mainstream Hurriyet's page one, adding "Turkey 
waited for the US to move first before recognizing Kosovo."  Liberal 
Radikal says while the US and Turkey recognize Kosovo, Russia and 
China are strongly opposed to recognition.  Radikal notes that 
Greeks living abroad warn this could be "a precedent for northern 
Cyprus." 
 
A commentary in economic-oriented Referans says with the 'birth' of 
Kosovo as an independent state, we see a new brother for Turkey in 
the Balkans and Europe.  "Kosovo's survival chances are largely 
dependent on the EU; it has an attribute that will automatically 
facilitate Turkey's membership claims in the EU."  Another 
commentary in mainstream Milliyet voices hope that "Serbian 
nationalists learned their lesson in the 1990s that Serbian 
nationalism does not spread peace, it spreads conflict." 
 
Editorial Commentray on Kosovo 
Sami Kohen commented in mainstream Milliyet (2/19):  "Kosovo, as 
expected, declared its independence this weekend.  At the same time, 
Papadopoulos was defeated in the first round of Cyprus' elections. 
According to the vote, Greek Cypriots are seeking a positive 
approach to finding a settlement on the island; 2/3 of the 
electorate voted for a settlement by voting for the moderate 
candidates.  A victory for Papadopoulos would have made Turkish 
Cypriots consider Kosovo's road to independence as a model for 
northern Cyprus.  However, now that a moderate figure will likely be 
the new leader of the Greek Cypriot administration, it will be hard 
to draw parallels between Kosovo and Cyprus.  In fact, a moderate 
Cypriot leader can work toward the unification of the island and the 
peaceful coexistence of Turks and Greek Cypriots. Equality will 
likely become the new model for discussions regarding the future of 
Cyprus.  But if attempts at a settlement fail again, our discussions 
will revisit the precedent set by Kosovo." 
 
Ali Sirmen wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet (2/19):  "Russia 
and Serbia strongly stand against an independent Kosovo.  However, 
their stance will not be strong enough to change the course of 
Kosovo's actions.  With Kosovo's declaration of independence, the 
Age of Tito in Yugoslavia has completely come to an end; the 
division of the former Yugoslavia is complete.  The ethnic majority 
of Kosovo will be very happy with this outcome.  On the other hand, 
it is impossible to claim that Albanians are more democratic and 
less chauvinistic than Serbs.  Therefore, the small Turkish minority 
living in this region should not expect anything more democratic 
than before." 
 
Nuray Mert wrote in the liberal-intellectual Radikal (2/19): 
"Kosovo's declaration of independence has paved the way for military 
interventions by the US or the United Nations.  It is not a 
coincidence that the architects of the occupation of Iraq always 
refer to the Bosnia example when they are held accountable for the 
 
ANKARA 00000309  002 OF 003 
 
 
Iraq invasion.  This is not a naove game of liberation and 
independence.  In today's world, this is only about having a share 
of the big pie.  Kosovo's independence is a good example of 
exchanging one influence for another.  In the midst of the cheerful 
notes, Kosovars liberated themselves from Serbia and Russia in 
exchange for their new master, the United States." 
 
Erdogan Issues Soothing Messages on Turban 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Taraf, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and 
others report Prime Minister Erdogan told a private television 
channel over the weekend there could be "provocative attempts" in 
the future regarding the headscarf issue.  Erdogan blamed "some 
media outlets" for being involved in such preparations.  "Those who 
wear headscarves and those who don't are all my sisters; I wouldn't 
discriminate among them, because upholding secularism requires 
respect and protection for all faiths and practices," said Erdogan. 
Culture Minister Ertugrul Gunay joined the debate by saying it would 
create chaos if public sector workers were allowed to wear the 
headscarf.  The ruling AKP deputy group Chief Nihat Ergun responded 
to reporters' questions regarding the main opposition CHP's concern 
that rights and freedoms are gradually restricted.  "Turkey's 
constitution has guaranteed mechanisms against such threats.  It's 
possible to work with the CHP and other political parties to end 
such concerns," Ergun emphasized. 
 
 
Meanwhile, liberal Radikal points to the fact that Constitutional 
Court President Hasim Kilic has so far remained silent in the 
ongoing turban debates.  Kilic told Radikal that he could not 
elaborate on how the high court will proceed before he sees a 
possible application against the AKP-MHP sponsored headscarf 
amendments. 
 
Greek Cypriots Vote for a New President 
Zaman, Milliyet, Sabah, Hurriyet, Taraf and others:  Papers report 
that the two presidential candidates, Communist party leader 
Christofias and former Foreign Minister Kasoulides managed to knock 
Papadopulous out of the race during the first round of elections. 
Since there was no clear winner at Sunday's elections, a runoff will 
be held on February 24.  Mainstream Milliyet reports that the defeat 
of Papadopoulos was seen by Greek and Greek Cypriot media as 
expression of the will of Greek Cypriot people to revive talks for 
settlement in the island.  Mainstream Sabah writes that the 
supporters of settlement in Cyprus have prevailed at the elections. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that many circles in Europe have 
welcomed the defeat of Papadopoulos and said that the elections 
offer an opportunity for a breakthrough in Cyprus.  Zaman reminds 
that four years ago 76 percent of the Greek Cypriots rejected 
Annan's settlement plan, however, at Sunday's elections 67 percent 
of the voters gave support to the candidates who supported 
settlement in Cyprus. 
 
Education Ministry Official Resigns due to Disagreement with the 
Minister 
Milliyet, Sabah, Aksam, Posta, Cumhuriyet and others:  Prof. Irfan 
Erdogan resigned from his post as chairman of Education Ministry's 
Teaching and Discipline board due to his disagreement with the 
minister.  Mainstream Posta says that Prof. Erdogan is known for his 
support for Ataturk's principles and for his efforts to close the 
Imam-hatip schools.  Mainstream Milliyet reports that in his 
resignation Prof. Erdogan said he had acted with his conscience 
while he administered an institution of the Republic. 
 
A Letter from Intellectuals to President Gul 
All papers report that 100 intellectuals, including Prof. Baskin 
Oran, Prof. Serif Mardin, Prof. Mete Tuncay, Ibrahim Betil and Orhan 
Pamuk sent a letter titled "We Miss Brotherly Living" to President 
Gul and asked him to assume an active role in finding a peaceful 
solution to the Kurdish problem.  The letter said "if DTP (mainly 
Kurdish political party) is closed down, tensions in the country 
 
ANKARA 00000309  003 OF 003 
 
 
will escalate.  A solution should be found through political 
determination not by judicial decision." 
 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Tough winter conditions affect daily life across Turkey.  Schools 
were closed in many cities.  350 road accidents were reported in 
Ankara. 
 
- Responding to journalists' questions on ATV, Prime Minister 
Erdogan said state broadcaster TRT would soon begin broadcasts in 
Kurdish, Farsi and Arabic. 
 
- On Monday, Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan marked the 56th 
anniversary of Turkey's NATO membership.  Toptan emphasized that 
Turkey has played an important role in enhancing regional and global 
security.  Turkey has been an allied member of NATO since February 
18, 1952. 
 
International News 
 
- Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos said the 
government of Spain "will not recognize the unilateral act 
proclaimed yesterday by the assembly of Kosovo." 
 
- Chancellor Angela Merkel said Prime Minister Erdogan's statement 
that "assimilation is a crime against humanity" was misunderstood in 
Germany. 
 
- Former President George H.W. Bush endorsed Senator John McCain for 
the Republican presidential nomination. 
 
WILSON