08ANKARA611
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0130
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0611/01 0921413
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011413Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5764
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8793
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4071
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2823
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6511
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6352
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2927
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, APRIL 1, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
High Court Decides to Hear Closure Case against AKP 
All papers report the Constitutional Court unanimously accepted the 
chief prosecutor's indictment and agreed to examine the case that 
seeks to close the ruling AKP.  On March 14, the Supreme Court of 
Appeals Chief Prosecutor Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya filed a lawsuit to 
close the AKP for allegedly being, "a focal point of anti-secular 
activities."  The chief prosecutor also asked that 71 AKP members, 
including Prime Minister Erdogan and President Abdullah Gul, be 
banned from politics. 
 
According to the legal procedure, the AKP will prepare a preliminary 
defense and submit it to the Chief Prosecutor's Office.  After the 
prosecutor reports on the merits of the case, the AKP will make a 
verbal defense which will be followed by a verbal response from the 
prosecutor.  A Constitutional Court reporter will prepare a report 
on the case to be examined by the court members.  Later, 
Constitutional Court Chief Hasim Kilic will set a hearing date. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet's front-page headline reads, "The Constitutional 
Court Unanimously Accepts the Indictment to Ban the AKP." 
Mainstream Milliyet writes, "The Suit for Banning the AKP Has 
Begun."  Mainstream Vatan reports on its front page, "Last Year Was 
Wasted on Presidential Election-related Tensions, Today the Suit 
against the AKP Overshadows the Economy."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet writes, "Opposition Spokesmen Say the AKP Is Responsible 
for These Developments."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak's front-page 
headline reads, "Are You Aware of the Threat?  The Prosecutor 
Prepares the Indictment Based on Rumors and The Court Accepts the 
Suit despite the EU's Warnings."  Liberal Radikal's front-page 
headline reads, "The AKP Has to Make a Different Decision.  The 
First Alternative is to Pass Constitutional Reforms and Initiate a 
Referendum.  The Second Alternative is to Fight the Allegations in 
the Court."  Leftist Taraf notes in its front-page headline, 
"Yesterday's Court Ruling Was a Coup, Now Erdogan's Only Path is to 
Uphold Democracy and Fight the Darkness."  Economic daily Referans 
carries the headline, "We Wish These Reports Were April 1st Jokes: 
The Suit against the AKP Will Exhaust Turkey."  Star, the mainstream 
daily close to the AKP, says in a banner headline, "Today is April 
Fools' Day, but This Is Not a Joke: The Court Accepts Closure Case 
Against the AKP on the Day Turkey's GNP Amounted to USD 10,000." 
Papers also note that the lawsuit could go on one year, raising 
concerns over a prolonged political and economic uncertainty. 
 
Islamist-oriented and liberal-leaning columnists boil the debate 
down to one question: is this a judicial coup?  Ali Bayramoglu, 
columnist for Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak, writes, "this struggle 
is between those who are for and who are against democracy.  This is 
a judicial coup."  Ergun Babahan of mainstream Sabah writes, "The 
judiciary has suspended democracy."  Ahmet Kekec of mainstream Star 
calls the court's decision, "bad judgment," and asks for "someone to 
stop this nonsense which is dragging Turkey into an economic crisis, 
coup, and civil war."  Mumtazer Turkone of Islamist-oriented Zaman 
calls the case, "the settling of political scores," and notes, "The 
case is putting the brakes on a country that was moving forward." 
Cengiz Candar of economic daily Referans writes, "Those who have 
dragged Turkey to this point care not for the EU or the impending 
economic crisis," as a result of the closure case. 
 
Meanwhile, nationalist-leaning columnists blame the AKP for bringing 
this upon themselves and praise the court decision.  Mainstream 
Milliyet's columnist Derya Sazak insists, "The AKP's stubbornness on 
the headscarf issued has brought Turkey to the cusp of a political 
and economic crisis."  Oktay Eksi of mainstream Hurriyet criticized 
EU officials who oppose the closure case, "Were we not supposed to 
raise our voices in order not to hurt our EU friends' feelings when 
the basic principles of the Turkish Republic were being undermined? 
Are we supposed to pretend this danger does not exist?"  Cuneyt 
Arcayurek of leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet, calls the Court's 
 
ANKARA 00000611  002 OF 003 
 
 
decision, "judicial common sense."  Arslan Bulut of far-right Yeni 
Cag calls the AKP, "a threat to secularism, democracy, and the 
unitary structure of the nation state." 
 
 
Reactions to the Constitutional Court's Decision 
All papers report that in his address to the nation, PM Erdogan 
said, "The AKP has always acted to unify the country rather than 
divide the people."  Deputy PM Cemil Cicek said after the cabinet 
meeting, "Everyone should retain commonsense," and added "the court 
process will continue and the AKP will work within the limits of the 
constitution and laws."  Conservative Bugun reports that main 
opposition party CHP deputy chairman Mustafa Ozyurek said that "the 
Constitutional Court decision is not a surprise. We were expecting 
this.  The Judicial process has begun."  Opposition Party MHP Deputy 
Chairman Mehmet Sandir said "The AKP has caused the developments. 
The Constitutional Court process should not be criticized and 
everyone should respect the process."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
carries reactions from Turkish business circles.  Chairman of Ankara 
Chamber of Industry (ASO) Nurettin Ozdebir said "who would come and 
make investments in this country when the courts try to close a 
political party who won 47 percent of the votes?" 
 
All papers report that U.S. State Department Deputy Spokesman Tom 
Casey said, "all parties involved in the suit are expected to show a 
pragmatic approach and to stay above politics."  He added, "The U.S. 
attaches great importance to democratic values and secularism." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet quote EU Enlargement Commissioner 
Olli Rehn's reaction, "This case shows that there is a systematic 
error in an EU candidate's constitution." 
 
Izmir Loses EXPO 2015 Bid to Milan 
All television broadcasts last night carried live coverage of the 
final decision on who will host the 2015 EXPO - Milan or Izmir. 
According to mainstream Milliyet, TRT television announced Izmir as 
the winner before the official announcement came from Paris.  CNN 
Turk, Star TV, NTV, and all other major Turkish television networks 
followed TRT's lead and announced that Izmir won.  Live broadcasts 
carried celebrations in Izmir and a victory speech from Izmir's 
mayor.  Half an hour later, the official decision from the EXPO 
committee was announced via live broadcast in Paris.  In fact, Milan 
won.  Thus, all Turkish television networks had to retract and 
correct their prior reporting that Izmir won. 
 
Editorial Commentary on AKP Closure Case 
 
In mainstream Sabah, Erdal Safak wrote (4/1): "While the AKP flaunts 
it won 46 % of votes in the last election, they ignore the fact that 
people supported the AKP in the last elections because of their 
programs.  By bringing out a religiously-motivated agenda, the AKP 
forgot they once defined secularism as a liberating model for 
different lifestyles and the model for social reconciliation. 
However, even with the court proceedings, it is not too late.  If 
the ruling AKP goes back to the fundamentals of its elections 
platform, which praised secularism, Turkey can overcome this 
difficult process without any significant damage.  The government 
has a chance to turn this situation into an opportunity." 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in mainstream Milliyet (4/1): "The case against 
the AKP is a judicial coup and will poison relations with the EU and 
demolish political stability.  The best way to deal with this thorny 
matter is to fight back through democracy and the rule of law. 
Pursuing economic reforms and enhancing the EU process are the ways 
to cope with this." 
 
Hikmet Cetinkaya wrote in nationalist-leftist Cumhuriyet (4/1): "As 
he reads verses from Koran, the prime minister is clearly 
challenging the secular system with the support of pro-AKP media. 
Turkey is heading towards serious tension-filled time.  We should 
not yield against this archaic mentality. We do want a 
 
ANKARA 00000611  003 OF 003 
 
 
fully-independent, secular democratic Turkey.  We do not want Sharia 
law or a military coup." 
 
Oral Calislar wrote in nationalist-leftist Cumhuriyet (4/1): "I 
disagree with most of AKP's political applications; however this 
issue goes beyond the AKP's political lines.  Turkey has not gained 
any success by closing down political parties.  If the AKP is closed 
down, we will achieve only a deeper political crisis.  Thus a common 
sense is needed for overcoming this crisis.  The duty goes to all of 
the parties represented in the parliament.  Maybe the president can 
arrange a leaders' meeting and work toward a common rationale." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak (4/1): "The AKP case 
before the Constitutional Court is different from other cases.  This 
is the ruling party with almost half of national support.  The court 
has damaged its reputation by proceeding with this case." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak (4/1): "This 
case illustrates a struggle between pro-democracy forces and 
anti-democracy forces.  When the court decided to proceed with this 
case, it turned the country's ruling party into an illegitimate 
party." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- During clashes between the Turkish military and the PKK in 
Sirnak's Bestler-Dereler region, one captain and two officers were 
killed and 8 soldiers were injured.  There are no reports on PKK 
deaths. 
 
- On Tuesday, the Turkish Parliament will discuss a controversial 
social security bill.  Labor unions and vocational organizations 
will stage protests against the bill outside the parliament today. 
 
 
- Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet's chief editor Ilhan Selcuk was 
taken to the hospital yesterday.  He is being treated for angina 
pectoris and pneumonia.  Selcuk will remain in the hospital for at 
least a week. 
 
- Turkey will set up undersea observatories to monitor seismic 
activity in the Marmara Sea. 
 
International News 
 
- The northern Iraqi KDP official Safin Dizayi said a Kurdish 
Regional Administration delegation would visit Turkey soon. 
 
- Yesterday, Turkish Cyprus leader Mehmet Ali Talat met with U.N. 
Undersecretary for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe. 
 
- Secretary Rice began a second round of talks with Palestinian 
leader Mahmoud Abbas in her latest push for the Middle East peace. 
 
 
- The PKK launched a new TV channel, called Nevruz TV, in Sweden in 
order to fill the void after its former mouthpiece, Roj TV, was 
closed down by Belgian officials. 
 
WILSON