08ANKARA1660
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4816
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1660/01 2611338
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171338Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7477
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9174
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4748
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3239
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6868
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6709
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3279
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001660 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Deniz Feneri Prosecutor Accuses Turkish Authorities of not 
Cooperating 
All media outlets report that on Wednesday, a court in Frankfurt is 
expected to announce its verdict in the trial against suspects 
charged with financial irregularities in the Germany-based, 
Islamist-oriented Deniz Feneri charity.  German Prosecutor Kerstin 
Lotz has called for a six-year prison sentence for Mehmet Gurhan, 
director of Kanal 7 TV Europe director.  A two-year sentence is 
being sought for the charity accountant Firdevsi Ermis and a 
three-year sentence is being sought for Deniz Feneri manager in 
Germany Mehmet Taskan.  Papers emphasize Lotz's allegations that the 
suspects facing trial in Germany were merely henchmen, but the 
masterminds of the fraud were "hiding in Turkey." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet and mainstream Milliyet report 
prosecutor Lotz said the main suspects behind all irregularities 
were Zekeriya Karaman, the founder of the Turkish Deniz Feneri 
charity and the president of Kanal 7 Television, Ismail Karahan, 
Kanal 7 advertisement director, and Zahid Akman, the chair of 
Turkey's radio and television watchdog RTUK.  Mainstream Vatan 
reports Lotz also said the Turkish police turned down requests to 
investigate the Turkish leg of the Deniz Feneri irregularities. 
 
Papers report opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said "Prime 
Minister Erdogan has close ties with Deniz Feneri suspects, but 
tried to escape responsibility by saying that he does not know 
them."  In addition, Baykal said, "The Deniz Feneri suspects and the 
PM have worked together in solidarity." 
 
Breaking News:  Turkish televisions are currently reporting that the 
court in Frankfurt has reached their decision.  The court sentenced 
Mehmet Gurhan to 5 years 10 months and Mehmet Taskan to two years 9 
months in prison. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Deniz Feneri Germany Case 
 
Mustafa Mutlu wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "During yesterday's court 
session of the Deniz Feneri case, the German prosecutor said that 
the kingpins of the organization live in Turkey and she complained 
that she couldn't get any support from Turkish police.  Now I have a 
question for the Interior Minister and the Chief of Security. Since 
when have the Turkish police ceased their duty to fight against 
international and organized fraud? 
 
DTP Defense 
All papers follow Ahmet Turk's defense arguments in the 
Constitutional Court case which seeks to ban the pro-Kurdish 
opposition party DTP. Reports note Turk's verbal argument lasted 3 
hours. Ahmet Turk said party closure is an unusual practice in 
democracies and reminded the court that the DTP won 2 million votes 
in the last elections.  Referring to accusations the DTP supports 
the PKK, Ahmet Turk said "The PKK is a result of Kurdish problem. 
Imprisoned leader Ocalan is for a democratic and peaceful solution 
and his views should be taken into consideration." 
 
Vatan carries the story, "He Not Only Defended the DTP, but also the 
PKK," while leftist Taraf carries the headline, "We Cannot Call the 
PKK Terrorists."  Hurriyet asked Ahmet Turk about his impressions of 
the court proceedings and he responded, "None of the Court Justices 
asked any questions, which may indicate that they see the DTP on 
their deathbed." 
 
The Constitutional Court indictment against the DTP calls for a 
political ban on 220 party members, including the current chairman 
Ahmet Turk. 
 
General Basbug Meets the Press 
All papers report on the "communication meeting" that the Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) chief General Basbug held with the media 
 
ANKARA 00001660  002 OF 004 
 
 
yesterday.  Mainstreams Sabah's headline reads "Basbug Sets His 
Criteria," in a reference to the rules he outlined regarding 
communication with the media.  Meanwhile, Milliyet's headline reads 
"New Lines from General Basbug" and Hurriyet notes Basbug's warning 
to politicians, "Do Not Try to Involve Us in Politics."  Sabah 
reports that during the three and a half hour meeting with media 
executives, General Basbug addressed several issues including the 
EU, Georgia, terrorism and cross-border operations.  He supported 
Turkey's EU bid by saying, "Turkey's EU membership is the 
realization of Ataturk's goal to carry Turkey above the level of 
contemporary civilizations." However, he also warned the EU to "not 
play with our nation-state structure in an attempt to weaken our 
unitary state structure."  On politics, Basbug said "no one, 
including the media, should try to use the Turkish Armed Forces 
(TSK) for their own political ends.  Do not include the TSK in daily 
matters.  Martyred soldiers should not be used as a tool for cheap 
politics."  Regarding terrorism, General Basbug said "the separatist 
terrorist organization (PKK) is coming to an end.  Only people from 
Syria, Iran and Europe are joining the organization.  Still, the PKK 
is actively recruiting those in the 14-18 age group.  It is an 
important duty to save these people from the terrorist 
organization."  Cumhuriyet reports that General Basbug assessed 
secularism, unitary structure, EU, terrorism and regional 
developments in his meeting with the editors-in-chief and the Ankara 
representatives of the newspapers. Zaman reports that the TGS will 
be having weekly press briefings to strengthen relations with the 
media. The first such briefing will be held on September 26. 
 
Meanwhile, Hurriyet notes that General Basbug gave a fact sheet 
regarding the last 24 years of terrorism.  Basbug said "32,000 
terrorists have been rendered ineffective.  The number of civilian 
casualties is 5,560 and the number of soldiers lost in the fight is 
6,482." 
 
Editorial Commentary on General Basbug Meeting with Press 
 
Oral Calislar wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Given the 
nature of current events, it is important to follow what General 
Basbug says to the media.  On the other hand, the military should 
have no influence on politics in a real democracy.  Democracy and 
civilian politics work parallel to each other.  General Basbug's 
remarks on important issues signal some changes in the military's 
approach. Thus, relations between the media and the military are 
entering a new period. However, the extent to which it will help 
civilian politics remains to be seen." 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "General Basbug has the 
characteristics of a soldier and a diplomat.  He wants to open a new 
page in the relations between the General Staff and the media.  His 
message to politicians is clear - "Don't use the martyrs for cheap 
political tricks."  He is definitely a different commander. 
Democracy and the state of law is as important as secularism for 
him." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "General Basbug wants a 
transparent communication system.  He warned everybody, including 
the media, not to use the Turkish Armed Forces for their own 
interests.  And he urged everyone not to involve the military in 
daily issues and to leave the martyred soldiers out of cheap 
politics." 
 
Hakan Celik wrote in tabloid Posta:  "During his meeting with the 
media, General Basbug spoke on topics ranging from secularism to the 
PKK to relations with the U.S.  His speech was prepared with the 
sensitivity of a diplomat and an academic.  And with every sentence, 
he pledged that the Turkish General Staff will be more active and 
transparent with the media and the public from now on." 
 
Mustafa Unal in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Information leaked from 
Basbug's meeting with the press indicates Basbug used very careful 
 
ANKARA 00001660  003 OF 004 
 
 
language despite the fact he made a long speech, and that he was 
particularly careful when talking about controversial issues which 
might negatively affect his ties with the government.  The first 
signs have been good.  I expect, in the new era, the military will 
put its focus more on military matters.  As a result of this, we 
might move forward regarding the war on terror.  There's full 
consensus between the government and military over the authorization 
to launch cross border operations into northern Iraq.  We arrived at 
this point through talks behind closed doors, and not by debating 
the issue in front of the public.  It seems that the two years 
Basbug will remain in office will be a normal period." 
 
Odierno, The 'Hood General,' Takes Control of Forces in Iraq 
Media outlets have donned U.S. General Ray Odierno the "Hood 
General," in a reference to an incident in 2003 when U.S. forces 
apprehended and hooded Turkish Special Forces in northern Iraq.  At 
that time, Odierno was in charge of U.S. forces in northern Iraq, so 
the Turkish press holds him responsible for the humiliation of 
Turkish troops.  Mainstream Sabah reports, "The Hood General is the 
Head of Forces in Iraq" Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes, "The 
Era of the Hood General in Iraq," begins as "Hood General Odierno 
assumes the throne in Baghdad."  Liberal Radikal, "From Now On, 
Iraq's Boss is Hood General Odierno," and notes Odierno sees Iraq 
"as his second home."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "From now 
On, Iraq is entrusted to Odierno," and reminds, "Odierno drew 
reactions when he suggested negotiations with the PKK." 
 
Paper: 'One By One, They are Falling' 
Media outlets find no relief from their anxieties despite USG 
efforts to solve the financial crisis.  Coverage expresses fears 
global markets have not see the worst yet.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports, "Markets Come to a Halt," as "The Fed is 
attempting to solve Wall Street's problems by extending $70-75 
billion in support of saving major companies like AIG, and 
potentially JPMorgan, Chase, and Goldman Sachs," but that "the plan 
to save AIG may not be successful in saving the markets from a 
disaster."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "The Business World Is 
Preparing an Emergency Action Plan to deal with the Global Economic 
Turmoil," but describes no actual action plan and even notes, "the 
Turkish private sector has over $170 billion in debts overseas," 
which "increases the risk for foreign investments in Turkey." 
Mainstream Vatan carries the headline, "The Most Critical Day for 
the Markets," and reports, "World markets hold their breath as they 
await the fate of American insurance giant AIG." Vatan also reports, 
"U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson insists the U.S. will not pay 
to save banks with taxpayer money," but notes, "If liquidity 
problems like the one involving AIG continue in other private firms 
and the government does not help them, more companies like Lehman 
Brothers will declare bankruptcy and market tension will increase." 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Economic Meltdown and Turkey 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The Turkish economy 
runs on hot cash from global markets.  Given the magnitude of the 
recent global crisis, the transfer of hot cash may come to an end. 
It is unclear whether PM Erdogan is really aware of the serious 
nature of the current global economic crisis.  Moreover, he has a 
bad reputation for managing crises poorly.  Corruption and poverty 
are famous for toppling governments.  It looks like the duo is just 
about to strike in Turkey." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "The collapse 
of Lehman Brothers indicates that the global economic bosses cannot 
even manage themselves, much less the world economy.  The aftermath 
of this crisis is even more frightening.  Will there be another 
9/11? Will there be new American military interventions in order to 
obtain some new economic funds?  Nobody knows what is next." 
 
Turkish PM's Iftar with Foreign Ambassadors 
 
ANKARA 00001660  004 OF 004 
 
 
Hurriyet, Milliyet and Yeni Safak report Prime Minister Erdogan 
hosted an Iftar dinner for the Ambassadors to Turkey.  Erdogan 
expressed disappointment about the EU's treatment of Turkey's EU 
bid, "Turkey does not want anything more than the same process 
applied to other candidates.  The EU should tell us if their 
intentions in this process are sincere or not." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Pakistan 
 
Gokcen Ogan writes in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "It won't be 
surprising to see Pakistan's new president Asif Ali Zerdari continue 
Pakistan's top level relationship with the U.S., in return for 
American support for his government.  The Pakistani military's 
objection to U.S. operations along the border with Afghanistan will 
be limited, because the Pakistani military needs American help in 
order to replenish its military power, close the technology gap with 
India, and preserve its regional power.  And also, if Osama 
bin-Laden is captured before the upcoming presidential elections in 
the U.S., the Republicans will win the election." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- President Abdullah Gul warns university rectors in a meeting 
Tuesday against tensions and polarization in universities. 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP has called for a parliamentary investigation 
into this summer's forest fires in east and southeast Turkey. 
 
- 41 companies are given licenses authorizing metal exploration in 
the Aegean tourist city of Marmaris. 
 
International News 
 
- NATO chief Jaap de Hoop Scheffer says Georgia's path to NATO 
membership was "wide open." 
 
- Pakistan's military says its forces had received orders to fire on 
U.S. troops if they entered Pakistani territory. 
 
- President Bashar Assad has named Syria's first ambassador to Iraq 
since the 2003 U.S.-led invasion. 
- 
WILSON