08ANKARA356
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6445
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0356/01 0561427
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251427Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5344
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8703
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3916
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2721
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6432
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6265
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2844
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey Continues Anti-PKK Offensive in Northern Iraq 
All papers over the weekend and today report that up to 10,000 
Turkish troops crossed the border into northern Iraq on Thursday 
night.  The land forces were supported by warplanes, artillery and 
combat helicopters.  The Turkish General Staff (TGS) reported a 
Turkish helicopter crashed during the operations but that Turkish 
troops killed at least 112 PKK terrorists.  Meanwhile, fifteen 
Turkish soldiers were killed in clashes with the PKK.  Monday's 
papers cite the TGS as saying that the terrorists are panicking. 
Nationalist-oriented Cumhuriyet reports "PKK fighters are accusing 
each other of being spies and they are killing each other."  Papers 
report Turkish troops destroyed PKK camps in Zap and Cemco Valley. 
Backed by F-16 fighter jets, Turkish troops are advancing toward the 
Qandil Mountains, according to papers.  Mainstream Hurriyet reported 
on Saturday that Turkish troops destroyed bridges and roads that 
could be used to extend logistical support to the PKK. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Monday that following the 
Turkish cross-border operations into northern Iraq, Iran has started 
to mass troops on its border with Iraq.  Mainstream Vatan reported 
Sunday that some Turkish troops will return home after the first 
phase of the operations is completed.  Some troops will remain in 
northern Iraq and set up cross-border patrol stations to prevent 
terrorist infiltration into Turkey.  Papers quote unnamed Iraqi 
sources who say Prime Minister Erdogan will send a delegation to 
Baghdad this week to discuss the Turkish military's incursion into 
northern Iraq. 
 
Reactions to Turkish Offensive into Northern Iraq 
All papers report Iraq's government issued a statement on Sunday, 
which read, "The Iraqi government considers this unilateral Turkish 
military action a threat to the stability of the region and a 
violation of Iraq's sovereignty, and calls on Turkey to withdraw its 
troops from Iraq as soon as possible."  Iraqi Foreign Minister 
Hoshyar Zebari said, despite Turkey's pledges to Baghdad that 
Turkish troops would "avoid targeting the civilian infrastructure," 
five bridges had already been destroyed.  Zebari warned that an 
escalation in Turkey's operations in northern Iraq could destabilize 
the region. 
 
Weekend papers report Prime Minister Erdogan phoned President Bush 
and Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki in order to ensure both 
leaders Turkish troops will withdraw as soon as they destroy their 
targets.  President Abdullah Gul phoned Iraqi President Jalal 
Talabani to tell him Turkey wanted to improve economic and political 
relations.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports on Sunday that Iraqi 
Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari said Talabani accepted Turkey's 
invitation, but will not go immediately.  Foreign Minister Ali 
Babacan instructed Turkish ambassadors around the world to explain 
to their host countries the aim and scope of military operations 
into northern Iraq. 
 
Papers report over the weekend that Secretary Rice highlighted the 
United States' "solidarity with Turkey" in the fight against the 
PKK, but that "Iraq's stability and progress is in Turkey's 
interest.  So everyone should keep in mind that nothing should be 
done to destabilize the situation in Iraq."  Defense Secretary 
Robert Gates warned that Turkey's military strike against the PKK in 
northern Iraq will not solve the Kurdish problem.  He recommended 
political and economic measures in order to address the Kurdish 
problem. 
 
Papers report over the weekend that EU Expansion Commissioner Olli 
Rehn said the EU "understands" Turkey, but warned that Turkey should 
refrain from "disproportionate" military action, and "human rights 
and the rule of law" should be respected.  A German Foreign Ministry 
spokesman said Berlin is following the operations with "major 
concern," adding that Turkish military presence in northern Iraq was 
"a serious risk to stability."  The British Foreign Secretariat 
 
ANKARA 00000356  002 OF 003 
 
 
urged Turkey to protect civilians from harm and warned Turkey to 
resolve the problem via diplomatic means.  Russia also issued a call 
for restraint after the start of the Turkish land operations. 
Papers also report the Arab League urged Turkey to end the 
offensive.  A commentary in Islamist-oriented Zaman says "in order 
to win the backing of Europe, Turkey should push for democratization 
at home and launch Kurdish language broadcasts without delay." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Offensive on Northern Iraq 
 
"The Land Operation and Journalism" 
Oral Calislar is a political scientist, author, and regular 
columnist for Cumhuriyet.  He writes with a liberal approach to the 
Kurdish issue, human rights and democratization. He is opposed to 
the Iraq war but often takes an objective view on Turkish-American 
relations. 
He wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet (2/25):  "It is 
disturbing to watch the war-mongering style of recent Turkish 
television reporting.  Over the past 25 years, history has taught us 
that the fight against terrorism cannot be limited to military 
action.  The terrorism problem has social and political dimensions 
that reach across borders.  For a television journalist, it is very 
easy to be motivated by ratings.  However, this military operation 
will have to come to an end sooner or later.  The cultural, social 
and political dimensions will continue to exist after this operation 
concludes, and we will not be able to bring back those who were lost 
in these battles.  The truth is the US did not offer support for the 
land operation as a step toward a Kurdish solution.  Washington, in 
the light of the Turkish public's growing fury against the PKK, was 
forced to give its okay for a limited-scale land operation.  Once 
the operation is over, Turkey will have to deal with reforms. 
However, so far we simply do not see the government with a plan for 
social development.  War-mongering journalism is an easy thing to 
produce and it helps television stations' ratings.  But what we 
really need is common sense in order to produce a long-lasting 
solution to the Kurdish problem." 
 
"The Land Operation and the US" 
Omer Taspinar is the Foreign Policy Director of the Turkey Project 
at the Brookings Institute.  He is an expert on Turkey, the European 
Union, Muslims in Europe, political Islam, the Middle East and 
Kurdish nationalism. He is a professor at the National War College 
and an adjunct professor at Johns Hopkins University's School of 
Advanced International Studies. 
He wrote in leftist Taraf (2/25):  "It appears as if Washington and 
Ankara have enhanced their strategic and military cooperation.  This 
is proven by the recent high-level dialogue between the Pentagon and 
the Turkish General Staff.  Washington is creating a new anti-Iran 
bloc that includes Sunni Arab countries, Turkey and Israel.  As 
Secretary Gates said, "Washington should not lose Turkey."  He was 
 
SIPDIS 
well aware of the fact that this approach requires solid cooperation 
with Turkey against the PKK.  The US gave a green light for Turkey's 
land operation in exchange for Turkey's support for Washington's 
policy to isolate Iran.  Within Turkey, the land operation will 
weaken the PKK's military capacity.  But as we know, the 
organization has deep social roots in Turkey.   Grassroots support 
for the PKK is fed by Turkey's social, economic and political 
problems.  The ruling AKP may be thinking of paving the way for 
reforms after the land operation.  Let us hope that expectation is 
correct so we may see political steps following in the footsteps of 
military action." 
 
Turban Directive to Rectors from YOK Chairman 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Aksam, Vatan, Zaman, Cumhuriyet, Radikal: 
 Following the Presidential approval of the constitutional 
amendments freeing the use of turban in universities, Higher 
Education Board (YOK) Chairman Prof. Yusuf Ziya Ozcan sent a written 
directive to university rectors saying 'there is no need for any 
other legislative arrangement to enforce the Article 10 and 42 of 
the constitution'.  Prof. Ozcan urged the rectors "not to prevent 
 
ANKARA 00000356  003 OF 003 
 
 
the students wearing turban from entering universities."  However, 
rectors said that amendment of articles 10 and 42 of the 
constitution would not enable students wearing turban to enter 
universities.  They noted that legal process should continue and 
supplemental article 17 of the YOK law should be amended as well. 
 
Greek Cyprus Votes for a New President 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal and others:  Greek Cypriots voted 
in the second round of presidential elections yesterday. 
Communist-rooted candidate Demetris Christofias and conservative 
Kasolides both staked their campaigns on pledges to stave off 
permanent partition by offering an olive branch to Turkish Cypriots. 
 Christofias won the elections with 53.36 % of the votes.  During 
his first speech after being elected as President, Christofias said 
"Tomorrow is the start of a new day.  Long live united Cyprus." 
Hurriyet reports that Christofias extended his hand in friendship to 
the Turkish Cypriots and added that he will meet with Turkish 
Cypriot leader Talat very soon. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Istanbul University Rector Professor Mesut Parlak said students 
wearing the headscarf would not be admitted into the university 
compound. 
 
- The trial of the murderers of Armenian Turkish journalist Hrant 
Dink will continue in Istanbul on Monday. 
 
International News 
 
- Russia's ambassador to NATO, Dmitri Rogozin, said Russia will 
never use force to resolve the problem of Kosovo, which unilaterally 
declared its independence from Serbia. 
 
- Pakistan has blocked access to the YouTube website because of 
content deemed offensive to Islam. 
 
- Cuba's National Assembly chose Raul Castro as Cuba's new president 
on Sunday. 
 
- The Iraqi government has urged Ankara to pull back its troops from 
Iraq as soon as possible. 
 
- Following Turkish cross-border operations in northern Iraq, Iran 
has started to mass troops at the Iraqi border. 
 
- An earthquake with a preliminary magnitude of 6.6 rattled 
Indonesia's Sumatra Island on Sunday. 
 
WILSON