08ANKARA1640
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1661
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1640/01 2561338
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121338Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7448
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9164
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4734
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3227
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6858
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6699
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3268
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001640 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Ankara Prosecutor Takes the First Step toward Examining Deniz Feneri 
Case 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that the Ankara prosecutor decided to 
respond to a legal complaint filed by the Labor Party against the 
AKP for irregularities in the Deniz Feneri case.   In the complaint, 
the Labor Party demands legal action against PM Erdogan, RTUK 
President Akman, the managers of the Turkish Deniz Feneri charity, 
the administration of Kanal 7 TV and all private Turkish companies 
linked to the German-based Deniz Feneri organization.  Five 
different prosecutors will be asked to probe the different aspects 
of the case.  If the prosecutors decide to start an official 
investigation, they may contact German authorities to request 
information about the charges directed to the Deniz Feneri charity 
organization in Germany.  Milliyet adds that the prosecutors have no 
authority to take legal action against PM Erdogan and the PM's 
permission is necessary to initiate an investigation against RTUK 
president Akman and the other state officials. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Deniz Feneri case 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "PM Erdogan's attitude 
towards the "Deniz Feneri" case is very wrong.  Instead of losing 
his temper, Erdogan should refute the allegations with evidence and 
initiate an investigation in Turkey.  I hope that Erdogan will stop 
fighting with the media soon and will focus on the real agenda in 
Turkey.  Turkey's development process does not need conflicts and 
tensions, but a peaceful and gentle atmosphere.  Let everyone 
fulfill their own responsibilities without damaging the stability in 
the country." 
 
Tufan Turenc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "It is difficult to 
understand PM Erdogan's recent attitude regarding the Deniz Feneri 
case.  I really wonder why he is acting like a defense lawyer for 
the suspects of this case and attacking the media.  Does he feel 
that he cannot be criticized just because the AKP won 47 percent of 
the votes in the last elections? Maybe the reason for his 
uncontrollable actions is because of the illegal money transfers to 
his party and the realization that if these allegations are proven 
to be true, his party will be closed and he will be tried at the 
Supreme Court.  PM Erdogan already deserves to be tried at the 
Supreme Court for all the illegal acts he has performed during his 
administration." 
 
Huseyin Gulerce in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Why is the fight 
between the PM and Dogan Media Group (DMG) growing?  Is it because 
Aydin Dogan is trying to distract the public from the 'Ergenekon' 
investigation because he may have played a role?  Or is it because 
the PM is making a preemptive strike in response to rumors DMG will 
launch a new assault campaign against the AKP when the 
Constitutional Court announces its justification over the closure 
case?  Do you think there can be a winner in this fight?  What would 
democracy, press freedoms, and politics win?  Will this make the 
Ergenekon investigation disappear?  The PM, no matter how right he 
might be, must think about these questions.  There is no way out in 
Turkey other than raising the institutions to European Union 
standards." 
 
Mehmet Tezkan wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "PM Erdogan's recent 
efforts to defend the people involved in Deniz Feneri case angered 
not only the liberals but conservative Muslims as well. 
Conservative Muslims made these donations in the name of God and the 
PM's support for the corrupt has hurt these people deeply.  Liberal 
democrats were also hurt and angry with the PM because they support 
EU membership and they know that, as the main rule of democracy, the 
press is free in Europe." 
 
Cuneyt Arcayurek in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "Mr Zahit Akman, 
who delivers lessons of morals, manners and decency to national 
 
ANKARA 00001640  002 OF 003 
 
 
broadcasters, is mentioned 34 times in the German indictment 
regarding the Deniz Feneri case.  Akman, who could be arrested as 
soon as he tries to enter Germany, has not considered resigning from 
his post at RTUK.  Indiscretions and bribery will naturally grow in 
a country where those who are in control have facilitated religious 
exploitation." 
 
Turkey and Armenia to Release Joint Statement 
Mainstream Sabah reports that Turkey and Armenia are working on a 
joint declaration to be released in New York or Istanbul. 
Reportedly, the declaration will stress a new positive approach to 
bilateral ties.  Papers add that Foreign Minister Babacan will go to 
New York on September 18 and will stay there until the end of the 
month.  During his stay in New York, Babacan will hold talks with 
Armenian FM Nalbandian and if the two Ministers reach an agreement 
on the declaration, the document will be released in New York by the 
end of this month.  Otherwise, the declaration will be released in 
October in Istanbul. 
 
Meanwhile, FM Babacan talked with Secretary Rice over the phone 
regarding the new dialogue between Turkey and Armenia.  Babacan 
stressed the importance of resolving problems between Azerbaijan and 
Armenia, and Turkey's support for the Minsk Process and added that 
settlement of the Nagorno-Karabagh dispute would have a positive 
impact on Turkey-Armenia ties.  Secretary Rice, in turn, praised and 
supported Turkish efforts to tackle disputes in the region. 
 
Cypriot Leaders Begin 'Substantive' Peace Talks 
Media outlets report that on Thursday, Turkish and Greek Cypriot 
leaders Mehmet Ali Talat and Demetris Christofias came together in 
the buffer zone in Nicosia (Lefkosa) for "substantive negotiations" 
regarding a settlement to end the division of the island.  No 
statement was released following the meeting.  UN Special Cyprus 
Envoy Alexander Downer, who joined the meeting, said the 
negotiations focused on "governance" and "power sharing."  Downer 
added the same topics would be on the agenda when the leaders meet 
again on September 18.  Islamist-oriented Zaman points to the 
differing approaches of the two sides, saying Turkish Cypriots want 
a "presidential council" like in Bosnia-Herzegovina or Switzerland 
while the Greek Cypriots ask for a "rotating presidential system." 
 
 
Anti-Terror Board Convenes 
Media outlets report the Counter-Terrorism Board convened Thursday 
to discuss cross-border operations against terrorists and other 
plans for combating terror.  Prime Minister Erdogan chaired the 
meeting, which was attended by the Chief of the General Staff (TGS) 
Ilker Basbug and the Land Forces and Gendarme commanders as well as 
some cabinet ministers.  The participants concluded that economic, 
social and psychological measures for combating terror should be 
enhanced.  The meeting also discussed the security operations at 
home and in northern Iraq.  Erdogan said his government was ready to 
renew the decree authorizing the military to carry out cross-border 
operations against terrorists. 
 
Meanwhile, tabloid Aksam says the ruling AKP was hesitant regarding 
the extension of the parliamentary decree authorizing cross-border 
operations against the PKK in northern Iraq.  The decree ends on 
October 17.  The paper comments the AKP leaders fear that the 
extension of the decree could undermine support for the ruling party 
in the mainly Kurdish southeast on the eve of the forthcoming 
municipality elections in March. 
Opposition CHP deputy chairman Onur Oymen said the decree was vital 
in combating terrorism, and warned that the government would have a 
hard time in the fight against the PKK if it can't renew the 
authorization of the parliament.  Opposition far right MHP deputy 
group chief Oktay Vural said his party would support the extension 
of the decree. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Terrorism 
 
ANKARA 00001640  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Hikmet Bila writes in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "After 9-11, 
the Bush administration has turned Turkey, an ally of the US for 60 
years, into chaos.  The U.S. established a Kurdish state in northern 
Iraq, and gave a green light to Turkey's Kurds toward the same end. 
Under the protection of the state it has helped established in 
northern Iraq, the U.S. has aided the PKK terror organization.  On 
the other hand, the U.S. forced Turkey into wearing a 'moderate 
Islam' shirt.  This is the meaning of 'The Crusades' Bush has 
declared seven years ago.  This is the reason for the intense 
distress Turkey is going through today." 
 
U.S. Denies Israel Access to Iraqi Airspace 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in "Israel Wants an Air Corridor 
from the U.S. In Order to Strike Iran," that the U.S. is "concerned 
Israel will carry out a nuclear strike against Iran," after "months 
of controversy regarding the Israeli request."  Zaman notes Israel 
"was unable to get the green light from the U.S. for an attack 
against Iran." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Turkish military has intensified operations against the PKK 
along the border with Iraq as well as in the provinces of Tunceli, 
Bingol, Diyarbakir and Siirt before winter sets in the region. 
 
- The Justice Ministry is expected to make a statement Friday 
concerning the results of an investigation of legal complaints filed 
against the Ergenekon prosecutor Zekeriya Oz. 
 
- The Council of State (Danistay) has suspended aid extended by the 
AKP-run Ankara Municipality to private Koran courses and 
non-commercial, Islamist-leaning student dormitories. 
 
International News 
 
- South Ossetian leader Eduard Kokoity said press reports quoting 
him as saying the Georgian breakaway region intended to become part 
of Russia were a 'misinterpretation' of his statement. 
 
-  Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said the U.S. missile defense 
shield to be deployed in Poland poses a direct threat to Russia's 
security. 
 
- President Hamid Karzai says Afghanistan has seen progress since 
the ouster of the Taliban regime, but it has also suffered much 
"pain" in civilian casualties. 
WILSON