08ANKARA1985
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1312
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1985/01 3191547
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141547Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8019
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9306
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5016
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3396
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6976
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6829
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3398
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001985 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan: Turkey Determined to Continue Ties with New U.S. 
Administration 
All media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan addressed the UN 
General Assembly Thursday and called for cooperation against 
terrorism.  Afterwards, the PM attended a conference entitled, "The 
Role of Turkey in Shaping the Future" at Columbia University in New 
York.  Erdogan said Turkey was "determined to preserve close ties" 
with the U.S. under the new administration of president-elect Barack 
Obama.  He also urged the new American administration to take into 
account Ankara's sensitivities regarding northern Iraq and relations 
with Armenia. 
 
Editorial Commentary on New U.S. Administration 
 
Mehmet Farac in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "Joe Biden said in 
Seattle just before the elections that terrorists would soon do 
something to test Obama.  A similar concern was voiced by Zbigniew 
Brzezinski, who is expected to be given a seat in Obama's cabinet. 
Brzezinski shared Biden's concerns by saying, 'In one way or 
another, all American presidents are tested by new threats and 
conditions.'  It's a fact that the ongoing global threat bides its 
time in order to test the U.S. at its weakest moment." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Susan Elizabeth Rice is 
among the ones who are being considered for the position of U.S. 
Secretary of State.  Rice is known as a straightforward person who 
can relay her thoughts easily.  When asked how she makes her 
frankness and diplomacy meet, Rice says, "I can act as a diplomat 
when I want to.  But I'm not a patient person in that regard."  Rice 
may play important roles regarding U.S. security, foreign policy and 
Africa strategies." 
 
Rescue Operations Are Expected in order to Save Hijacked Turkish 
Ships 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that following the hijacking of a second 
Turkish ship by Somali pirates, the Turkish Gokova frigate, which is 
under NATO command, has been given to the command of the Turkish 
Navy.  Hurriyet expects the Turkish Navy to launch an operation to 
rescue the 14 crew members kept hostage on the Turkish-flagged ship, 
Karagol.  In a phone conversation permitted by the pirates, the 
captain of the ship said their hijackers consisted of 40 pirates who 
were all armed with Kalashnikov rifles.  The captain said they were 
not being mistreated. 
 
A Tough Call for the PM 
Mainstream Milliyet carries a front-page feature story entitled, "A 
Tough Decision for Prime Minister Erdogan" on the Hrant Dink murder 
case investigation report prepared by Prime Ministry Inspectors. 
Referring to the report's content, Milliyet highlights that 
inspectors have concluded serious negligence by government officials 
prevented them from preventing the assassination of Hrant Dink.  The 
report will be in the Prime Minister's office soon, and it is 
subject to Prime Minister Erdogan's approval to go further ahead 
which will lead to investigations against some official figures, 
including former Chief of Police in Trabzon province who is 
currently Director General for Police Intelligence, and the Istanbul 
Chief of Police.  Commenting on the report, senior Law Professor 
Mithat Sancar said to NTV that the report makes some very important 
conclusions and it calls for opening a public case by prosecutors 
and it does not have to be a subject of PM approval. 
 
Court Cases and Debate Over Justice 
Liberal Radikal carries in a front page story "Heavy Penalty for 
Children" while Sabah and Vatan also do the similar reporting about 
six children, all primary school students are subject to 25 years of 
imprisonment.  A local court in southeast Diyarbakir prepared 
indictment against six kids who were arrested for throwing stones to 
police and burning tires during Prime Minister Erdogan's visit to 
 
ANKARA 00001985  002 OF 004 
 
 
the city.  The indictment asked for total 25 years of sentence for 
"acting under PKK's instruction and help toward independent 
Kurdistan goal of the terrorist organization."  The trial will soon 
start at Diyarbakir Court. 
 
Meanwhile all papers highlight a ruling by European Court of Human 
Rights in favor of a former Turkish prosecutor.  Prosecutor Sacit 
Akarsu during his term in Adana prepared an indictment against 
Turkish generals who held the September 12, 1980 military coup.  The 
indictment in 2000 argued that the generals including the coup 
leader General Kenan Evren should be tried for constitutional 
violation.   Prosecutor Akarsu was fired from public service for 
misusing authority.  The ECHR ruling says Akarsu did nothing wrong 
and fined Turkey to pay 41,000 Euroes to compensate. 
 
Optimism Fades to Worry over the G20's Ability to Deliver 
Hope that the G20 can deliver relief to world markets is fading fast 
in the Turkish media.  Headlines are almost entirely focused on the 
dismal economic news out of Europe and the U.S.  Mainstream Milliyet 
carries the headline, "The Climate of Pessimism Deepens," as "the 
OECD, the U.S., 15 EU Member Countries, and Japan are expecting 
negative growth."  Mainstream Hurriyet carries the headline, "In 
2009, The Global Economy Will Shrink and Even the Giants Can't 
Escape," from the continuing effects of the crisis.  Liberal Radikal 
reports, "Germany Officially Enters a Recession and Britain Sees Its 
Worst Times in Thirty Years," as "The Crisis Continues," and leading 
Turkish economists accuse the government of Turkey with "delaying 
preparations for a rescue package for Turkey."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports, "The Three Largest Economies are entering a Recession 
One Step at a Time," and the G20's efforts to revive economies are 
characterized as "the doping up of Wall Street."  Leftist Taraf 
carries the banner headline, "Germany is officially in a Recession" 
and notes "England is shocked," as the global economic crisis "is 
expected to continue into 2009."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
reports "OECD countries are expected to enter recessions," and 
"unemployment numbers will climb," as "unemployment in the U.S. 
alone reached a seven-year high."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "The OECD predicts that no one will be able to escape from 
recession," as "The Giants are devoured by Recession." 
 
Editorial Commentary on G-20 
 
Guven Sak wrote in business daily Referans: "It is unrealistic to 
expect miracles out of the G-20 summit.  In fact the summit's 
composition, which includes Turkey, is a success story in and of 
itself.  Normally it would be the G-8 plus 5, but this time the 
composition was extended to include others into the system.  Many 
countries will be able to inject liquidity into their markets from 
IMF funds, which is an important opportunity in a short run.  The 
G-20 could also be a platform that can be used by countries like 
Turkey to better govern the global economic system in the long 
term." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The upcoming 
G-20 summit is very bad news for the entire world because it is 
basically the implementation of a secret strategy designed by the 
United States and the United Kingdom.  The layout of this plan gives 
a dictator-like role to the IMF as it will the have final say on 
world economies; i.e. the IMF will now be the Global Central Bank 
and will be able to impose its policies and take care of American 
and British interests.  This is the very time to stand strongly 
against the American-British monopoly in a global economic and 
political scheme." 
 
Metin Munir wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "In the eyes of the 
Turkish public, the IMF is like Satan.  Erdogan does not want to be 
branded by an IMF stamp as the local elections approach.  Of course, 
if Erdogan takes a loan from the IMF, the IMF will want public 
spending to be reduced.  With every passing day, Turkey's economy is 
being drained and eventually it will be completely drained.  One of 
 
ANKARA 00001985  003 OF 004 
 
 
Turkey's greatest exports is iron and steel.  Prices dropped in 
August for these commodities by two-thirds; what used to be worth 
$1,500 is now only worth $500.  Developing countries are divided 
into two - those with foreign currency on hand, like China, and 
those without.  Turkey's reserves are low. And only one man cannot 
make the preference to not do anything to save the Turkish 
economy." 
 
Prime Ministry Bans Reporters, Renews Press Card of Deniz Feneri 
Convict 
Milliyet, Aksam and Taraf continue criticism of a Prime Ministry ban 
placed on seven reporters by not renewing their accreditation. 
Tabloid Aksam reports on its front page the Prime 
Ministry-affiliated Press Cards Committee renewed the press card of 
Mehmet Gurhan, the main suspect in the Deniz Feneri scandal in 
Germany.  Gurhan was sentenced to five years and ten months in 
prison for embezzlement of millions of Euro in donations made to the 
Islamist charity organization Deniz Feneri.  Aksam criticized the 
fact that the Prime Ministry recently barred seven reporters from 
doing their job while it renewed indefinitely the press card of 
Gurhan who was convicted of fraud. 
 
Editorial Commentary on 'Ergenekon' Case, Turkish Democracy Debate 
 
Mustafa Mutlu wrote in mainstream Vatan:  An Ergenekon Raid That is 
like A Comedy Film!  On October 26th, according to the Istanbul 
Prosecutor's office, there was a police raid on a depot in Atasehir 
neighborhood in Kadikoy municipality, where the prosecutor claims 
jailed journalist Tuncay Ozkan hid "secret documents."  It's 
approximately fifteen days later and no one else was taken into 
custody, and nothing has come out of the raid.  And after I 
criticize this raid as an example of the ridiculousness of this 
case, some idiots are likely to accuse me of waterdowning the 
Ergenekon case..." 
 
Mumtazer Turkone in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "The first four 
provisions of our constitution, which Constitutional Court head 
Hasim Kilic suggested should be opened to debate, serve an elitist 
republican understanding.  It's true that the republic is a regime 
of virtues.  What we are asking after 85 years is this: why are 
these virtues monopolized by an elite minority?  Why can't the 
public take its share from these virtues?  Why don't we try to find 
an answer to this by debating the four provisions, and thus 
rendering the Republic a more anonymous character?  For example, the 
third provision stipulates that the national language is Turkish. 
Whose language is Turkish?  Are they referring to the state or the 
people?  Don't we need an answer and isn't this answer important?" 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- On Thursday, the parliament hosted a funeral ceremony for bidding 
farewell to Mustafa Sekip Birgol, Turkey's last Independence War 
veteran.  All state and military top brass attended the funeral. 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP drafts a bill for exempting conscientious 
objectors from compulsory military service. 
 
- Ankara prosecutor initiates investigation into DTP's "project for 
democratic settlement in the Kurdish issue." 
 
World 
 
-  Germany's media watchdog ZAK has revoked the broadcast licenses 
of Frankfurt-based Kanal 7 Int and tvt in the country.  The two 
channels had ties with the Islamic charity organization Deniz 
Feneri. 
 
- Bulgaria will withdraw its 155-strong military contingent from 
 
ANKARA 00001985  004 OF 004 
 
 
Iraq when its mandate expires at the end of this year. 
 
- Russian President Dmitry Medvedev urges US President-elect Barack 
Obama to reconsider plans to deploy a missile-defense shield in 
Europe. 
 
WILSON