08ANKARA1296
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1021
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1296/01 2001445
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181445Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6891
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9034
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4495
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3087
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6734
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6567
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3148
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001296 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JULY 18, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
NSA Hadley Visits Ankara 
All news outlets report on Thursday, US National Security Advisor 
Stephen Hadley paid a one-day visit to Ankara for meetings with 
President Abdullah Gul, Prime Minister Erdogan, Foreign Minister Ali 
Babacan, and the military General Staff (TGS).  Speaking to the 
press following his meeting with Erdogan, Hadley said the US would 
continue cooperating with Turkey in the fight against the "common 
enemy PKK."  Hadley said Turkey was a "close friend and ally and a 
powerful strategic partner," and expressed gratitude for Turkey's 
support.  Hadley also noted the US would continue to support 
Turkey's EU entry process.  Mainstream Sabah claims Hadley told 
Ankara negotiations with Iran would not happen unless Tehran gives 
up its uranium enrichment program.  Mainstream Hurriyet says Hadley 
warned the Turks that Iran was a threat for Turkey.  Ankara, 
however, suggested dialogue to avoid a new crisis in the region 
which would add on to the turmoil in Iraq.  Sabah and the all-news 
broadcaster NTV say Hadley sent messages to Iran in advance of the 
talks in Geneva, and also held a "secret meeting" with the security 
advisors of 11 NATO countries.  The meeting was hosted by Prime 
Minister Erdogan's foreign policy advisor, Ahmet Davutoglu. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet and some mainstream papers underline 
the Hadley visit came two days in advance of the Geneva talks to 
discuss Iran's nuclear program, and ask whether Ankara was mediating 
in a new diplomatic process, as it did with Israel and Syria. 
Leftist Taraf sees a "change" in the US approach toward Iran, adding 
Turkey was supporting the new US strategy of seeking solutions to 
the problems at the negotiating table. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: NSA Hadley Visit 
 
"Reason for Hadley Visit" 
Nagehan Alci wrote in mainstream Aksam (7/18):  "Some might think 
that there is a link between the timing of Hadley visit and the 
problems such as the Ergenekon investigation and the AKP closure 
case that Turkey is going through.  The fact of the matter is Iran 
was the main and almost sole reason for Hadley's visit to Ankara. 
There were certainly some other topics on the table, but mainly 
Washington wanted to get Ankara's take on the Iran issue. 
Interestingly enough, there are some in Turkey who seek the 
'American finger' in every problem that Turkey faces.  All of these 
speculations are based on the assumption that the United States 
Administration acts in a unified manner and that's its focus on 
Turkey is organized.  This isn't true, in fact, this Washington 
Administration is not only nearing the end of its term, but it also 
is not consistently unified about Turkey.  Therefore, any Turkish 
official can receive different messages about Turkey from Secretary 
Rice's and Vice President Cheney's office.  That said, there's 
simply no room for creating conspiracies here." 
 
"Ankara's Message from Hadley to Mottaki" 
Yasemin Congar wrote in leftist Taraf (7/18): "Chances for 
persuading Iran to freeze its uranium enrichment program are higher 
than ever.  And it comes with a 'carrot' on the table which will be 
the reestablishment of ties between the United States and Iran after 
some 30 years.  First of all, Washington has made a major policy 
change by agreeing to send a high-level diplomat to talks with Iran. 
 Such an opportunity happened primarily because of the  European 
Union's efforts and despite those in the Bush Administration who 
support a strike against Iran.  This new move is compatible with the 
ruling AKP's approach on Iran, and it also serves Turkey's 
interests.  Iran was one of the main topics during the discussions 
with NSA Hadley in Ankara.  An American diplomat knowledgeable about 
 these meetings said Hadley gave an extensive brief about the US' 
current stance on Iran and added 'There is a strong proposal here as 
we send an important diplomat to Geneva.  That shows seriousness of 
the proposal. It is up to Iran to decide whether or not they use 
this chance.'  Turkey is hosting the Iranian Foreign Minister and 
this will be the message to Iran.  Iranian FM Mottaki, who had 
 
ANKARA 00001296  002 OF 003 
 
 
previously served in Ankara as the Iranian Ambassador, will be told 
that Iran should use this important chance to both resolve its 
international dispute and to normalize its ties with the US." 
 
Iran's Mottaki in Ankara for Talks 
All papers report Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki 
arrived in Ankara Thursday evening for talks with his Turkish 
counterpart, Ali Babacan, and with President Abdullah Gul and Prime 
Minister Erdogan.  Leftist Taraf expects Turks to urge Mottaki "not 
to miss the opportunity for a peaceful settlement" with regard to 
Tehran's nuclear program.  Babacan said in response to a press 
question after meeting Hadley yesterday, "We are in close dialogue 
with the six countries who have made a new offer to Tehran, as well 
as with our friend and neighbor Iran.  Turkey is ready to undertake 
every necessary move to ensure the peaceful settlement of the 
dispute."  Islamist-oriented Zaman claims Babacan will pay visits to 
the US and Iran later this month. 
 
Paper: Turkey-Armenia Kick Off 'Secret Talks' 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports on July 8, Turkey and Armenia kicked off 
a series of "secret talks" in the Swiss capital of Bern.  The 
Turkish delegation was chaired by an unidentified senior Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) official.  The US and some EU countries have 
been notified about the talks in Bern.  Armenian President Serzh 
Sarksyan said after his election in February, as well as in a recent 
coomentary published in The Wall Street Journal, he was ready for 
"unconditional" talks with Turkey to normalize bilateral ties and 
the reopen the border between the two countries.  Sarksyan's 
messages were claimed to have been influenced by the US.  Sarksyan 
also invited Turkish President Abdullah Gul to Yerevan to watch a 
World Soccer Cup qualifier between Turkey and Armenia on September 
¶6.  The Turkish MFA says Gul could go to Yerevan since such a visit 
would not be an official one, reports Hurriyet. 
 
Green Card Possibility for Fethullah Gulen 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that although the "US Immigration 
Department" and their sub-office "Appeal Department" turned down 
Fethullah Gulen's green card application, the Federal Court in 
Pennsylvania decided in favor of Gulen for the review of the 
decision. 
 
GENAR Poll Results 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak gives extensive front-page coverage to 
a survey conducted by GENAR polling company.  The survey is based on 
interviews with 2020 people in 14 provinces between July 7 and 17. 
According to the survey, the majority of Turkish people support the 
Ergenekon operation.  65.1 percent of the people interviewed in the 
survey don't believe that Ergenekon investigation was a politically 
motivated operation.  37 percent described Ergenekon as a terror 
organization and 61 percent said it is a criminal organization.  60 
percent of the interviewed objected to the closure of the AKP and 45 
percent said the ban of the AKP and the PM would lead to a political 
crisis in Turkey.  According to the survey, the most trusted 
institution in Turkey is the national soccer team and the least 
trusted is the media. 
 
The survey also contains questions about Islamic leader Fethullah 
Gulen.  47.4 percent of Turkish people say Gulen should return to 
Turkey, while 45.3 percent are against his return. 
 
Barzani Threatens Baghdad Regarding Kirkuk Referendum 
Liberal Radikal reports that at his party group meeting, KRG 
President Mesud Barzani said that 'if article 140 of the 
constitution, which states that Kirkuk's status should be determined 
by a referendum, is postponed, Iraq will be divided.  According to 
the Iraqi Constitution, the referendum should take place by the end 
of 2007.  However, in search of a political solution, the UN had 
suggested a census prior to the referendum, and that is why the 
referendum was postponed. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001296  003 OF 003 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan is to lead a delegation to northern Cyprus 
on Friday to participate in the July 20 celebrations marking the 
founding of Turkish Cyprus. 
 
- Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP is to hold a convention on July 20 
to pick a new party leader.  Ahmet Turk of the "moderates" is 
expected to be elected the new chairman, and "hawkish" Emine Ayna 
his co-chair. 
 
- Turkey has been convicted by the European Court of Human Rights 
(ECHR) in a lawsuit filed by 11 teachers who were punished for 
participating in a one-day strike in 2000. 
 
International News 
 
- Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki will visit Germany and Italy 
next week to encourage European investment in Iraq.  Mailki will 
also come together with Pope Benedict 16. 
 
- The US plans to build a military airport near the northern Iraqi 
town of Halabja in Suleymaniye which borders Iran. 
 
- New York City's yellow taxi fleet will go green. 
 
WILSON