08ANKARA1957
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9043
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1957/01 3171551
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121551Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7969
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9298
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4989
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3385
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6969
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6821
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3390
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001957 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers: 
 
The EU Issues PKK Report 
 
Defense Minister Gonul Makes Controversial Comments 
 
Industry Shrinks by 6.4 Percent 
 
Journalists' Accreditation Revoked by Prime Ministry 
 
High Expectations for G20 
 
A Diplomatic Gesture from Switzerland 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
The EU's Issues PKK Report 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says on its front page a report of the EU 
Institute for Security Studies (ISS) states the Kurdish Regional 
Government (KRG) of northern Iraq has cut support for the PKK, but 
continues its policy of tolerance towards the organization.  The ISS 
report estimates there are 5,000 PKK militants in northern Iraq and 
around 2,000 in Istanbul, Ankara and Izmir.  The report notes that 
one of the chiefs of the PKK, Murat Karayilan, has met at least 
twice with officials from Turkey's National Intelligence 
Organization (MIT).  The ISS report cites comments by Masrur 
Barzani, son of KRG President Massoud Barzani, who is also the KRG 
intelligence chief.  The report quotes Masrur Barzani as saying, 
"Abdullah Ocalan, who is in a prison on Imrali Island, is controlled 
by Turks and has been turned into "a propagandist for Kemalists." 
In addition, the report says Masrur emphasized, "Turkey does not 
want to force Ocalan to improve the situation because Turkey, or at 
least its military, has no interest in changing the situation."  The 
report also notes Turkey could occupy the northern Iraqi city of 
Erbil within two hours, and it would be impossible to get Turkish 
troops out of the region once they get in. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Democracy Debates/Kurdish Issue 
 
Rusen Cakir wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "AKP parliamentarians who 
are of Kurdish origin are concerned but hopeful regarding efforts to 
find a solution to the Kurdish issue.  After the AKP won the July 
2007 elections PM Erdogan said that his party is the right one to 
address the Kurdish issue.  Unfortunately, neither the AKP 
parliamentarians of Kurdish origin nor the PM put forth any 
suggestions to resolve the Kurdish issue.  At this point, I really 
don't know what the PM can do about the Kurdish issue, but first of 
all he must change his derogatory attitude towards DTP.  I don't 
believe that such an approach is suitable for the prime minister of 
a democratic country." 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The government's 
intention to work for a civilian constitution is history.  They are 
not even talking about it any more.  In fact, Prime Minister Erdogan 
abandoned his freedom and democracy platform right after a date for 
negotiations was designated by the EU.  In the eyes of the AKP 
government, this action from the EU was an endorsement of the AKP's 
legitimacy vis-`-vis the European Union and thus the AKP saw no need 
for further reform.  In other words, the prime minister is no longer 
interested in a democratic republic, but he is interested in 
establishing a religious republic." 
 
Serdar Akinan wrote in tabloid Aksam: "Diyarbakir has 200,000 
children under the age of 18.  Of the 145 people arrested in 
Diyarbakir during the most recent protests, 16 were elementary 
school students.  91 children were arrested in March 2006.  Lawyers 
for these children claim the children were mistreated and tortured 
by the police and prison officials.  Everyone agrees that if torture 
had not been used against PKK suspects in Diyarbakir in the 1980s, 
the PKK would not be as strong as it is today.  Dozens of children 
remain in a Diyarbakir prison over charges of membership to terror 
 
ANKARA 00001957  002 OF 004 
 
 
organizations.  What do you think will happen once those children 
are released from detention?  This will become everyone's problem as 
everyone holds some kind of responsibility in this issue." 
 
Defense Minister Gonul Makes Controversial Comments 
Media outlets continue to highlight the ongoing controversy over 
Defense Minister Gonul's recent remarks which were interpreted as 
overly nationalistic.  During a reception at the Turkish Embassy in 
Brussels, Minister Gonul said, "Turkey would not be the same country 
it is today if the Greek community still lived in the Aegean region 
or the Armenians still lived in many parts of Turkey." 
 
Today's papers carry a public response from Minister Gonul saying 
that his words were "misunderstood" and he was "making reference to 
Turkey's foundation."  Gonul added, "However, today minorities 
enrich our society."  He also attempted to clarify his prior 
comments by saying, "while building a new country, neither Greece 
nor Turkey wanted different religious elements in their societies as 
they formed their identity." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Gonul's Remarks 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Defense Minister Vecdi 
Gonul asked if Turkey would be what it is today if Greeks and 
Armenians had been allowed to stay in Turkey.  With such 
unacceptable comments coming from a state minister, how can Turkey 
advance toward democracy and human rights?  How will Turkey succeed 
among contemporary civilizations with this kind of ignorant 
mentality?  I wonder when Turkey will manage to mature?  A state 
minister in a civilized country would not remain in his position 
after saying such things." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "There are 
dark points in every country's history.  The 1915 disaster, the 1937 
events that were anti-Semitic in nature and the 1942 Special 
Taxation Law for non-Muslims are some of our past events which call 
for a conscientious response.  Unfortunately, the Defense Minister 
is now defending the dark intentions behind those past events.  It 
is very unfortunate to see such a mentality is still alive and has 
representation in the government." 
 
Turkish Industry Shrinks by 6.4 Percent 
Media outlets report Turkey's industrial production, including 
automotive and technology sectors, has shrunk by 6.4 percent. 
Automotive production was cut by 14,000 automobiles in September. 
The Turkish lira has fallen against the U.S. Dollar to a value of 
1.61 YTL to $1.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports gas stations 
continued selling petrol at high prices despite the 60 percent fall 
in global oil prices.  Papers also report Prime Minister Erdogan as 
saying the global financial crisis has begun to ease off.  The PM 
stressed his hopes continued that Turkey, with its strong economic 
structure, would be elevated to the level of "a financially 
attractive country." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-IMF 
 
Ali Bulac observes in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Big capital groups 
in Turkey are pressuring the government to sign an agreement with 
the IMF in the face of the global financial crisis.  Turkey's elite 
business circles have opposed the ruling AKP government over 
ideological concerns and are now blackmailing the government.  The 
PM has even named those who have increased their wealth 6-7 times 
during the AKP's term.  PM Erdogan must resist such pressures and 
stand behind his word that we don't have a penny to spend on those 
who want to benefit from the economic crisis." 
 
Journalists' Accreditation Revoked by the Prime Ministry 
All papers:  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that the Prime Ministry 
revoked the accreditation of six journalists yesterday without 
giving any reason for it.  Mainstream Hurriyet's Hasan Tufekci and 
 
ANKARA 00001957  003 OF 004 
 
 
Turan Yilmaz, mainstream Milliyet's Abdullah Karakus, mainstream 
Star TV's Fatma Cozen, mainstream Aksam's Ali Ekber Erturk, and 
pro-Kurdish Evernsel's Sultan Ozer were told yesterday that their 
accreditations as prime ministry correspondents were not renewed. 
The Press Council statement criticized the revocations and said 
"such applications indicate the pressure on the press.  We demand 
the annulment of the decision immediately." 
 
High Expectations for the G20 
Media outlets expect a lot from the G20 meeting, including the 
continuation of bailout measures on a wider and more comprehensive 
scale.  NTV reports, "The G20 Will Take Measures," to address the 
global economic crisis, "in a united and coordinated effort."  CNN 
Turk reports the G20 summit comes "as World Bank President Zoellick 
notes the number of countries needing assistance is climbing." 
Columnist Erinc Yeldan of leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet notes, 
"there is no one solution to this global crisis, one can't say to 
countries like Turkey 'reduce public expenditures and practice 
financial discipline,'" but it is expected "that whatever comes out 
of the summit, the G20 countries will see the necessity for more 
comprehensive support packages."  Meanwhile, Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak reports the summit "seeks to solve the current economic crisis 
and find a way to return to normal in the markets."  Columnist Ugur 
Gurses of liberal Radikal reports in "Economists Warn the G20," that 
"the countries comprising the G20 are prepared to suggest measures 
to deal with the global economic crisis, but what about Turkey?" 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports in, "Everyone is Having Difficulty and 
Wants Help as the U.S. Rescue Package Gets Crowded," that the 
Detroit auto giants, Fannie Mae, and American Express are joining 
the list of those who will be bailed out by the U.S. government. 
 
In a related story, mainstream Hurriyet reports "Prime Minister 
Erdogan will not meet with President-elect Obama when he joins the 
G20 Summit in Washington," but "Erdogan will be able to send a 
message to the Obama Administration when he speaks to the Brookings 
Institution," which the paper describes as "the think tank that is 
closest to the Democrats." 
 
 
A Diplomatic Gesture from Switzerland 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Yeni Safak, Vatan and others: President Gul and 
his visiting Swiss counterpart President Pascal Couchepin attended a 
ceremony at a historical museum in Ankara yesterday where Couchepin 
presented Gul with the table on which the Lausanne Treaty was 
signed.  Couchepin said that Switzerland appointed its first 
Ambassador to Turkey in 1928 and he had presented his credentials to 
President Mustafa Kemal Ataturk.  He also underlined the importance 
of the Lausanne Treaty signed in 1923 for bilateral relations, 
reports mainstream Milliyet.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports 
that Couchepin and the Swiss government recently acted to halt money 
laundering activities by the PKK in Switzerland. 
 
TV News 
 Domestic 
 
- The interrogation of 86 suspects implicated in the Ergenekon 
network has begun. 
 
- Haci Uzen, the former head of the pro-Kurdish DTP branch in the 
southeastern town of Silopi, was given a one-year prison sentence on 
charges of spreading PKK propaganda. 
 
- DTP leader Ahmet Turk says "Turkey would be much richer if defense 
spending had been used to boost the welfare of Turkish people." 
 
International 
 
- Representatives from Britain, China, France, Germany, Russia and 
the United States will meet in Paris on Thursday to discuss the next 
steps concerning Iran's nuclear program. 
 
ANKARA 00001957  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
- Israeli defense officials say the military has deployed 
remote-controlled machine-guns along its border with the Gaza Strip. 
 
 
WILSON