09ANKARA1054
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4612
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1054/01 2041217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231217Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0298
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0197
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6049
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4024
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7441
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7327
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3911
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, JULY 23, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan: "We Have Launched a Kurdish Initiative" 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan, in connection with the 
steps taken by the government to resolve Turkey's Kurdish question, 
said yesterday, "Whether we call it the Kurdish, the southeastern or 
the eastern problem, or whether we call it the Kurdish initiative, 
we have started work on this."  Erdogan warned his party deputies 
that he would "not tolerate" statements undermining government 
unity.  Speaking to press Wednesday before he left for Syria, 
Erdogan said that a week ago, work was kicked off together with 
cabinet ministers who also attend the National Security Council 
(MGK) meetings.  Erdogan noted that so far, his government has 
launched a Kurdish channel, TRT-6, on the state run broadcaster TRT, 
and that Kurdish language and literature departments were 
established in universities.  Business investments were made in 
southeast Turkey, adverts in Kurdish were allowed on billboards in 
the cities, and prison inmates were allowed to communicate with 
their relatives in Kurdish, the PM added.  He told the press that 
his government would discuss more forward steps with the military 
General Staff (TGS), the intelligence service MIT, and with the 
lawmakers from southeast Turkey. 
 
Papers comment that the AKP government is expected to launch "the 
new initiatives" regarding the Kurdish issue before August 15, when 
the PKK's imprisoned leader Abdullah Ocalan is expected to announce 
a new "roadmap" for solving the Kurdish problem. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the AKP Government's Kurdish Initiative 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Besides the 
statements, there seems no concrete plan for resolving the Kurdish 
issue.  The government cannot go beyond some cosmetic efforts 
considering the fact that there is not even a harmonized view within 
the ruling party.  Some AKP members believe the imprisoned PKK 
leader will be used as an interlocutor while some others strongly 
oppose it.  In the meantime, Ocalan gains more momentum since the 
government's actions have thus far been limited to words as opposed 
to deeds." 
 
Yasin Dogan wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The most 
important element for resolving the Kurdish issue is political will 
and determination to act further.  This time both of them are in 
question, therefore everyone and every institution public or private 
should help and support the government in this process.  Everyone 
should feel they are a part of the solution." 
 
Kadri Gursel wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The AKP government lost 
enormous momentum when there was a positive climate in 2005 for 
addressing the Kurdish issue.  Instead time has been wasted through 
political nepotism as the ruling AKP focused on its agenda to 
politicize Islam instead of addressing the pending Kurdish issue. 
As we speak now, there is no strategy on the Kurdish issue either. 
The government is just trying to use the current de facto situation 
in Iraq after the American withdrawal to its own domestic 
propaganda.  Because the current picture in Iraq leaves little room 
for the PKK." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "The AKP 
government lost an opportunity to resolve Kurdish issue in 2005. 
This time PM Erdogan is discussing a plan that amounts to a second 
try.  Before the implementation of a plan, PM Erdogan better realize 
that any plan to address the Kurdish problem cannot succeed without 
working in harmony with military and without the military's backing. 
  Thus Erdogan has to make his choice: quarrel with the military or 
seek harmony with the military.  Otherwise there will be no third 
chance to resolve the problem." 
 
Erdogan: "Turkey is Ready to Resume Israel-Syria Talks 
AA and all papers:  Mainstream Hurriyet reports that PM Erdogan paid 
a one-day visit to Syria yesterday.  Prior to his departure, at the 
 
ANKARA 00001054  002 OF 003 
 
 
airport Erdogan said "Turkey is ready to resume its role as mediator 
in indirect talks between Syria and Israel.  We are receiving 
requests to resume the process, we should get to work on this 
issue."  Papers report that in the Northern Syrian city of Aleppo, 
PM Erdogan met with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.  No statement 
was made following the hour-long meeting, which was also attended by 
FM Davutoglu and his Syrian counterpart Walid al-Moallem. 
Mainstream Vatan reports that after meeting with Asad, PM Erdogan 
said "our two countries separated from each other in the past but 
now we are breathing the air of brotherhood."  Aleppo University 
decorated Erdogan with honorary doctorate for his support to 
Palestinian people and his "one minute" reaction to Israeli 
President Peres at Davos summit, adds the paper. 
 
'Cyprus Session' Held in the U.S. Congress (Cumhuriyet) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports from Washington that the 
Greek lobby in the U.S. supported a session in the U.S. Congress on 
the divided island of Cyprus, during which there were testimonials 
alleging that Turkey was held responsible for the damage inflicted 
on the religious and cultural heritage such as churches, monasteries 
and cemeteries in the island.  The U.S. Helsinki Commission, under 
the co-chairmanship of Senator Ben Cardin and Representative Alcee 
Hastings, held Wednesday a hearing on "Cyprus' Religious Cultural 
Heritage in Peril."  "Since the Turkish military invasion and 
continuing occupation of nearly one-third of Cyprus, the devastation 
of the island's heritage has been comprehensive.  Churches, chapels, 
monasteries, libraries, museums, and private collections of 
religious art and antiquities were looted.  Religious and historical 
sites have been damaged, ravaged or allowed to disintegrate," 
according to the hearing.  The special session also concluded Greek 
Cypriots had been subjected "ethnic cleansing," and that non-Muslims 
in the north do not enjoy religious freedom, according to 
Cumhuriyet. 
 
Biden Visits Russia's Backyard (Cumhuriyet) 
In "Biden Visits Russia's Backyard," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports U.S. Vice President Joe Biden visited Georgia yesterday 
after wrapping up his contacts in Ukraine.  Biden said the Obama 
Administration's step for a "new beginning" with Russia would not be 
taken without Georgia and Ukraine, says Cumhuriyet.  Mainstream 
Haberturk reports, "Georgia wants arms from the U.S."  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports, "Biden will discuss arms sales with Georgian 
President Saakashvili." 
 
Russia Opens New Naval Base in Syria (Aksam) 
Mainstream Aksam reports that Russia has opened a new naval base in 
Syria's Tartus port, and deployed 10 Russian warships to the region. 
 Two Russian nuclear warships, Peter the Great and Admiral 
Kuznetsov, will pass through the Bosporus Straits to go to Syria, 
says Cumhuriyet. 
 
Psychological Warfare is America's Plan B for Iran (Yeni Safak) 
Mainstream Milliyet, Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and liberal 
Radikal report that Secretary Clinton gave some hints about a "Plan 
B for Iran" during her visit to Asia.  During a television interview 
in Thailand, Secretary Clinton explained tactics the U.S. will use 
if Iran insists on continuing its nuclear weapons program, "It will 
not make Iran more secure to pass the nuclear threshold.  We 
stressed clearly that our door will be left open for talks with 
Iran, however, at the same time, we will take action to give a 
security shield to our allies in the region.  Moreover, we stressed 
clearly that we will paralyze our opponent with our actions.  We 
want Iran to understand that, if we expand our defense umbrella and 
support the military capacity of the Gulf states, Iran, as it hopes, 
will not be more powerful or secure by owning nuclear weapons, 
because, it will be unable to intimidate countries in the region." 
The papers note that Secretary Clinton reiterated that it is 
"unacceptable for Iran to seek nuclear weapons so determinedly." 
Mainstream Haberturk headlines, "Clinton Gives A Harsh Warning to 
Iran."  Mainstream Hurriyet reports in, "A Defense Umbrella," that, 
"The new strategy in U.S. foreign policy is weapons sales." 
 
ANKARA 00001054  003 OF 003 
 
 
Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "The U.S. Will Arm Iran's Neighbors." 
 Meanwhile, liberal Radikal notes in "One of Clinton's Promises 
Throws Israel into A Panic," that, "When Clinton said 'If Iran 
becomes a nuclear power, the U.S. will arm Iran's neighbors,' Israel 
responded sharply by accusing the U.S. of accepting a nuclear-armed 
Iran." 
 
Popular support for Obama Declines (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reports that popular support for President Obama is 
"in a speedy downward trend, dropping from 64 to 55 percent in the 7 
months after the elections."  This approval rate, the paper notes, 
is "even lower than President Bush's rate after the first seven 
months in the office."  Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "Obama's 
Approval Is Back to The Bush Levels," of public approval ratings. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- The High Military Council (YAS) will hold its annual convention 
from August 1-4. 
 
- The son of Prime Minister Erdogan has completed his military 
service in 21 days and is discharged from the army. 
 
- On Thursday, Turkey's Constitutional Court will discuss the 
requests for the annulment of a bill for the trial of soldiers by 
civilian courts, and another bill for the sweeping of landmines 
along the Syrian border. 
 
- Next week, the deputy energy ministers of Turkey and Israel will 
meet to discuss the construction of a pipeline carrying oil to 
India. 
 
- Turkey's state-owned oil refiner Tupras is the largest company in 
Turkey, says Istanbul Chamber of Industry (ISO).   Half of Turkey's 
top ten companies are owned by the Koc Group. 
 
- Turkey's year-end inflation is expected to stand at 6.09 percent. 
 
 
World 
 
- Greek Cypriot authorities have seized a North Korean-registered 
cargo ship that stopped and purchased food in Turkish Cyprus in 
north of the divided island. 
 
- PKK's Iranian arm, PJAK, has refused to abide by the PKK's 
ceasefire decision, while the PKK leader Murat Karayilan threatened 
to punish those who violate the ceasefire. 
 
- Pakistan's top court summons former president Pervez Musharraf to 
defend himself over controversially sacking judges two years ago. 
 
- In August, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu will pay a state visit 
to Skopje, Macedonia. 
 
- The number of pubs closing across Britain has increased by a third 
in the first six months of 2009 to about 52 a week. 
 
JEFFREY