09ANKARA1240
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9278
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1240/01 2360449
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240449Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0614
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0268
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6188
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4104
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7510
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7398
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3982
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001240 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, AUGUST 21, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
National Security Council Supports Continuation of The AKP 
Government's 'Kurdish Initiative' 
Media outlets report the National Security Council (MGK) has advised 
the government to continue with its 'Kurdish initiative' at 
Thursday's seven-hour meeting chaired by President Abdullah Gul. 
MGK said in a statement the "initiative" should continue on the 
condition that Turkey's unitary structure is preserved.  The 
statement also said that on Iraq, the three-party mechanism between 
Turkey, Iraq and the U.S. was "reviewed" in the light of 
developments, and underlined that contacts with the Iraqi groups 
were "useful." 
 
MHP, CHP Reactions To 'Kurdish Initiative' Continue 
Media outlets report opposition MHP leader Devlet Bahceli strongly 
reacted to the AKP government's 'Kurdish move,' which he said would 
amount to the "destruction of the unitary state."  "What the 
government is trying to do is to put martyrs and killers, security 
forces and terrorists, into the same basket.  The PM got into the 
same picture with Mount Kandil, tribal leaders and separatists. 
They want us, too, but let it be known that we will never be a part 
of this game," Bahceli said in a statement Thursday. 
 
The main opposition CHP's Algan Hacaloglu said the so-called 
"democratic initiative" was merely a "show" made by the ruling AKP. 
"If you have something concrete, just tell us so that we can make a 
contribution," Hacaloglu called on the AKP. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report opposition DSP leader Masum Turker called 
on President Abdullah Gul to hold a meeting with the leaders of all 
political parties to further discuss possible solutions to the 
Kurdish question. 
 
Saadet Party Makes Public Its 'Kurdish Report' 
Papers report that on Thursday, the Islamist Saadet Party (SP) 
leader Numan Kurtulmus made public in Diyarbakir a "Kurdish Report" 
prepared by his party.  The report says the PM must apologize to the 
martyrs' families, for the murders committed by "deep state," and 
for unaccounted murders as well as to torture victims.  It calls 
that a parliamentary committee must be set up to investigate the 
tortures at Diyarbakir prison.  It says the PKK members must be 
given a chance to return to "normal life," and adds the PKK must lay 
down its arms unconditionally, and calls an end to military 
operations.  The report also says education in and the usage of 
mother tongue was a "basic right." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Government's Democratic Initiative 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "Today, in Turkey, if you 
don't support the government's democratic process, you can be called 
a traitor.  I support the process but still have difficulty 
understanding why everyone is expected to support it.  MHP leader 
Bahceli's criticism of the process might be too harsh.  But he is 
not obliged to be as patient as the rest of us.  He has concerns 
that the government can easily sacrifice the national interests, 
therefore, he wants to warn everybody before it is too late.  What 
could be wrong with this?" 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Even though the 
government kept saying that their interlocutor on the Kurdish issue 
is not Imrali but the people of Turkey, they still keep one ear open 
towards Imrali.  They expected a moderate statement from Ocalan with 
support for the unity of the country because by talking like that he 
would strengthen the governments hand regarding the initiative. 
However, this did not happen and Ocalan asked for a separate Kurdish 
state.  This definitely disappointed the government and narrowed 
their field of action." 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in liberal Radikal:  "Democracy and freedom are 
the only elements to bring Turks, Kurds and all the people of Turkey 
 
ANKARA 00001240  002 OF 003 
 
 
together." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "Democratic move can be 
realized by freeing Kurdish origin people from the terrorist 
organization through economic and cultural rights.  All the parties 
in the parliament should mend the bridges and find a solution 
together.  It is not possible to find solutions to eliminate 
separatist terrorist organizations in a separated parliament." 
 
Mumtazer Turkone wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman:  "Ataturk's words 
"How happy it is to says one is a Turk" could be seen everywhere on 
the mountains of Turkey.  Do you think the people in the southeast 
feel happy when they read these words?  Those words should be 
engraved not on the mountains but on the peoples' minds and souls. 
If one tries to make others accept certain things by force and 
threat, then, the will to live together will be eliminated by them. 
Everything one says should serve to common approval." 
 
An Election In Spite of The Taliban (Sabah) 
Most media are far from hailing yesterday's elections in Afghanistan 
as a success, but some note that those who did turn out to vote 
defied the Taliban's threats.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "The 
Taliban Wave Crashes the Afghan Elections."  Liberal Radikal says, 
"It's Not An Election in Afghanistan, It's A Joke," as, "The 
elections took place under a wave of Taliban attacks and there was a 
very low turnout."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in 
"Democracy Under the Shadow of Violence," that "The Afghan public 
did not show a large turnout due to the Taliban's threats, violence, 
and corruption."  In contrast, some media are more optimistic. 
Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "Democracy Defeats The Taliban," but 
the paper notes, "not even 50% turned out to vote." Mainstream 
Hurriyet praises Afghan women for defying the Taliban's threats in 
"Afghan Women Were Not Scared of The Taliban," as, "Despite the 
Taliban's calls for a boycott, women in burkas lined up and voted in 
the elections."  Hurriyet also hails Afghan women for "going to the 
ballot box to vote for change." Leftist Taraf reports, "Despite the 
fact that the Taliban threatened to cut the fingers off those who 
voted, Afghans went to the polls." 
 
The CIA Rented Triggermen Against Al Qaeda (Hurriyet) 
Leftist Taraf headlines, "Blackwater is the 'Dirty Work' 
Contractor," and the paper reports "Blackwater was hired by the CIA 
to 'hunt' Al Qaeda in Iraq."  Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines, 
"The CIA Rented Blackwater for An Assassination Program," and the 
article says, "Blackwater, the private U.S. security firm known for 
committing bloody acts, agreed to kill top level Al Qaeda 
commanders."  In "An Agreement Between Blackwater and The CIA," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "A Contractor Was Assigned 
to Al Qaeda." Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The CIA paid 
millions of dollars to Blackwater," but "Among the reasons why CIA 
Director Leon Panetta put an end to this program is that it's not 
looked upon warmly that the CIA hired an outside firm," to target Al 
Qaeda.  Haberturk headlines, "Blackwater, The CIA's Triggermen." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- The military General Staff (TGS) has declared some areas in 
Tunceli province as 'temporary security zones' from August 23 to 
November 23. 
 
- On September 1, the DTP will hold a meeting in Diyarbakir to bring 
together writers, academics and artists who support the efforts for 
the resolution of the Kurdish issue. 
 
- DSP leader Masum Turker has called on President Abdullah Gul to 
hold a meeting with party leaders to discuss the AKP government's 
'Kurdish initiative.' 
 
- On Tuesday, President Abdullah Gul will host a Ramadan 
 
ANKARA 00001240  003 OF 003 
 
 
fast-breaking dinner for 300 relatives of martyred soldiers, police 
officers and village guards. 
 
- There was no agreement in Thursday's third round of collective 
bargaining talks between the government and labor unions. 
 
- Turkey's Central Bank expects the yearend inflation to stand at 
5.94 percent. 
 
World 
 
- The Iraqi deputy PM Barham Saleh has resigned to become the prime 
minister of the Kurdish autonomous region of northern Iraq. 
 
- Scottish authorities to free a terminally ill Abdel Basset 
al-Megrahi, a former Libyan intelligence agent who was serving a 
life sentence in a Scottish prison for 1988 Lockerbie plane bombing. 
 
 
- Iran's defeated presidential candidate Mehdi Karroubi will 
reportedly set up a satellite TV network. 
 
- Internationally acclaimed Kurdish singer Sivan Perwer has been 
"mistakenly" taken into custody in Toronto. 
 
SILLIMAN