09ANKARA835
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0558
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0835/01 1671234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161234Z JUN 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9893
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0103
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5873
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3927
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7366
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7248
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3830
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000835 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, JUNE 16, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Alleged Military Plan to Combat Religious Reaction Triggers Heated 
Debates 
All papers:  Today's papers give extensive front-page coverage to 
reactions to a controversial document which leftist Taraf said on 
Friday indicated a military plot to overthrow the civilian 
government.  The April 2009 plan was allegedly prepared by Naval 
Colonel Dursun Cicek and the plan indicated unease in the military 
ranks due to the Ergenekon investigation.  After the document was 
revealed by Taraf, the military prosecutor said that the document 
"was not prepared by the General Staff" and the military announced 
that it would "not harbor any conspirators."  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports that Deputy Prime Minister Cemil Cicek commented on the case 
when he said, "The government will turn to the Public Prosecutor's 
office and take all necessary actions to enlighten the details of 
the issue."  Mainstream Vatan notes that yesterday the military 
prosecutor and the General Staff issued statements in connection 
with the document.  The military prosecutor said "following the 
publication of reports about the document in Taraf daily last 
Friday, the General Staff immediately initiated an investigation in 
connection with the allegations.  So far there is no evidence to 
indicate that the document was prepared by the General Staff."  The 
prosecutor added that the final decision will be made when he 
acquires the document and completes an investigation.  Following the 
statement of the prosecutor, the General Staff posted a statement on 
its web site saying, "The Turkish Armed Forces is committed to the 
rule of law and the principles of the state and has not one single 
reservation on these.  Moreover, the legal process implemented so 
far by the independent Military Judiciary is also apparent.  The 
Turkish Armed Forces cannot harbor any personnel who take on 
attitudes and views that do not correspond with the principles of 
democracy and rule of law.  The Military Prosecution has not been 
able to reach any conclusion that the alleged document was prepared 
in any unit of the General Staff.  The Military Prosecution will be 
able to reach a final conclusion as to whether the document is real 
or counterfeit. The Turkish Armed Forces will follow up this issue 
closely until the end."  Today's papers report that the weekly 
meeting between the Prime Minister and the Chief of General Staff 
was move up from Thursday to today.  TV Channels report at this hour 
that PM Erdogan and General Basbug met at the Prime Ministry at 10 
am and the meeting still continues. 
 
General Basbug Answers Questions About Controversial Document 
Mainstream Hurriyet interviewed General Basbug regarding a 
controversial document which leftist Taraf said on Friday indicated 
a military plot to overthrow the civilian government.  When Hurriyet 
asked Basbug if he gave the order for the plot, Basbug called the 
question "insulting."  According to Basbug, Col. Dursun Cicek, who 
is accused of drafting the plan against the AKP government, denied 
he had any role in the document and noted the signature at the end 
of the document was not his.   Basbug added that the army examined 
all of its computers onsite at TGS, but could not find any evidence 
of the document.  In response to a question about vague expressions 
in the army statement issued yesterday, Basbug said "If it becomes 
clear that the document is authentic, the army will act with utmost 
sensitivity and will undertake all necessary steps."  When asked 
what the military will do if the document is authentic, Basbug 
replied, "Then everyone will see what we will do." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Alleged Military Coup Plot Document 
Mehmet Y. Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "I wish there were a 
way to take all of this seriously. The way this alleged coup plan 
was designed looks as if it was drafted by a group of college kids. 
It seems there will be lots of talk and time wasted in the days 
ahead." 
 
Ertugrul Ozkok wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "A speedy investigation 
process is needed so that we can clearly see if this was a plot 
against the civilian authority or a plot against the military and 
 
ANKARA 00000835  002 OF 003 
 
 
its prestige." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The statement from TGS is 
clear enough to eliminate clouds of doubt.  The military is 
demonstrating it takes the issue seriously by starting an immediate 
investigation.  It is also very important that the military 
expresses readiness for any legal action in this regard as well. 
Meanwhile, the civilian authority should be very careful not to 
present this case as a proven fact before the legal process is 
concluded." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak: "The military's 
statement was not satisfactory and convincing at all.  The only 
concrete thing was the denial that the document was prepared at TGS 
headquarters.  We need more than that because the military's image 
is weakening day by day. 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak: "Even after 
all of the statements yesterday, the military still owes an 
explanation regarding why it has become a coup-plotter institution. 
It will be interesting to see the developments in the months ahead. 
The government should even think of firing General Basbug if 
necessary." 
 
Credit Card Debts to be Paid in Installments 
All papers:  Mainstreams Hurriyet, Milliyet and Vatan report that 
State Minister for Economy and Deputy Prime Minister Ali Babacan 
announced yesterday that the government has prepared a new repayment 
plan for credit card debtors who fail to meet their financial 
obligations and who are pursued by the banks.  Under this plan, a 
credit card debtor will be able to pay his /her debt in installments 
up to 36 months with low interest rate.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet notes that 1.3 million citizens who are in default as of 
May 31st , 2009 will benefit from the plan. 
 
U.S. Ambassador Goes to Diyarbakir 
Mainstream Vatan reports that U.S. Ambassador James Jeffrey will 
visit Diyarbakir tomorrow, marking his first visit to Southeast as 
U.S. Ambassador to Turkey.  Following his meetings with Diyarbakir 
Governor Huseyin Avni Mutlu and Mayor Osman Baydemir, Ambassador 
Jeffrey will have lunch with the head of Southeastern Industrialists 
and Businessmen's Association (GUNSIAD), the head of Diyarbakir 
Chamber of Trade and Industry and the head of Diyarbakir 
Industrialists and Businessmen's Association (DISIAD).  Following 
his meetings with Diyarbakir Bar of Lawyers and Human Rights 
Association, in the evening Amb.Jeffrey will join a reception 
organized by GUNSIAD.  At the reception Jeffrey is expected to 
address the guests in Turkish.  The observer says that Jeffrey has 
played key role in shaping Washington's policies regarding Turkey, 
Iraq and the Kurdish issue.  Therefore, his contacts in Diyarbakir 
will have an impact on American foreign policy. 
 
Blood Is Spilled in Iran, but The Reformists Are Not Intimidated 
(Radikal) 
Media are closely following the demonstrations after disputes over 
the election results in Iran.  Some media are covering the story 
from the angle that yesterday's protests are reminiscent of the 
civil upheaval during the 1979 revolution. Mainstream Vatan reports 
in "Rebellion," that "Two million Iranians filled Independence 
Square when the Shah was overthrown," and "Yesterday two million 
supporters for the reformist candidate Musavi filled the same 
squared and chanted "Death To The Dictator."   Islamist-oriented 
Zaman headlines, "Blood Stains Election Protests in Iran," as 
"Supporters of Musavi filled the streets despite a ban on 
demonstrations and the country's spiritual leader Khomeini's call 
for calm."  Mainstream Sabah headlines on its front page, "Hundreds 
of Thousands of Faces Fill the Streets of Iran," and notes, "1.5 
million people turned out to protest the election results in Freedom 
Square."  CNN Turk reports in,  "Did Ahmadinejad Not Win The 
Election in Iran?" that ,"Leaked election results show Musavi won 
 
ANKARA 00000835  003 OF 003 
 
 
with a total of 19.1 million votes, which is three times the amount 
of votes won by Ahmadinejad."  Liberal Radikal notes there is no end 
in sight for the demonstrations as "A call has been made for a 
general strike today." 
 
Netanyahu Can't Please Anyone (Taraf) 
Media are skeptical of Netanyahu's conditional acceptance of a 
Palestinian state.  Liberal Radikal headlines, "Bibi Angers Both the 
Arabs and the Israeli Right."  Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines, 
"Only a Flag And a National Anthem," and notes, "Netanyahu answered 
U.S. President Barack Obama's efforts for a two-state solution by 
placing conditions on the creation of a Palestinian state - only in 
a flag and a national anthem."  Zaman posits that, "this appears to 
be an advancement in Netanyahu's acceptance of a Palestinian state, 
but it highlights the tensions in the peace process."  In "Netanyahu 
Is Playing With The Media," mainstream Sabah writes, "Netanyahu gave 
a 'conditional yes' to a Palestinian state during his speech on 
Sunday and outlined preconditions including a non-militarized 
Palestinian state and the Palestinians' official recognition of 
Israel as a Jewish state."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
headlines, "Netanyahu's Palestinian State," and reports, "the 
Israeli Prime Minister's speech is being criticized in Arab 
capitals, but met with positive responses from the U.S. and Europe," 
and "Jewish settlers are put at ease by the speech." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak notes, "the Palestinian side is stirred 
up by Netanyahu's promise to recognize a 'non-militarized' 
Palestinian state." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
-  The MHP administration rejects demands for holding an 
extraordinary party convention. 
 
- The relative of a martyred soldier is taken into custody while 
attempting to make a press statement in front of the Prime 
Ministry. 
 
- The two-month Parliamentary recess begins on July 1. 
 
- Turkish Security Forces carry out operations against PKK 
terrorists in northern Iraq. 
 
 
World 
 
-  Moldova's President Vladimir Voronin dissolves the parliament and 
calls fresh elections. 
 
JEFFREY