09ANKARA144
ERGENEKON PROBE: SOME SMOKE, BUT LASTING IMPACT
Thu Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7975
PP RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHAK #0144/01 0291234
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 291234Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8615
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5//
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU//TCH//
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEUITH/TLO ANKARA TU
RUEHAK/TSR ANKARA TU
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TUid: 189386
date: 1/29/2009 12:34
refid: 09ANKARA144
origin: Embassy Ankara
classification: CONFIDENTIAL
destination: 08ANKARA375|09ANKARA31|09ANKARA64
header:
VZCZCXRO7975
PP RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHAK #0144/01 0291234
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 291234Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8615
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5//
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU//TCH//
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEUITH/TLO ANKARA TU
RUEHAK/TSR ANKARA TU
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TU

----------------- header ends ----------------

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL OSCE TU
SUBJECT: ERGENEKON PROBE: SOME SMOKE, BUT LASTING IMPACT 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 64 
     ¶B. ANKARA 31 
     ¶C. 08 ANKARA 375 
 
Classified By: POL Counselor Daniel O'Grady for reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  The widening scope of the Ergenekon 
investigation has divided Turkish society into two 
increasingly hardened camps:  those who see the case as a 
courageous step to bring Turkish society under the rule of 
law, by uncovering and then holding accountable the gangs 
responsible for hundreds of unsolved mystery killings and 
disappearances; and those who see a politically manipulated 
investigation that targets only opponents of the ruling 
Justice and Development Party (AKP).  The continuing 
progression of the investigation and trial, steps that would 
have been unthinkable just several years ago in Turkey, 
demonstrates a shift in balance of power away from an 
entrenched elite that includes the military, bureaucracy, and 
the Republican People's Party (CHP) to a body of elites that 
has newly emerged on the political scene.  The case reflects 
the deep schisms in Turkish society, and therefore will 
continue to evoke visceral responses that are an outgrowth of 
a larger debate over where the country is headed.  Many Turks 
are quick to blame Ergenekon for every wound in the past, but 
we find the notion of such a vast conspiracy network highly 
implausible.  Prosecutors seem to be overreaching as they try 
to connect ever-widening circles of defendants, some of whom 
appear directly culpable for violent crimes, but others who 
seem only marginally involved, or are simply strong advocates 
for secularism.  Actual convictions may prove elusive, given 
the nature of the evidence.  The trials promise to be 
unusually lengthy.  AKP sees itself as the political 
beneficiary of the Ergenekon investigation, but over the long 
term Turkish society itself may be the real winner:  the 
prosecutor's resolve in tackling this previously taboo topic 
introduces the concept of full accountability -- even in dark 
corners of the "deep state."  End summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Investigation's Scope Widens 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The Ergenekon case, which began in June 2007 after 
police raided the home of a non-commissioned military officer 
in Istanbul and discovered 27 hand grenades of the same type 
used in attacks on "Cumhuriyet" newspaper's Istanbul office 
in 2006, has grown ever wider in scope.  Prosecutors have 
worked with the Turkish National Police (TNP) to detain more 
than 100 journalists, writers, alleged gang leaders, and 
politicians in what has morphed into a case to root out and 
hold accountable members of an alleged ultra-nationalist gang 
named Ergenekon.  The 2,500-page indictment filed by chief 
prosecutor Zekeriya Oz alleges an extensive criminal network 
sought to carry out numerous assassinations and other crimes. 
 Although the indictment does not explicitly say so, may 
allege the evidence points to a plan by the criminal network 
to topple the AKP government by creating an environment of 
mayhem that would lead to a military coup. 
 
¶3. (U) Turkish police on January 22 carried out the eleventh 
sweep, detaining 39 people from 13 cities, including 
Istanbul, Ankara, Antalya, Bursa, Hakkari, Elezig, Igdir, and 
Hatay, and seizing 50,000 books and 200,000 documents.  The 
detainees are alleged to be part of assassination teams 
directed by Ibrahim Sahin, former head of the police special 
operations unit who is currently under arrest in the case. 
Detainees included 17 police officers from a special 
operations unit, two non-commissioned military officers, 
three lieutenants, seven journalists, the leader of the 
Turkish Metal Worker's Union (a body that claims 300,000 
members) and four unionists, the head of Ankara-based Eurasia 
TV, VERSO Polling company's owner Erhan Goksel, senior 
journalist Unal Inanc, and Sirinoglu Human Rights Association 
Head Savas Avci.  Union leaders, the main opposition 
Republican People's Party (CHP) and detainees' relatives 
condemned the detentions as part of a campaign to eliminate 
AKP's opponents.  Turkish Confederation of Labor Unions 
(Turk-Is) released a statement reading, "It is impossible to 
implicate any union in the Ergenekon case.  The reason for 
the union's existence is democracy itself."  Following the 
detentions, Prosecutor Turan Colakkadi told reporters that 
 
ANKARA 00000144  002 OF 004 
 
 
his office would complete a supplemental indictment by the 
end of January. 
 
¶4. (C) The military seemingly has generally acquiesced in the 
probe, saying that it, more than any other institution in 
Turkey, has an interest in "making the investigation more 
clear."  The military has cooperated with the civilian-led 
investigations, allowing searches on premises controlled by 
the military, and consenting to the arrest of active duty 
officers.   Official military reactions against the Ergenekon 
investigation have been limited to expressing concern about 
the treatment of senior retired officers arrested in the case 
and the need to respect the rule of law and the rights of the 
accused as well as about how the case is covered by the 
media.  Still, some of our contacts tell us that many 
generals are seething and perceive this probe as a focused 
effort to diminish the military's stature.  There are outward 
signs of this anger.  For example, the military issued a 
sharply-worded statement following the suicide of a decorated 
retired colonel implicated in the investigations, comparing 
those passing judgment in the media on individual suspects 
before the formal judicial proceedings have concluded to 
"extrajudicial executions." 
 
------------------------------ 
Views of Ergenekon Politicized 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) A January 17-19 "A and G Company" poll that surveyed 
2,407 people in 33 provinces reveals a sharp division in 
societal views about Ergenekon.  The poll determined that 62 
percent of those questioned believe an organization called 
Ergenekon exists, while 20 percent do not.  The percentage of 
those who rejected the existence increased with education: 
15 percent of primary school graduates did not believe 
Ergenekon exists; 23 percent of high school graduates did 
not; and 27 percent of university graduates did not.  When 
asked their views of the aims of the investigation, 49 
percent of respondents said they believe it aims to punish a 
criminal gang and coup plotters, while 22 percent agreed that 
it is an excuse used by the government to punish opposition 
and the military.  When asked if the investigation is 
proceeding according to legal norms, 33 percent said yes; 27 
percent said they believe illegal gangs within the state 
exist but that the investigation is targeting government 
opponents; 15 percent said the entire investigation is a 
government ploy. 
 
¶6. (U) The poll demonstrated that Turks' views of the case 
line up according to political allegiances.  According to the 
poll, half of respondents who are CHP supporters did not 
believe Ergenekon exists.  Among AKP supporters, 75 percent 
believed the alleged gang exists, while 64 percent of 
Nationalist Action Party (MHP) supporters believed in 
Ergenekon's existence.  Partisanship was also apparent in 
answers to the question of whether the investigation is 
proceeding in accordance with legal norms.  Only 13 percent 
of CHP supporters believed this to be true, while the 
percentage increased to 18 percent among pro-Kurdish 
Democratic Society (DTP) supporters, 21 percent among MHP 
supporters, and 56 percent among AKP supporters.  Among CHP 
supporters, 33 percent believed the investigation to be a 
government ploy, versus 2 percent for AKP supporters. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
A Leap Forward in Transparency and Accountability 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶7. (C) Many liberal contacts hope that the case represents a 
"Clean Hands" process that will hold the military and 
traditional state elites accountable for their conduct. 
Human Rights Agenda Association President Orhan Kemal Cengiz, 
lead attorney for the families of three Christians murdered 
in Malatya in 2007, told us the investigation is a necessary 
first step to end the "tremendous culture of impunity in 
Turkey that has led to over 17,500 unsolved killings." 
Cengiz said criticisms of the use of excessive force in the 
investigation are beside the point, noting that Ergenekon 
opponents "never once criticized such tactics when they were 
used over the past several decades to detain Kurds, human 
rights activists, and other innocent citizens."  Such claims 
by opponents of the case distract from the reality that the 
 
ANKARA 00000144  003 OF 004 
 
 
investigation has brought to light evidence that has made it 
impossible to deny the existence of "deep-state" involvement 
in criminal acts and "collapsed the old balance of power in 
Turkey" between the military, the government, and the 
traditional state elite, including the judiciary.  Cengiz 
said that as the revelations of the Ergenekon investigation 
have come forth, the once-skeptical judges in the Malatya 
murders trial (ref C) have been increasingly willing to allow 
Cengiz to pursue his theory that the Ergenekon network was 
responsible for the Malatya murders. 
 
¶8. (C) Ankara University Law Professor Mithat Sancar told us 
that the Ergenekon investigation is the most important event 
in Turkey since the Turkish Republic was founded in 1923. 
Sancar said he does not believe that there is an overarching 
criminal network as such, but estimates that 80 percent of 
detainees are guilty of some serious crime.  He disagrees 
that the prosecution team is under AKP's influence.  Chief 
prosecutor Oz is a well-respected professional and 
understands that it would be foolish to give too much 
credence to the views of a political party that could be 
voted out of office, he said.  Sancar believes that the 
investigation will last at least two years and will uncover 
only the "tip of the iceberg" because "Turkey's judicial 
system is not equipped to process such a large and complex 
case."  He told us that the impact of the case is not tied to 
its length or conclusion, noting that the investigation had 
already upended the traditional culture of impunity for 
certain segments of Turkish society, including the military. 
 
¶9. (C) Ayhan Bilgen, former President of human rights NGO 
Mazlum-Der, told us the military's apparent acquiescence thus 
far is in itself a sea change.  Bilgen said that the past 
investigations of Susurluk and Semdinli, two other cases 
where deep-state involvement was indicated, had been quashed 
by the military without legal consequences for any involved. 
If Ergenekon had begun just 5 years ago it too would have 
been stopped in its tracks, he said.  AKP's triumph over the 
military and the traditional elite in the controversy 
regarding the 2007 election of Abdullah Gul to the Presidency 
and later in the 2008 AKP closure case had significantly 
weakened the military's hand.  The military will not 
intervene lest it draw fierce public response, according to 
Bilgen.  (Comment:  Retired military judge Sadi Cayci told us 
the Turkish military firmly believes Turkey's secular 
identity is sacred and must be protected at all costs, and 
that there are active duty and retired officers who might 
take this view to the extreme.  He said Basbug's challenge is 
to rein in extremists while pushing for an investigation that 
respects the rule of law and is not used as a political tool. 
 End comment.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Politicization Jeopardizes Ability to Bring Change 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶10. (C) Middle East Technical University (METU) Dean of 
Graduate Programs Sencer Ayata, one of Turkey's most 
respected Social Democrats, doubts the case will lead to the 
lasting effect for which its proponents hope.  He told us 
that the ever-widening scope of the investigation and the use 
of questionable prosecutorial tactics undermines the 
credibility of the investigation.  The prosecutors had 
rounded up a diverse array of figures, many of whom are 
traditional enemies, whose only common element is their 
opposition to AKP:  union leaders and Alevis on the left, 
right-wing ultranationalists, and marginal figures such as a 
transvestite television star with no connection to politics. 
Lumping together these diverse figures into one massive case 
makes it appear to be deeply politicized, and it has 
therefore lost credibility, according to Ayata.  MHP MP Faruk 
Bal told us that it is unlikely that the criminals who worked 
for Ergenekon will be brought to justice because the 
investigation has turned into "a farce."  Prime Minister 
Erdogan and CHP Chairman Baykal have taken such clear sides 
on the case that regardless of the verdict, the popular 
perception will be that it will have been political. 
 
¶11. (C) METU professor Aykan Erdemir told us that the tactic 
of arresting even marginal figures, such as a transvestite 
actor, often in the middle of the night, had scared people 
into silence.  In an atmosphere "eerily reminiscent of the 
 
ANKARA 00000144  004 OF 004 
 
 
post-1980 coup," parents are telling their kids not to talk 
about politics, and academics are scared to mention anything 
about politics when talking on the phone, according to 
Aydemir.  Such an environment of fear had significantly 
eroded trust in Turkey's system of justice.  "The tragedy," 
in his view, "is that the politicization will cause the 
perverse result of leading to the collapse of the case 
without the guilty having been brought to justice." 
 
¶12. (C) "Hurriyet" columnist Yusuf Kanli believes the case 
has become politicized to an extent that it will not be able 
to increase respect for the rule of law.  He wrote January 19 
that the investigation's disregard for traditional pillars of 
justice -- due process, protection of individual rights, and 
the right to a fair trial -- has undermined its legitimacy. 
The prosecution's tendency to detain people without a court 
warrant and then "summarily execute them on the front pages 
of the AKP-controlled media" was legitimizing the "gross 
violations" of due process that have plagued Turkey for 
decades. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Comment:  A Pivotal Event for Turkey 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶13. (C) Although the investigation has already proceeded much 
further in time and scope than many believed possible when it 
began, many obstacles stand in the way of the prosecutor's 
ability to see it through.  Not least is the opposition he 
will face from the judicial establishment itself. 
Foreshadowing this tension, following a police search of the 
house of the honorary president of the Court of Appeals Sabih 
Kanadoglu, Union of Judges and Prosecutors (Yarsav) head Omer 
Faruk Eminagaoglu called a January 23 press conference to 
criticize the investigation as politically manipulated and to 
reprimand Turkish police for "seeking murderers in the houses 
of judges and prosecutors."  Eminagaoglu criticized Justice 
Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin for siding with intelligence 
organizations instead of upholding the law, and said the 
investigatory tactics were turning Turkey into a "police 
state."  Many predict that one of the coming prosecutorial 
police sweeps will occur shortly before March 29 local 
elections and focus on politicians from the mainstream 
opposition parties -- CHP, MHP, Democratic Party (DP) and 
Motherland Party (ANAP).  If true, this is likely to bring 
increasing protests that the investigation is less a push for 
transparency than a witch hunt against AKP enemies.  AKP 
opponents will continue to point out that AKP refuses to lift 
parliamentary immunity and is less than fully engaged in 
urging investigations into credible allegations of AKP-linked 
corruption, such as the Deniz Feneri (Lighthouse) scandal. 
 
¶14. (C) Irrespective of the length of the case or its 
ultimate conclusion, the fact that the case has proceeded so 
far already -- 8 months, a 2,500-page indictment, and over 
200 people detained, including active duty and senior retired 
military officers, active police officers, union leaders -- 
demonstrates that the balance of power in Turkey has already 
swung away from an entrenched elite composed of the military, 
bureaucracy, and CHP to a body of elites that has emerged on 
the political scene in the past decade.  The prosecution's 
ability to detain such noteworthy figures and delve into some 
of Turkey's dark secrets has sent a message to the public and 
the old guard that illegal manipulation of politics is no 
longer acceptable in Turkey, and portends the end of Turks' 
once-sacred belief that the military stands as the primary 
protector and guardian of the Republic.  The progression of 
this sometimes disorderly and confusing case will bring more 
visceral reactions and likely further political polarization. 
 These are a natural outgrowth of a larger debate over where 
the country is headed, as democratic reforms related to 
Turkey's European Union accession are forcing Turks to 
grapple with the meaning of secularism and nationalism, as 
well as darker parts of Turkish history.  But the 
prosecutor's willingness to tackle this previously taboo 
topic, and the debate Ergenkon has engendered, gives evidence 
of a maturing Turkish democracy. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
Jeffrey