09ANKARA234
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0931
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0234/01 0440502
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130502Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8769
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9468
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5370
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3601
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7116
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6978
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3567
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000234 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Mubarak Lauds Turkey's 'Supportive Stance' on Arab Issues 
Media outlets report President Abdullah Gul and visiting Egyptian 
President Hosni Mubarak met Wednesday to discuss Middle East peace 
in Istanbul's Ciragan Palace. 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that during a joint press avail with Gul 
after the meeting, Mubarak "did not even utter the name of Hamas." 
Mubarak said the sole legitimate representative of Palestine was the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).  Papers report that in 
their meeting, a "roadmap" was drawn for Palestine, which aims for a 
lasting ceasefire to be followed by securing unity among the 
Palestinian groups and rebuilding Gaza.  Mubarak said Egypt backed 
Turkey's role in the region, and praised "Turkey's supportive stance 
regarding the Arab issues."  "Next month in Cairo, we will host an 
international conference for raising funds for Gaza's 
reconstruction," said Mubarak. 
 
Meanwhile, a group of about 200 demonstrators rallied in Taksim in 
the heart of Istanbul, protesting the visit of Mubarak.  The 
protestors also called for the opening of Rafah border crossing. 
 
Erdogan: My Davos Message Found its Place in Israel 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan, in Kastamonu yesterday 
for his party's municipal elections campaign, said on the outcome of 
the Israeli elections that "the message he gave in Davos found its 
place in Israel."  Erdogan did not elaborate further on how the 
Israeli election results prove that his message "found its place." 
"We always do what is best for Turkey's honor; we did it before and 
we can do it today and tomorrow," said Erdogan. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Israel 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The results of the Israeli 
elections do not give any hope for peace in the foreseeable future. 
As for the other key players in the region, Egypt has lost its 
significance while Turkey remains objective and more welcoming by 
people in the region.  Ankara will undoubtedly play its role, 
whether it as mediator or go-between, according to the situation." 
 
Kadri Gursel wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "PM Erdogan talked about 
redefining terrorism at the Davos conference, but we are still 
waiting for some elaboration of this.  Given the U.S. official 
definition of terrorism as well as PM Erdogan's Hamas rhetoric, it 
is very obvious that Erdogan was implying the acceptance of Hamas as 
a legitimate resistance movement as opposed to a terror 
organization.  His wish will not come true because stretching the 
definition of terrorism can not do any good for Hamas who is not 
only responsible for military attacks but also responsible for 
civilian killings.  PM Erdogan needs to clarify his intentions on 
this as soon as possible before further negative speculations 
begin." 
 
Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in tabloid Posta: "As expected, the Gaza 
issue has become an internal political propaganda item and those who 
exploited it during the election campaign have become winners. 
However, the current election results will not take Israeli politics 
further than coalition governments. Israel will not be capable of 
acting arbitrarily any more, even though hawkish figures remain 
powerful.  Unconditional U.S. support for Israel can no longer be 
taken for granted, especially with the new Obama administration. 
Turkey, on the other hand, has great capability to communicate and 
collaborate with all players in the Middle East issue, including 
Washington." 
 
EP Committee Approves Turkey Draft Report 
All papers report the European Parliament's Foreign Affairs 
Committee has approved a draft report on Turkey, in which the EU 
welcomes Turkey's new National Program, the launch of broadcasts in 
the Kurdish language, and appointment of Egemen Bagis as the chief 
 
ANKARA 00000234  002 OF 003 
 
 
EU negotiator.  Oomen-Ruijten, EU's Turkey rapporteur, urged Turkey 
for "new systemic reforms."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says the 
report asks the Turkish government to work in close cooperation with 
the judiciary regarding the Islamist-oriented Deniz Feneri scandal 
in Germany.  "The report criticizes PM Erdogan for targeting the 
Turkish media, but welcomes the trial of the suspects in the 
Ergenekon case," says Cumhuriyet.  The report calls on Turkish 
authorities to inspect more closely the claims of links between the 
Ergenekon network and the assassination of Armenian-Turkish 
journalist Hrant Dink.  It also underlines the problems Alevis face, 
and adds that politicians should be allowed to use the Kurdish 
language in election campaigns, say papers. 
 
Azerbaijan's Air Force Commander Shot Dead in Baku 
Papers report the commander of Azerbaijan's air force was gunned 
down outside his Baku home yesterday.  Lt. Gen. Rail Rzayev was 
"shot in the head, and died in a military hospital in Baku shortly 
thereafter."  Experts said the killing may be linked to Rzayev's 
role in the large-scale military acquisitions Azerbaijan has made in 
recent years. Commentators point out that the assassination happened 
on the eve of Azerbaijani-Armenian negotiations on the controversial 
issue of Nagorno-Karabakh. 
 
 'Kadiri' Sect Leader Joins CHP 
Media outlets report Abdul Hafiz Aydin, one of the leaders of the 
"Kadiri" religious order, joined Wednesday the opposition CHP at the 
party's branch office in Istanbul's conservative district 
Sultanbeyli.  Papers claim Aydin would be bringing 30,000 votes with 
him.  "Kadiri" is a Sufi religious order founded by Abdulkadir 
Geylani (1077-1166), and has many followers in Egypt, Iraq and 
Turkey. 
 
Survey: 39 Percent of Married Women Suffer from Domestic Violence 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports State Minister for women, Nimet Cubukcu, 
disclosed at a press briefing Thursday new research on "female 
victims of domestic violence."  According to the survey, which was 
conducted in 51 Turkish provinces by canvassing the view of 12,795 
women, 39 percent of women were subjected to physical violence by 
their current or former husbands.  The physical violence rate stands 
at 38 percent in cities, and 43 percent in rural areas.  41.9 
percent of women say they have suffered from physical violence 
coupled with sexual violence.  48.5 percent say they could not tell 
anyone about the abuse.  One out of every ten women has been 
subjected to physical violence during their pregnancy, and 92 
percent did not apply to authorities after facing abuse, according 
to the survey. 
 
Division in Sabanci Group 
Media outlets report Sevket Sabanci, a large shareholder in the 
Sabanci Holding Group of Companies, and his children have decided to 
part ways with the Istanbul-based leading Turkish conglomerate. 
Nine members of the Sabanci family will sell their shares in the 
group, including the group's bank Akbank.  Mainstream Hurriyet says 
the 6.97 percent fall in Akbank's shares prior to the announcement 
of Sevket Sabanci's decision raised questions whether the decision 
was known by some beforehand. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Thursday, Turkey will attend an international summit on Iraqi 
oil to begin in Istanbul, where proposals for tenders for Iraqi oil 
and natural gas fields will be put forward.  The two-day summit is 
organized by the Iraqi Oil Ministry. 
 
- Finance Minister Kemal Unakitan will undergo bypass surgery next 
week in the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.  Professor Murat Tuzcu, one of 
the leading doctors in the clinic, said the minister could start 
 
ANKARA 00000234  003 OF 003 
 
 
working again in two months. 
 
- Deputy Prime Minister Hayati Yazici said in a press conference the 
AKP municipalities' distribution of aid and white goods to the poor 
families will continue. 
 
 - An IMF report predicts that in 2009, the world will grow 0.5 
percent but Turkey will shrink 1.5 percent, saying Turkey was the 
only G-20 country that has not taken measures to revive its economy. 
 
 
International News 
 
- Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov says Russia will not retaliate 
against the planned US missile defense shield unless it is 
physically deployed. 
 
- British Home Secretary Jacqui Smith's decision to prohibit Dutch 
film-maker Geert Wilders from broadcasting his anti-Muslim film, 
Fitna, in the House of Lords triggers a diplomatic row between 
Britain and The Netherlands. 
 
- Lawmakers in the US House of Representatives introduced a bill to 
allow US nationals' unrestricted travel to Cuba. 
 
- Muslim clerics in Sudan urge young couples to boycott Valentine's 
Day, saying it is a Western tradition that could lead couples 
astray. 
 
 
JEFFREY