09ANKARA1047
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3524
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1047/01 2031353
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221353Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0286
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0192
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6043
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4018
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7435
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7323
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3907
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001047 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
- Ankara Determines New Strategy for Turkish-Iraqi Council Meeting 
- Public Support Civilian Trial of Soldiers 
- Nalbandyan on Turkey-Armenia 
- High School Coefficient System Abolished 
- U.S. Representative Glenn Nye on Turkey 
- Guantanamo 
- Secretary Clinton's Asia Trip 
 
Ankara Determines New Strategy for Turkish-Iraqi Council Meeting 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet:  Today's papers report that several 
ministers participated in a preparatory meeting of the Turkish-Iraqi 
High Level Strategic Cooperation Council on Tuesday at the Foreign 
Ministry.  During the meeting FM Davutoglu announced that he would 
depart for Baghdad in August, where he would discuss in detail with 
the Iraqi authorities the action plan drafted at the meeting in 
Ankara.  Besides FM Davutoglu, State Minister for Foreign Trade 
Zafer Caglayan, Interior Minister Besir Atalay, Energy Minister 
Taner Yildiz, Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim, Public Works 
Minister Mustafa Demir, Health Minister Recep Akdag and Environment 
Minister Veysel Eroglu attended the preparatory meeting.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet notes that the Ankara talks came just before another 
comprehensive meeting scheduled to be held in Iraq in October where 
PM Erdogan is expected to be present. 
 
In a related story, mainstream Sabah reports that the government has 
prepared a two-stage plan to address the Kurdish issue and end 
terror; the plan is expected to be announced by August 15.  Sabah 
notes that this issue was on the agenda of the meeting between 
Minister Cicek and U.S. Ambassador Jeffrey which took place last 
week. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey/Iraq/PKK 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "There is so much talk and 
speculation about finding a solution to the Kurdish problem.  This 
is the wrong approach because much of the discourse is divisive. 
Freedoms and human rights for individuals must cover everyone in 
this country.  Thus we should think about this issue as a way to 
improve human rights for the nation.  Has anyone heard of the 
establishment of different human rights methodology for Hispanic 
Americans and African Americans?" 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in liberal-intellectual  Radikal: "Turkey should 
be proactive and declare a road map on toward settling the Kurdish 
issue before [imprisoned PKK leader] Ocalan makes a similar move. 
Ankara's performance regarding this issue will determine whether 
Ocalan will be treated as part of the problem or part of solution." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak: "If the 
ongoing Kurdish-Arab tension in Turkey's immediate neighbor Iraq is 
somehow brought under control, we can expect some positive 
developments in the future.  Ankara is preparing for a comprehensive 
cooperation plan with Iraq which comprises of a vast variety of ways 
to integrate Turkey and Iraq.  Along with this, Turkey is also 
working on some radical steps to address the Kurdish issue.  In sum, 
there will be an enormous gate for opportunities between Turkey and 
Iraq in the days to come unless there happens to be an accident, 
i.e. a Kurdish-Arab conflict." 
 
Public Supports Civilian Trial of Soldiers (Yeni Safak) 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carries a survey which shows the ruling 
and the main opposition parties have increased their support base. 
Asked which party they would vote for if general elections were held 
today, 41.8 percent said the AK Party, and 25.4 percent said CHP. 
Those whose views were canvassed also gave large support to the 
trial of soldiers by civilian courts -- by 60.4 percent.  The survey 
was carried out by GENAR polling company with 1,560 people in 17 
provinces. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001047  002 OF 004 
 
 
Nalbandyan: Armenia-Turkey Normalization Still Possible 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports the Armenian FM Edward 
Nalbandyan said in Yerevan after meeting an EU delegation that 
"There is still a possibility for the normalization of ties between 
Armenia and Turkey."  Nalbandyan said such "normalization" would 
also affect positively the prosperity in the region, of which 
Azerbaijan is a part.  He also noted no agreement had been signed 
between the two countries regarding normalization, and if signed, 
such an agreement would contain the establishment of diplomatic ties 
and the reopening of borders. 
 
Meanwhile, the Minsk Group's French co-chairman Bernard Fassier told 
Islamist-oriented Zaman in Paris that Armenia first should withdraw 
from the land it occupies around Karabakh and give it back to 
Azerbaijan.  Fassier also stressed Turkey cannot be an intermediator 
in the talks between Armenia and Azerbaijan because of Ankara's 
close ties with Baku.  Fassier rejected criticism that Moscow and 
Paris are closer to Yerevan in the efforts to find a solution 
between Armenia and Azerbaijan.  He also stressed that risks for a 
new conflict in the region were still alive, particularly if a 
solution is not reached. 
 
High School Coefficient System Abolished 
Media outlets report the Higher Board of Education (YOK) lifted the 
coefficient system that differentiated between the Islamic cleric 
high school (Imam-Hatip) or vocational high school graduates versus 
other public high school graduates while taking university exams. 
Four members of the 11-member YOK objected to the decision.  The 
grade point average for all students, regardless of what type of 
high school they attended, will be multiplied by the same 
coefficient, 0.15.  This means that high school graduates will 
compete on an equal playing field with graduates from vocational 
schools and Imam-Hatip Islamic cleric schools.  The decision gives a 
green light for the Imam-Hatip and vocational high school graduates 
to enter different departments at colleges such as law, political 
science or others, reports pro-government mainstream Sabah. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Abolishment of High School Co-efficient 
System 
 
Abbas Guclu wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The Higher Board of 
Education (YOK) has made a complete political decision by lifting 
the co-efficiency system that differentiated between students who 
graduated from Koran courses [imam hatip schools] and students who 
attended regular high schools that applied a standardized college 
preparatory curriculum.  This method negates the Ministry of 
Education's project to provide an early guidance system to direct 
students to university branches based on their talents and 
interests.  YOK's decision is a clear invitation toward further 
chaos in the education system and it will only serve the interests 
of private courses and tutors.  Children will be alienated from 
school education and will be forced to worry more about university 
exams." 
 
Nye: Obama Made a Right Choice in Visiting Turkey (Zaman) 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports from Washington that U.S. 
Representative Glenn Nye told the Rumi Forum in Washington that 
President Obama has made the "right choice" by visiting Turkey, a 
country at the "crossroads of cultures," in the Islamic world. 
"Turkey has given the other Muslim countries examples they can look 
at in merging Islam and democracy.  It is, of course, not perfect; 
but nobody's perfect," emphasized Nye. 
 
"A Shadow Falls Over The Guantanamo Election Promise" (NTV) 
Media note with disappointment that the release of the Obama 
Administration's report on the closure of the Guantanamo Bay 
detention facility has been delayed for another six months.  In 
"Guantanamo Closure Faces Delay Upon Delay," liberal Radikal notes, 
"The Obama Administration's plan to close Guantanamo has suffered 
another blow."  Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "Obama's ability to 
fulfill his election promise to close Guantanamo has been struck 
 
ANKARA 00001047  003 OF 004 
 
 
with another delay."  Mainstream Haberturk reports, "the report is 
still not complete."  Meanwhile, leftist Taraf reports, "Guantanamo 
detainees are waiting on the U.S. to make a decision about itself." 
 
 
Clinton Wins In Asia 
Media cover U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's visit to Asia 
as a huge success, with special attention paid to gains made between 
the U.S. and India and expected gains to be made in relations with 
ASEAN.  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "A Farewell to Russian Arms and 
Hello to the U.S." and the article notes, "India decided to halt the 
purchase of weapons from Russia and agreed to the formulation of a 
nuclear cooperation with the U.S."  Mainstream NTV headlines 
excitedly, "India Will Now Ask for Weapons from The U.S.!" and the 
report notes, "India and the U.S. have reached an agreement in which 
India will now purchase U.S. weapons instead of Russian weapons." 
Mainstream CNN Turk headlines, "A Message from Clinton: The U.S. Is 
Again in Asia," and the report points out, "The Obama administration 
is targeting the broadening of relations in Asia." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- One soldier died when a land-mine was detonated by remote control 
in the southeastern province of Sirnak when security teams were 
patrolling around an area on Mount Kupeli between Sirnak and Cizre 
town. 
 
- Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP has issued a statement saying that 
the proposals of the PKK's imprisoned leader Abdullah Ocalan should 
be taken into account while discussing ways for resolving the 
Kurdish question in Turkey. 
 
- Three lieutenants were arrested by the court for making 
assassination plans to kill generals and admirals and providing 
financial support to the 'Ergenekon' organization through drug 
trafficking and prostitution. 
 
- The decree that would rotate 1332 judges and prosecutors was 
signed by members of the Supreme Board of Judges and Prosecutors 
(HSYK).  The board will discuss on Thursday the future of 300 judges 
and prosecutors including the prosecutors of the 'Ergenekon' case. 
 
 
- On Tuesday, U.S. dollar continued its fast downward trend and saw 
below 1.5 TL level. U.S. dollar closed the day at 1.5 TL. 
 
- The representatives of YouTube have visited Transport Minister 
Binali Yildirim to discuss the possibilities for lifting the "access 
restrictions" to the website. 
 
World 
 
- Iranian riot police are reported to have arrested a number of 
pro-reform protesters in Tehran following the demonstrations staged 
against President Ahmadinejad. 
 
- Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso has dissolved the parliament's 
lower house and called for national elections to be held August 30. 
 
 
- Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki is heading to Washington to 
visit President Barack Obama. 
 
- Secretary Clinton says the Obama administration is concerned by 
the possibility that North Korea was developing military ties with 
Myanmar. 
 
- Ten people have been killed in sectarian clashes between Sunni and 
Shiite Muslims in Yemen. 
 
ANKARA 00001047  004 OF 004 
 
 
JEFFREY