09ANKARA1527
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7062
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1527/01 2951230
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221230Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1034
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0095
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6397
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4221
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7605
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7497
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4087
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2009 
 
Media Highlights:  PKK Returns Spark Emotions; Davutoglu Briefs 
Parliament on Armenian Protocols; Ninety Nuclear 
Bombs at Incirlik; Powell Lauds Turkey's Active Role; Iranian 
Officials Accept Protocol on Nuclear Fuel; Taliban 
On Afghan Elections 
 
Erdogan, Turk call for 'common sense' on PKK returns.  Media outlets 
report on Wednesday, the PKK group that has returned from Camp 
Makhmur and Kandil Mountain arrived in Diyarbakir, to be greeted by 
a huge crowd and fireworks.  The PKK group was met with the posters 
of Abdullah Ocalan and banners reading "Kurdistan is proud of you." 
Papers describe the joyful welcome given to the group as a "show of 
force."  Papers report the relatives of martyred soldiers strongly 
reacted to the returns and the government's 'democratic initiative.' 
 The prosecutors in Diyarbakir, Silopi, Cizre and Nusaybin have 
launched investigations in connection with the celebrations held for 
the returns.   In the province of Agri yesterday, Prime Minister 
Erdogan warned the DTP to avoid "provocations" and "show."  Erdogan 
stressed provocations would not be allowed to block the "process of 
unity," which aims to "end the bloodshed and restore peace." 
 
DTP leader Ahmet Turk, who addressed the crowd, warned that the 
process might be deadlocked if they disregard the reactions in the 
Turkish public.  "We have to convince the people of Turkey.  This is 
neither victory, nor defeat.  We have to leave our feelings aside," 
said Turk.  Turk claimed MHP and CHP were exerting every effort to 
block the new process, and that their opposition had some impact on 
the government.  "If the government believes in this project, it 
should not be afraid of the opposition," said Turk.   Papers also 
report another group of 16 PKK members are expected to arrive in 
Istanbul from European destinations. 
 
Commentary: Columnists continue to urge DTP and pro-Kurdish 
supporters for being sensible and respect everybody's feelings.  In 
"Kurdish issue, Turkish issue" mainstream Vatan columnist Rusen 
Cakir takes note of sensitivities in Turkey's west as well as in the 
east:  "Genuine peace atmosphere can only be achieved by not 
ignoring sensitivities in the west and by a common understanding 
that this was not about pain and agony only for Kurds."  In 
mainstream Hurriyet, Ertugrul Ozkok urges pro-Kurdish supporters to 
understand "this not a victory nor a defeat for the returnees." He 
writes in "Listen to Me My Kurdish Brother" that "this ongoing show 
must be over and replaced by tranquility.  We have done our part and 
now you should do your part too."  In Islamist oriented Zaman, Sahin 
Alpay blames opposition parties: In "Giant Step Toward Internal 
Peace" he writes "both leaders of opposition present a pathetic 
approach by undermining the peace process.  Their stance will be 
judged by history."  In liberal Radikal, Murat Yetkin sees a thin 
line. In "Will PKK Address the Call?" he observes that "the 
government acts on a thin line in the process.  The scenes about 
returnees are provocative and must come to a stop.  If the PKK does 
not get this immediately, the democratization spirit may also come 
to end rapidly." 
 
Davutoglu Briefs Parliament on Armenian Protocols.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet covers yesterday's briefing at the parliament and the 
reaction of the opposition, extensively.  The government on 
Wednesday submitted the recently signed protocols with Armenia to 
Parliament for ratification.  Foreign Minister Davutoglu briefed 
Parliament on Wednesday afternoon on these protocols.  Davutoglu 
said "these texts will shape the history.  There are frozen crises 
which are ready to explode in the region.  We shall change the 
status quo with peaceful methods so that a new tension area will not 
be created."  Main opposition CHP deputy Sukru Elekdag criticized 
the protocols by saying "the protocols include very serious 
disadvantages in terms of our national interests.  Because, demands 
of Yerevan for certain parts of Turkish land, were openly registered 
in the founder documents of the Armenian state."  MHP's group deputy 
chair Oktay Vural said "we will defend that borders should not be 
opened until the occupation of Azerbaijani lands ends.  We will 
oppose to the protocols at Parliament." 
 
ANKARA 00001527  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Armenian Resolution in the Congress: The Hurriyet daily website have 
started a flashy announcement about 2 Senators presented an Armenian 
resolution draft to the Senate Foreign Relations.  Senator Menendez 
and Senator Ensign have prepared the draft which asks the 
administration for recognition of 1915 events as interpreted by 
Armenia, the story tells. 
 
Commentary: In mainstream Hurriyet, Sedat Ergin thinks the Karabakh 
solution process and protocol at the parliament will run parallel to 
each other.  He observes, in "Armenian Initiative Waits for 
Karabakh" that "it seems to be a road map regarding Armenian 
withdrawal from Karabakh's certain areas will be announced sooner or 
later.  However PM Erdogan put the bar too high when he talked in 
Baku that the end of occupation is a must for border opening.  In 
the end, this will give an enormous card to play for the opposition 
parties." 
 
Ninety Nuclear Bombs at Incirlik Airbase.  Hurriyet reports from 
Washington that the Washington-based think tank "Stimson Center" 
recently arranged a briefing for journalists on the latest nuclear 
reports.  The briefer, Dr. Barry M. Blechman is quoted as saying 
that "there are 90 tactical nuclear weapons in Incirlik."  Hurriyet 
observes therefore that Ankara doesn't need to produce atomic bomb 
as long as Turkey and the US remain as allies.  "However, if Turkey 
distances itself from the West, then the whole situation will 
change, " the paper notes, and say that despite it being public 
knowledge that there are nuclear weapons at the Incirlik air base, 
no official announcement regarding the number and characters of 
these weapons has ever been made. 
 
US, Israel Hold 'Cobra' Exercises Against Iran.  Papers report 
Israel and the US have started "Juniper Cobra 10" military 
exercises, the largest ever joint missile defense exercises between 
the two countries with the participation of 2,000 troops from both 
sides and 15 US vessels.  An Israeli commander is quoted as telling 
Israel Radio that the exercises were "preparation for a nuclear 
Iran."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet comments that following the 
exclusion of Israel from the Anatolian Eagle exercises that were to 
be held in Turkey, the US gave the message that it sides with 
Israel. 
 
Powell: US Government Pleased about Turkey Taking Active Roles 
Mainstream Aksam report the former Secretary of State Colin Powell 
went on a tour of the Bosphorus with several guests after addressing 
an Istanbul conference on "mothers against violence."  Powell told 
Aksam nuclear weapons have not been used since the Korean War. 
"Using nukes will harm the one who uses them; it is tantamount to 
suicide.  Iran is aware of this, therefore I do not see nuclear 
weapons as a threat."  On recent impressions that Turkey was moving 
away from Israel and closer to Syria, Powell said, "Average 
Americans see Turkey as sliding toward radical Islam.  The US 
Government, however, is very pleased about the active role Turkey 
has taken.  President Obama stresses this frequently, and ties are 
strengthening between the two countries." 
 
Iranian Officials Accept Protocol on Nuclear Fuel.  Media reports on 
talks regarding Iran's nuclear program in Vienna are positive after 
envoys reached a tentative deal.  Leftist Taraf headlines, "Draft 
Deal with Iran on Nuclear," and thinks "the years-long tension 
regarding Iran's ability to produce nuclear arms may be over with 
the potential deal reached in Vienna."  Meanwhile, 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reads, "Nuclear Fuel Deal on the 
Table," saying, "Iran agreeing to ship most of its enriched uranium 
abroad would significantly ease fears about Tehran's nuclear 
program, since 1,000 kilograms is the commonly accepted amount of 
low-enriched uranium needed to produce weapons." 
Taliban's Comment on New Afghan Elections:  Funny (Sabah)  Media 
observe "no matter who wins the election runoff that Afghanistan 
President Hamid Karzai agreed to during pressured consultations, 
Afghanistan has a government in which corruption has become second 
 
ANKARA 00001527  003 OF 003 
 
 
nature."  Liberal Radikal headlines, "Always Fraud in Ballot Box," 
and opines, "Afghan election officials pay the bill for the fraud in 
presidential elections.  The UN issued a warning to Afghan election 
officials not to re-recruit those officials who might have been 
involved in fraudulent electoral processes."  Mainstream Sabah says, 
"while Karzai's rival, former FM Abdollah Abdollah, is happy with 
the second round, Taliban militants said the election process is 
funny and full of irregularities." 
Upcoming events: 
 
Q October 22: Kazakhstan's President Nazarbayev visits Turkey. 
Q October 22: Foreign Minister Davutoglu will go to Baku to attend 
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation meetings. 
Q October 22-25: A French police team will come to Turkey to discuss 
the PKK activities in France and the extradition of fugitive 
businessman Cem Uzan to Turkey. 
 
TV News (NTV) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q The state-owned TRT television "scissored" scenes of fighting 
between Palestinian and Israeli soldiers in the controversial 
"Separation" series. 
Q One soldier is wounded when terrorists fired mortars at a military 
base in the province of Hakkari on the border with Iraq. 
Q A percussion bomb placed in front of Skyturk television's 
headquarters in Istanbul has been sapped by the police. 
Q Istanbul Governor's Office says 16 students from 10 schools have 
been diagnosed with the swine flu.  Two swine flu cases have been 
reported in Konya.  A high school in Ankara has been closed for a 
week after four students were diagnosed with swine flu. 
 
World 
 
Q French President Sarkozy might reportedly cancel his November 7 
trip to southern Cyprus scheduled after Greek Prime Minister 
Papandreou said "Turkey will join the EU." 
Q Turkey has submitted a note of protest to Azerbaijan over removal 
of Turkish flags in front of Turkey's Religious Affairs office in 
Baku. 
Q President Gul says he held a meeting with Azerbaijan's President 
Aliyev to end the "misunderstandings that have triggered various 
emotional reactions." 
Q Russian and Italian Prime Ministers Putin and Berlusconi will hold 
Thursday a teleconference with Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan to 
discuss South Stream pipeline project. 
Q Exiled Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer says nine Uighurs have been 
executed by the Chinese government. 
 
JEFFREY