09ANKARA782
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9243
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0782/01 1541030
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031030Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9811
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0076
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5818
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3893
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7342
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7224
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3804
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000782 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WENESDAY, JUNE 3, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
General Basbug Calls for a Boost in US Cooperation Against 
Terrorism 
All papers:  Today's papers extensively cover the speech Turkish 
Chief of General Staff General Ilker Basbug 
at the American-Turkish Council (ATC).  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports that General Basbug asked the US for more cooperation than 
just intelligence sharing against the PKK by saying "We believe that 
the common vision of our two countries needs to bring our 
cooperation to a whole new level which goes beyond intelligence 
sharing."  Mainstream Milliyet notes that General Basbug said that 
the Turkish military has come to a special point to eradicate the 
PKK.  Mainstream Hurriyet quotes General Basbug saying "security, 
economic and socio-cultural policies must be used simultaneously to 
counter the PKK but that these measures alone could not put an end 
to terrorism.  Therefore, we are very determined to fight against 
the terrorist organization until it is totally eliminated."  The 
paper notes that Admiral Mullen spoke after Basbug, and said that 
US-Turkish relations were exceptionally strong now and that both 
sides should work to sustain this relationship.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports that the PKK and the situation in Pakistan were 
the top issues on the agenda of the ATC. 
 
Main Opposition Party CHP is Determined Not to Support De-mining Law 
 
Hurriyet reports the opposition said yesterday that it was 
determined not to support the law on de-mining the Syrian border if 
the government insists the job be done through the 
build-operate-transfer model.  CHP leader Deniz Baykal said "we will 
do everything to stop this law in Parliament.  We are not against 
de-mining, but against leasing these lands to foreigners.  The cost 
of clearing the area will be paid to foreign companies if we cannot 
do it ourselves.  But afterwards this land should be given to its 
real owners." 
 
DTP Leader Ahmet Turk Asks President Gul to Arrange Summit on 
Kurdish Issue 
Milliyet reports that during his address to DTP deputies yesterday, 
Turk said "The PKK's decision to suspend its activities for a while 
is a chance for Turkish politics and for democratic civil society." 
He urged President Gul to arrange a summit meeting with leaders of 
political parties to discuss the Kurdish issue. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the PKK, Northern Iraq, Turkey's Kurdish 
Question 
 
Okay Gonensin comments in mainstream Vatan (6/3): "The PKK, too, 
must see that Turkey has made some progress in the Kurdish question. 
 Turkey's Kurds want an end to this war.  The PKK must declare that 
it will withdraw its militants into Iraq, and that it will end armed 
attacks in Turkey indefinitely.  The moment the PKK announces it 
will lay down weapons, a new Turkey will emerge.  No one, including 
the PKK, has the right to waste this opportunity." 
 
Mehmet Barlas opines in mainstream Sabah (6/3): "It's against the 
nature of politics that Prime Minister Erdogan still refuses to meet 
with the pro-Kurdish DTP leader Ahmet Turk while the internal and 
external conjunctures are pushing for a solution to Turkey's Kurdish 
problem." 
 
Avni Ozgurel writes in liberal Radikal (6/3): "The basis on which 
Ankara conducts its Kurdish policies is a report written by the 
national intelligence (MIT) chief Emre Taner.  A solution strategy 
by the government would have to be approved by the National Security 
Council (MGK) as well.  Two main topics are highlighted in the 
solution efforts: The expansion of the 'return home' law for the 
militants in the mountains, and the fate of the PKK leadership as 
well as the improvement of Abdullah Ocalan's prison conditions.  For 
the first time, Ankara has adopted a realistic view for the 
 
ANKARA 00000782  002 OF 003 
 
 
elimination of the PKK -- the aim is set as reducing terror to a 
level that can be controlled rather than ending it completely, as 
well as cutting the organization's ties with people." 
 
Murat Yetkin writes in liberal Radikal (6/3): "The speech TGS chief 
General Ilker Basbug delivered at the ATC's Washington meetings 
yesterday has many common points with CHP leader Deniz Baykal's and 
PM Erdogan's advisors' stance on the resolution of the PKK problem. 
Basbug said it would be wrong to think terror could be finished only 
by using economic and social-cultural measures alone while the PKK 
maintains its armed terrorists, that the struggle against terror 
should be consistent with the existing legal system, that the 
destruction of the PKK would not be possible without ending the 
organization's presence in northern Iraq, and that Turkey welcomes 
the cooperation with the US but sees necessary a 'new phase of 
cooperation' which would go beyond intelligence sharing.  Basbug's 
speech gave us the first clues that all the sides in this problem 
may arrive at a common understanding to resolve the Kurdish 
question." 
 
Obama's Upcoming Cairo Speech. 
 Media outlets carry excerpts of U.S. President Barack Obama's 
recent interview with French Canal Plus, with most interpreting his 
comment "If you actually took the number of Muslims Americans, we'd 
be one of the largest Muslim countries in the world ," as "The U.S. 
is one of the largest Muslim countries."  In "Obama Says the U.S. Is 
One of The World's Largest Muslim Countries, " mainstream Milliyet 
reports, "Obama is calling on the West and the Islamic world to 
dialogue," in order to "better understand" each other's issues. 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "The U.S. Is One of The World's Largest 
Muslim Countries," and notes, "Obama said the Western World and the 
Muslim World must get to know each other better." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "The U.S. Cannot Impose 
Its Values," that Obama "seeks a better understanding between the 
West and the Islamic world."  Liberal Radikal reports in "Critical 
Messages from Obama," that "Obama is hopeful for a solution in the 
Middle East."   In a related article, Islamist-oriented Zaman 
headlines, "Obama's Likely Test Will Be Palestine," and reports, 
"Tomorrow Obama will deliver a speech to the Muslim world from the 
Middle East's most prestigious university," and "he is likely to 
emphasize that the U.S. is not at war with the Islamic world," as 
"The Islamic world wants more than sweet talk about peace and 
instead awaits radical changes regarding Palestine." 
 
In addition, Zaman carries a commentary article entitled "There Are 
Many Reasons for Arabs' Anti-Americanism," and notes, "The U.S. 
gives complete support to Israel," and "American's only interest in 
the region (i.e. the Middle East) is oil," and "the U.S. spreads 
fears about Iran, which leads to regional countries arming 
themselves," and finally, "from Sudan to Somalia, from Iraq to 
Lebanon, the public perception is that these countries' territorial 
integrity is in danger because of the U.S." 
 
July 4th Invitations to Iranian diplomats. 
Media outlets are widely interested in the AP report yesterday 
indicating U.S. embassies around the world have been instructed by 
the Obama Administration to invite Iranian diplomats to their July 
4th celebrations.  Liberal Radikal reports, "In an effort to reach 
out to Iran, Obama has instructed embassies to invite Iranian 
diplomats to July 4th celebrations."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports "A July 4th Invitation to Iran," and notes, "The U.S. is 
seeking to broaden its relations with Iran."  Mainstream Sabah 
reports straightforwardly, "The U.S. has also invited Iranian 
diplomats to its July 4th celebrations." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Possible Closure Case against the AKP 
 
Ismet Demirdogen writes in leftist Taraf (6/3): "Chief Prosecutor 
Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya, in a new attempt to outlaw the AKP, 
reportedly examines the Deniz Feneri file sent by German officials 
 
ANKARA 00000782  003 OF 003 
 
 
to Turkey to find evidence for banning the ruling party.  The AKP 
managed to escape an earlier ban for activities against secularism, 
but now there is speculation that the party will not be able to 
survive the new assault.  CHP leader Deniz Baykal has recently said 
that over the last ten years, the funds raised by the German-based 
Islamist Deniz Feneri charity amounted to Euro 900 million.  CHP 
also said the money was used to sponsor the establishment of the 
AKP.  According to Turkish laws, political parties are not allowed 
to accept funds from foreign countries, international organizations 
or individuals, and the parties are automatically banned if they do 
so.  The chief prosecutor started to examine the Deniz Feneri file 
over the weekend, but could not find any evidence against the AKP so 
far." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- A 38 year old man is arrested for killing eight of his relatives 
in the southern city of Adana 
 
- Conservative parties DP and ANAP push the button for possible 
merger 
 
- Farming Minister Mehdi Eker said Turkey not made any deal with any 
country or company including Israel to clear mines in the area along 
the Turkey-Syria border 
 
- PM Erdogan signals that the parliament recess might be delayed 
till the end of July 
 
World 
 
- The British army claims that they killed an alleged Taliban leader 
Mullah Mansur in southern Afghanistan 
 
- The Commander of US Forces in Iraq General Odierno says US combat 
forces will vacate all Iraqi cities on schedule by the end of this 
month 
 
- Brazilian Air Force say they found airplane seats and other debris 
floating in the Atlantic Ocean along the path that the missing Air 
France jet was flying 
 
SILLIMAN