09ANKARA1326
DAS KAIDANOW'S INITIAL CONSULTATIONS IN TURKEY
Wed Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1606
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDIR RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHSL RUEHTRO
DE RUEHAK #1326/01 2521454
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 091454Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0737
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHYE/AMEMBASSY YEREVAN IMMEDIATE 1380
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU IMMEDIATE
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TU IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/JCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001326 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS AR GR TU
SUBJECT: DAS KAIDANOW'S INITIAL CONSULTATIONS IN TURKEY 
 
Classified By: CDA Doug Silliman, Reasons 1.4 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: GoT officials told EUR DAS Kaidanow during 
her initial visit to Ankara that: 
 
-- Turkey is committed to the reconciliation process with 
Armenia, but Ankara also needs to see progress on 
Nagorno-Karabakh; 
 
-- Ankara fully supports Talat and is giving him maximum 
flexibility, but is concerned that the Greek Cypriots are not 
motivated to deal.  Turkey believes UN Special Envoy Downer 
needs to be more engaged in the process and wants UN SYG Moon 
to host a meeting for Talat and Christoufias at UNGA to give 
visibility to this issue; 
 
-- There is ongoing Greece-Turkey bilateral dialogue 
regarding the Aegean, including on the issue of military 
flights.  Greek allegations about Turkish air activities are 
often misleading, including recent allegations of Turkish 
harassment of a Greek civilian airliner; 
 
-- The Kurdish Opening is at the forefront of Turkey,s 
domestic agenda.  The government has a strong will to move 
forward and appreciates USG's continuing support on intel 
sharing against the PKK and working with Europe to curb the 
PKK's fundraising and political activities; 
 
-- Turkey is concerned about Iranian efforts to form a Shiite 
coalition in Iraq and wants to work with the U.S. to support 
a more liberal, democratic, pro-Western regime in Baghdad. 
Rising tensions between Syria and Iraq are a concern; 
 
-- FM Davutoglu will visit Iran the week of September 7 and 
will urge the Iranians to respond constructively to the P5 
Plus 1 offer; 
 
-- Turkey is committed to Nabucco as an important element of 
energy security and does not view Southstream as a 
competitor.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) During her initial visit to Ankara September 3-4, 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian 
Affairs Ambassador Tina Kaidanow met with MFA Undersecretary 
Feridun Sinirlioglu and other senior MFA officials, Deputy 
Chief of the Turkish General Staff (TGS) GEN Aslan Guner, 
Energy Undersecretary Metin Kilci and Foreign Trade 
Undersecretary Ahmet Yakici.  Ambassador hosted a dinner for 
DAS Kaidanow with pundits and thinktankers on September 3 and 
a separate dinner with senior GoT advisors and members of 
opposition parties on September 4.  DAS Kaidanow and 
interlocutors agreed on the positive and close partnership 
between the U.S. and Turkey on a full range of key issues, 
including particularly Afghanistan/Pakistan and Iraq. 
Discussions in the various meetings focused on Turkey,s 
approach on Armenia, Cyprus, Greece, the "Democratic Opening" 
to address the Kurdish issue and energy. 
 
ARMENIA-TURKEY: COMMITTED, NEED PROGRESS ON N-K 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. (C) MFA Undersecretary Sinirlioglu told DAS Kaidanow that 
Ankara is committed to normalizing relations with Armenia, 
and that the protocols to establish and develop diplomatic 
relations between Turkey and Armenia has created very 
positive momentum on which all parties should build.  While 
acknowledging that Nagarno-Karabagh is on a separate track, 
Sinirlioglu stressed that Turkey also needs to see progress 
on Nagorno-Karabakh.  This message was echoed by TGS Deputy 
CHOD Gen Guner during his meeting with DAS Kaidanow. 
Sinirlioglu also predicted that this sensitive step will be 
fiercely debated in parliament. 
 
¶4. (C) MFA Deputy U/S Cevikoz, the MFA point person on 
normalization with Armenia told DAS Kaidanow in a separate 
meeting that Turkey was pleased with how the press was being 
managed and thanked the U.S. for helping to manage the 
Azeris.  "Turkey hopes this is the beginning of an end, 
rather than the end of the beginning," Cevikoz quipped, but 
said a lot will depend on how the next steps play out, 
 
ANKARA 00001326  002 OF 004 
 
 
including the Minsk Group meeting in Chisinau (on the margins 
of the CIS summit) between Armenian President Sargsian and 
Azerbaijani President Aliyev, and Sargsian,s attendance at 
the World Cup qualifier match in Turkey between Turkey and 
Armenia on October 14. 
 
¶5. (C) DAS Kaidanow applauded Turkey's courage in moving 
forward with normalization with Armenia.  The U.S. 
understands that although the two issues are on separate 
tracks, it is important for Turkey to see progress on N-K in 
order to move forward with normalization.  She underscored 
that the U.S. remains committed to finding a resolution on 
N-K and noted the appointment of Amb. Bradtke as the new U.S. 
co-chair for the Minsk Group as a reflection of the U.S. 
commitment.  Sinirlioglu welcomed this announcement and said 
Turkey will look forward to working closely with Amb. Bradtke. 
 
¶6. (C) Senior representatives from the opposition Republican 
People's Party (CHP) and the National Action Party (MHP) told 
DAS Kaidanow that opposition parties will reject the 
protocols without a commitment from Armenia to withdraw from 
occupied Azerbaijani territories.  During the dinner hosted 
by Ambassador Jeffrey on September 4, CHP Vice Chair and 
former MFA Undersecretary Onur Oymen argued that Turkey 
normalizing relations with Armenia before an Armenian 
withdrawal would effectively condone the illegal occupation 
by Armenia.  This, Onur concluded, would set a terrible 
precedent for other instances of illegal occupation in the 
South Caucasus, including the Russian occupation of South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia.  Hakan Fidan, senior advisor to PM 
Erdogan, retorted by noting that the protocol should be seen 
as a confidence building measure in advance of ratification 
by both parliaments and that the government understands the 
need for progress on Nagarno-Karabagh in order to receive 
opposition support for the protocols.  DAS Kaidanow also 
noted that if Azerbaijan was willing to accept finalizing an 
agreement on the Madrid Basic Principles as a mark of success 
in the Nagorno-Karabakh process, Turkey should not be in the 
position of defining that success more stringently than Baku 
itself. 
 
Cyprus 
------ 
 
¶7. (C) MFA U/S Sinirlioglu told DAS Kaidanow that Turkey 
completely supports Talat's constructive, pro-solution 
approach and that Turkey has provided him full flexibility in 
the negotiations.  Sinirlioglu expressed concern that the 
Greek Cypriots seem unmotivated to negotiate and appear to be 
using Turkey,s EU accession process as leverage to advance 
their goals in the negotiations.  He warned that the window 
for a settlement is closing, pointing to the April 2010 
presidential elections in the north as a likely turning point 
given the growing sentiments in the north against a 
settlement.  He asked for U.S. support to encourage Special 
Envoy Downer to be more engaged in the process and to back 
Turkey's request for UN SYG Ban Ki Moon to meet jointly with 
Talat and Christoufias at the UN to highlight his personal 
interest in and draw international attention on the 
negotiations.  DAS Kaidanow agreed that the UN should be 
fully engaged and that the window for a solution is limited. 
She said a UN SYG meeting with the two leaders could be a 
positive step and the US would consider supporting this. 
 
Greece-Turkey 
------------- 
 
8 (C) MFA Deputy U/S Berk told DAS Kaidanow that relations 
with Greece are generally positive and outlined the ongoing 
semi-annual meetings of the bilateral steering committee in 
which he represents the Turkish side.  Berk was upbeat in 
describing the discussions with Greece that were broadening 
and moving beyond the monotonous exchanges of their 
respective positions on the continental shelf.  Berk said the 
Greeks had proposed five confidence building measures (CBMs) 
and that he had sent a letter in mid-August to the Greek 
PolDir to accept four of these CBMs and to propose an 
additional five new ones.  Turkey was even willing to 
consider the selective 
extension of territorial waters beyond the six mile limit in 
 
ANKARA 00001326  003 OF 004 
 
 
certain areas (while not in others).  DAS Kaidanow raised the 
issue of Turkish overflights of inhabited Greek islands, 
expressing concern that the potential for escalation or 
accidents was high.  Berk warned DAS Kaidanow not to take 
Greek allegations of Turkish overflights in the Aegean at 
face value and rejected outright Greece's claim that Turkish 
fighter aircraft had passed close by a Greek airliner on 
August 31.  Berk said that in addition to proposed CBMs, he 
had sent to his Greek counterpart a proposal for an "Aegean 
Code of Conduct" which he said could greatly reduce the 
chance of a mishap with potential for escalation.  Turkey was 
ready to implement this proposal as well as the CBMs without 
prejudicing the legal positions on either side.  While noting 
that the Greek government may be distracted with upcoming 
elections, Berk pointed to polling that showed PASOK in the 
lead.  He commented that that Turkey is "not a stranger" to 
PASOK and considers Papandreou a good partner. 
 
¶9. (C) TGS Deputy CHOD General Guner told DAS Kaidanow that 
there are improvements in Turkey-Greece relations and Turkey 
is looking to build on the personal relationships between the 
two militaries, especially between the service commanders. 
Guner said the new Greek CHOD had served in Ankara when Guner 
was the J2 at TGS.  Responding to concerns expressed by DAS 
Kaidanow about Turkish military overflights over populated 
Greek islands, Guner avoided getting into specifics, but said 
that there are CBMs ongoing.  He concluded by stating that, 
"Man-to-man, military-to-military, we have no problems." 
 
Kurdish Opening 
--------------- 
 
¶10. (C) Sinirlioglu said there is a consensus of public 
opening supporting the GoT's "Democratic Initiative," and 
that there is strong political will to press forward.  He 
expressed appreciation for the continuing support Turkey 
receives from the U.S. in the fight against the PKK and asked 
for the U.S. to continue pressing the EU to prevent political 
and fundraising activities in Europe.  DAS Kaidanow agreed 
that the EU can be doing more and that the U.S. will continue 
to explore with the EU what more can be done to deny 
political and financial support for the PKK.   TGS Deputy 
CHOD Guner flagged for DAS Kaidanow TGS Chief Basbug's July 
25 announcement as key: it highlighted TGS's red lines but 
provided general support for any efforts that would not cross 
those lines.  Guner concluded: "If there is something that we 
can do to bring the PKK down from the mountains, we will do 
it.  But as long as they stay in the mountains, we will fight 
them." 
 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶11. (C) Turkey,s Special Envoy and soon-to-be ambassador to 
Iraq Murat Ozcelik joined Sinirlioglu,s meeting with DAS 
Kaidanow and stated that he is working closely with 
Ambassador Hill.  Ozcelik said he will focus on overcoming 
the challenge of elections and on passage of the revenue 
sharing and hydrocarbon laws once he arrives Baghdad.  He 
said a smooth drawdown of U.S. forces is important, and urged 
the U.S. to not become overly focused on an "exit strategy," 
but to work with Turkey and others toward a more pro-Western 
Iraq: "We don,t want another Iran in the region."  He 
stressed that Turkey supports a fair election process and is 
following developments closely, particularly Iran,s efforts 
to build a Shiite coalition in Iraq.  He was encouraged by 
Maliki's decision not to join a Shia coalition, but remains 
concerned about Maliki's intentions.  He asked that the U.S 
and Turkey should work together for a constellation of 
political actors who are more liberal and democratic.  He 
noted Turkey's concerns about growing tensions between Iraq 
and Syria.  FM Davutoglu had just traveled to both countries 
and may do so again, following the September 9 meeting in 
Cairo.  Ozcelik noted that Turkey will remain engaged with 
all groups in Iraq. 
 
Iran/Syria 
---------- 
 
¶12. (C) Sinirlioglu noted that FM Davutoglu will be traveling 
 
ANKARA 00001326  004 OF 004 
 
 
to Iran in the near future and will convey a "tough message" 
urging Iran to respond to the P5 plus 1 offer.  He also said 
that Turkey,s continuing engagement with Syria is difficult, 
but worth the effort as changing Syria will be important for 
the region. 
 
Energy 
------ 
 
¶13. (C) Turkey supports the free flow of energy to Europe, 
Sinirlioglu stated, and believes that energy security is one 
of Turkey's key contributions to Europe.  He reiterated 
Turkey's support for Nabucco and said Southstream is not in 
competition with Nabucco.  He agreed with DAS Kaidanow's 
assessment that supplies for the pipeline remains the 
lingering question mark over the project and said this is yet 
another reason to have a breakthrough in Armenian-Azerbaijan 
and Turkish-Armenian relations.  Energy Undersecretary Metin 
Kilci in a separate meeting told DAS Kaidanow that Turkey is 
pushing hard in support of Nabucco, has high expectations for 
it, and is working on secondary agreements such as the 
Project Support Agreement (PSA) and setting up the national 
Nabucco companies.  Kilci said he expects the project will 
begin within two years, compared to Southstream, which 
remains a long-term and costly project. 
 
¶14. (U) DAS Kaidanow has cleared this cable. 
 
SILLIMAN 
 
           "Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at http://www.intelink.s 
gov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turkey"