09ANKARA714
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6818
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0714/01 1381117
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181117Z MAY 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9682
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0038
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5752
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3848
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7305
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7183
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3761
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000714 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, MAY 18, 2009 
 
IN TODAY'S PAPERS 
 
In Poland, Erdogan Repeats the Karabakh Condition to the 
Turkey/Armenia Roadmap 
Weekend papers and television news broadcasts reported PM Erdogan 
mentioned Armenia during his speech at Gdansk University during his 
visit to Poland on Friday.  Media report Erdogan said, "Relations 
between Turkey and Armenia are not independent from other things. 
There are other issues related to the region and we cannot pretend 
as if they do not exist. The trouble between Azerbaijan and Armenia 
is a binding concern for us. We want one thing from Armenia at this 
point, and that is a withdrawal from Nagorno Karabakh. This is not 
our decision. It is a U.N. decision. Armenia acknowledges itself as 
an occupier in Nagorno Karabakh. So, Armenia should withdraw from 
there. Turkey closed the border because of this occupation. The 
border will be opened once the Armenia ceases to occupy Nagorno 
Karabakh. Currently there are 40,000 Armenians who are illegally 
residing and working in my country. They are here because things are 
grave in Armenia and there is poverty. Armenians are struggling. We 
could send these 40,000 Armenians back to Armenia if we wanted to. 
But we don't think this is the right thing to do because such a 
thing would not be humanitarian." 
 
Papers report today that PM Erdogan addressed Sunday the ruling 
AKP's provincial party congress in the city of Bursa.  Erdogan 
criticized the "efforts" to cause "artificial problems" between 
Turkey and Azerbaijan, and "sour the relationship between the two 
countries."  "In Turkey, those who don't even know which way 
Azerbaijan lies make suggestions on the matter.  My visit to Baku 
and the meeting with President Aliyev, however, left them out in the 
open," emphasized Erdogan. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia-Azerbaijan 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "It is totally confusing to 
hear remarks from PM Erdogan on Armenia which question the future of 
a road map on Turkish-Armenian relations.  First of all, when the 
road map was made public we did not hear any political remark from 
the government.  And now Prime Minister Erdogan is threatening to 
send Armenians living in Turkey back to their country.  Given this 
picture, how come one can expect Turkish public opinion to be 
supportive about the Turkish-Armenian rapprochement?" 
 
Ceyda Karan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Prime Minister 
Erdogan made it very clear in Baku that Nagorno Karabakh remains a 
precondition to the roadmap with Armenia. Even though this approach 
clearly conflicts with the road map between Turkey and Armenia, 
maybe it is time to reconsider the whole process.  The current road 
map was hastily designed and announced to prevent President Obama 
from using the word 'genocide' in his April 24 message.  It does not 
necessarily go down the drain because of Erdogan's commitment to 
support Baku but the road map requires a revision to balance it 
properly.  A balanced road map should be free from U.S. impositions 
and should not contain any worries in Baku and Moscow." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Although the Prime 
Minister has not said anything new by creating a link between 
Nagorno Karabakh and the Armenian border opening, he has clearly 
acted under Baku's will.  After Ankara bowed to Azerbaijan's push, 
the future of the current road map for Turkish-Armenian ties remains 
questionable.  It is absolutely not clear how this process can 
possibly progress given the Baku-favored policy line." 
 
Erdogan and Putin Meet in Sochi 
Mainstream Milliyet reports today that "For the first time, Erdogan 
and Putin declare to the world that Turkey and Russia are 
cooperating with each other regarding economic, political, and 
energy initiatives."  Mainstream Vatan reported over the weekend, 
"Putin said that they wanted a settlement regarding Nagorno 
Karabakh, and added that the other states will be guarantors in a 
 
ANKARA 00000714  002 OF 004 
 
 
settlement."  All weekend papers reported on the Putin-Erdogan joint 
press conference where Erdogan said, "Only a Russian company remains 
in the bid for Turkey's nuclear energy contract after all the other 
countries withdrew from the bid.  We're working to finalize this 
bidding process over the coming days.  Our work on Blue Stream 
continues as well.  We've also discussed importing electricity from 
Russia.  Another matter I deem very important is carrying out 
bilateral trade with national currencies - I believe this will 
relieve both countries' distress over currency exchange.  We've also 
agreed to stage the Turkish-Russian Joint Economy Meeting in Turkey 
in June." 
 
The PM added, "Another step which we also deem very important is the 
regional cooperation between Turkey and the Russian Federation. 
Turkey has become an interim member of the UN Security Council, of 
which the Russian Federation is a permanent member.  We must take 
some steps for the well being of the region.  These steps include 
the Nagorno Karabakh, the Middle East question, the Cyprus 
question... etc.  I believe that solidarity will provide a means to 
overcome these questions, at least make some progress toward that 
end."  PM Putin pointed to the positive trend in the ties between 
the two countries, and underlined that the relationship has made 
great progress since the Ankara Treaty was signed.  Putin said, 
"Turkey has become the fifth largest trade partner for Russia.  We 
extend importance to the diversification of our energy ties.  We 
also discussed the nuclear energy issue."  Regarding 
Nagorno-Karabakh, Putin said, "Our view on this matter is that the 
sides reach a mutually acceptable agreement on this conflict.  The 
countries in the Minsk Group can only help find a solution which 
will be acceptable for both sides.  If need be, these countries can 
be the guarantors of an agreement to be reached.  Turkey and Russia 
want a solution to be found to this problem in a timely manner.  On 
this question, both countries are ready to do whatever is 
necessary." 
 
Gul in Syria 
President Gul met with Syrian President Assad during his three-day 
official visit to Syria. Gul said during his visit in Syria that he 
is "waiting on the new government in Israel to indicate an interest 
in continuing the indirect talks between Syria and Israel." Gul 
emphasized Turkey's role as a neighbor, and "a friend and a brother" 
to Syria. Gul also mentioned the annual $2 Billion trade between 
Turkey and Syria. He also emphasized support for Iraq's territorial 
integrity and for a solution in Palestine. He wants global dialogue 
and a peace agreement regarding Palestine. Meanwhile, CNN Turk 
reported over the weekend, "Syria Says Israeli Government is Not A 
Good Peace Partner," as Syria's president said Friday that his 
country is interested in resuming indirect peace talks with Israel 
but does not believe the new Israeli government will make a good 
negotiating partner. Syria has said it is willing to resume the 
talks mediated by Turkey as long as they focus on a complete Israeli 
withdrawal from the Golan Heights. But Israel's new prime minister, 
Benjamin Netanyahu, has said he would not be willing to cede the 
territory Syria wants. "Syria is keen about peace as much as it is 
keen about the return of its occupied territories," Syrian President 
Bashar Assad said during a joint press conference with Turkish 
President Abdullah Gul in the Syrian capital, Damascus.  Sabah and 
Yeni Safak report today that Israeli President Peres send a message 
from Jordan that Israel is interested in direct talks with Syria, 
which would bypass Turkey's role as a mediator.  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports Syrian President Assad said, "We will not sit at the table 
unless Turkey is present.  We're waiting for a message from Israel 
via Turkey." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Syria 
 
Mustafa Unal wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman (5/17): "The ties 
between Syria and Turkey make a good example of strong friendship. 
The visit of President Gul in Damascus demonstrated Turkey's power 
not only on a political level but more importantly on a street 
 
ANKARA 00000714  003 OF 004 
 
 
level.  It is a great diplomatic success that the two countries were 
on the verge of war 10 years ago, and now present a deep friendship 
on all levels." 
 
Gul on Turkey's 'Kurdish Question' 
Media outlets report President Gul, in Syria on a state visit, 
talked Sunday to Turkish journalists in Damascus.  Gul said all in 
Turkey should ask "where have we made mistakes" in the Kurdish 
question, and noted the resolution of "big problems" should not be 
left to the government alone.  "The opposition must also contribute 
to a solution.  In this regard, dialogue is essential.  This problem 
is the opposition's problem as well," said Gul.  The President added 
the existing opportunity for a solution should not be missed, and 
expressed content that for the first time in Turkey's political 
history, there was agreement and unity among the state institutions 
regarding the efforts for a solution to the problem. 
 
Meanwhile, Islamist-oriented Zaman reports the pro-Kurdish DTP 
lawmaker Akin Birdal welcomed Gul's "Kurdish initiative."  "It's 
clear that the AKP has a project for a solution; the opposition must 
also support this," said Birdal. 
 
'Republic Rally' Protests the AKP, the 'Ergenekon' Investigation, 
and Record Levels of Unemployment 
Media outlets report tens of thousands of demonstrators rallied 
Sunday in Ankara in a show of support for secularism as well as to 
protest the controversial 'Ergenekon' investigation, the economic 
meltdown and rising unemployment.  Two years after the first 
'republic rallies,' thousands at yesterday's rally protested the 
arrest of academics, journalists and others suspected of involvement 
in plots to oust the ruling party.  Following the demonstration, the 
crowd marched to Ataturk's mausoleum.  The rally was organized by 
the Kemalist Thought Association (ADD) and over 130 NGOs.  Papers 
give different estimates of the size of the crowd, with mainstream 
Hurriyet putting the figure at over 100,000 whereas the 
pro-government dailies Sabah and Zaman at 40,000 and 35,000 
respectively. 
 
Erdogan, Davutoglu on Turkey-EU 
Media outlets reported over the weekend Prime Minister Erdogan told 
a conference held Friday at Poland's Gdansk University that French 
President Sarkozy and German Chancellor Merkel's objections to 
Turkey's EU entry were "political maneuvers."    Erdogan said 
Sarkozy gave "different messages in bilateral meetings," and 
stressed that such an approach was "not nice."  Erdogan said the EU 
has been "deceiving" Turkey for 50 years.  He said the ongoing 
controversy would end if the EU countries openly express their 
reluctance to admit Turkey into the bloc. 
 
In a related story, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu told the press 
over the weekend that for 50 years, the EU has been one of the 
parameters shaping Turkish politics.  Davutoglu stressed Turkey 
would continue to carry out the reforms for EU accession, and noted 
the EU was expected to honor its commitments made in dealings with 
Turkey. 
 
Israeli PM Netanyahu To Meet Obama at The White House Today 
Media are speculating regarding how the Obama administration will 
approach Israel - media ask will the White House push the two state 
solution or will the White House give in to Israel's demands? 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "Today The White House Shows Its Middle 
East Cards," and reports, "Today President Obama is meeting with 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu" and the paper asks, "Will 
the White House take a harsher stance against Israel?" and "What 
will Netanyahu say about the two state solution?"  Liberal Radikal 
reports in "Bibi Is Talking Outcomes With Obama," that "prior to 
today's meeting, the Obama administration has not voiced support for 
a the two-state solution."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak says Obama 
is being told, "Don't give a blank check to Israel and do whatever 
Israel wants." 
 
ANKARA 00000714  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
Women Parliamentarians Elected in Kuwait 
Media laud the victory of four women parliamentarians in Kuwait. 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports in "High Heel Voices in Kuwait," that 
"All of the women elected to the Kuwaiti parliament were educated in 
the U.S."  Mainstream Vatan headlines, "For The First Time in 
Kuwaiti History, Women Are Elected to The Parliament," and the paper 
notes, "for the first time women have won the right to join 
parliament." Mainstream Milliyet reports, "In Kuwait, The Women Won 
and The Islamists Lost."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines, "A 
Women's Revolution in the Kuwaiti Parliament." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- An Iraqi American and his family traveling from the US to Turkey 
are held under observation at Istanbul's Haseki Hospital after the 
Iraqi American and his mother tested positive for H1N1 flu. 
 
-At party congresses held in Ankara over the weekend, Husamettin 
Cindoruk was elected the chairman of Democratic Party (DP) and Masum 
Turker of the Democratic Left Party (DSP). 
 
- On Wednesday, a parliamentary committee will discuss a draft bill 
for the establishment of a 'special undersecretariat for public 
order and security.' 
 
- The unemployment rate for February stood at 16.1 percent, 
increasing the number of the unemployed by 1.1 million and reaching 
3.8 million, the Turkish Statistics Institute said. 
 
World 
 
- Iraqi PM al-Maliki told the opening of a Turkish hospital in 
Karbala that they would "finish off the PKK" through "cooperation 
with Turkey." 
 
- Two European and two UAE companies have formed a consortium to 
pump gas from northern Iraq to kick-start the Nabucco project. 
 
- On May 21, Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva will 
visit Turkey.  Silva will be accompanied by the representatives of 
Petrobras, a company that signed an agreement for oil exploration in 
the Black Sea with the Turkish petroleum company TPAO. 
 
JEFFREY