09ANKARA454
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9597
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0454/01 0841529
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251529Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9184
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9554
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5561
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3707
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7192
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7067
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3645
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000454 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 25, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
President Gul Backtracks on His Use of the Word "Kurdistan" 
All papers and TV Channels:  Speaking to reporters at the airport in 
Ankara upon his return from a two-day visit to Iraq, President Gul 
denied that he referred to the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) in 
northern Iraq as "Kurdistan."  Gul told reporters, "There is a local 
Kurdish Administration in northern Iraq which was established by the 
constitution of Iraq.  This is what I said.  I met with the prime 
minister of the local Kurdish Administration; such talks are very 
normal.  At a time when the fight against terror is being conducted 
and difficult issues are faced, it is meaningless to go into 
unnecessary arguments.  Every country has its own languages, 
terminology, laws and constitutions.  The Iraqis decided on their 
territorial integrity, political unity and their own style of 
administration. "  Gul added that as a neighbor, Turkey extended 
full support to Iraq's reconstruction. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet and mainstream Haberturk reports that all the 
journalists accompanying Gul in his visit to Baghdad mentioned in 
their reporting that President Gul used the word "Kurdistan." 
 
Meeting Held Between President Gul and KRG Prime Minister Necirvan 
Barzani 
Yeni Safak, Zaman, Turkiye, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, and others: 
Liberal Radikal  and mainstream Sabah report that President Gul also 
met with KRG Prime Minister Necirvan Barzani.  Gul said, "Necirvan 
Barzani reaffirmed their determination to fight against the PKK. 
Turkey appreciates this.  But we cannot wait for the results 
forever." Responding to a question regarding a declaration of 
amnesty for the PKK, Gul stressed that "the declaration of amnesty 
is Turkey's internal issue" and he would not discuss it with others. 
 Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Deputy Prime Minister Cemil 
Cicek said, "There are no plans to declare amnesty for PKK 
terrorists but in Turkish laws there were already regulations 
granting amnesty to repentant terrorists." 
 
Meanwhile, Sabah reports that the PKK again rejected Iraqi President 
Talabani's call to the PKK to disarm or leave Iraq by saying, 
"Talabani does not represent the PKK." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Iraq Relations, Gul's Use of the Word 
"Kurdistan" 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The Regional Government of 
Kurdistan (KRG) is a reality, as stated in Iraqi constitution. 
However we, Turkey, have to use this term correctly when the time 
comes.  Now is not the right time because it looks as if Turkey is 
part of the big plan to politicize the PKK.  We should also argue 
about the sincerity of Iraqi Kurds regarding their words and the 
deeds.  Turkey has sent 5 diplomatic notes for action against the 
PKK so far, but Baghdad did not even respond to any of them." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The president's 
pronunciation of 'Kurdistan' is an effort to create better ties with 
Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and KRG President Massoud Barzani in 
order to dissolve the PKK.  However, Ankara should proceed with 
caution by bearing in mind the larger picture.  It is nice to 
believe that the PKK will eventually be forced to disarm, but 
terrorist organizations never take such big steps without bargaining 
for political gains.  When we think about the ultimate goal of the 
Kurds of Turkey, Iran, Syria and Iraq --i.e. independent Kurdistan-- 
it is obvious why we must act with caution." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The president has 
made a historic visit to Iraq and it should not be wasted by 
focusing on his use of the words 'Kurdistan' and 'amnesty.'  There 
is a positive spirit in the Iraqi side and we should be supportive 
to this approach." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000454  002 OF 003 
 
 
Yasemin Congar wrote in leftist Taraf: "President Gul has done the 
right thing by saying to Necirvan Barzani that amnesty [for PKK 
members] is Turkey's internal matter.  On the other hand, Turkey has 
to be proactive on this very Turkish matter and should be able to 
set the proper legal ground for the upcoming Kurdish conference in 
Erbil." 
 
Goldman Sachs Report on Post-Elections Turkey 
Mainstream Vatan carries the results of a report prepared by Goldman 
Sachs on the March 29 municipal elections in Turkey.  The report 
lists the ruling AKP's advantages over other political parties as 
"Prime Minister Erdogan's charisma and exceptional leadership 
talents," the success of the AKP in uniting Islamic and 
nationalistic tones in conservative voters, and the "organizational" 
success of the AKP.  In Turkey, 65 percent of the votes go to the 
conservative/right wing parties and politics, embodied today in the 
AKP.  The AKP is represented even in the tiny villages across 
Anatolia and has a dynamic party organization, says the report. 
 
The report predicts in the post-municipal elections period that, 
should the AKP receive40-45 percent of the votes, markets will react 
positively, opening the way for a new deal with the IMF.  If the AKP 
wins below 35 percent of the votes, coupled with continued 
stagnation, Turkey may call early elections in 2010.  If the AKP 
receives over 50 percent of the votes, it may pose some "risks" for 
the ruling party such as boosting confidence for making 
"controversial" reforms, according to the report. 
 
Former TGS Chief: Young Generation in Turkish Military More 
Democratic 
Media outlets report that on Wednesday, prosecutors in the 
'Ergenekon' case said the former chief of the military general staff 
(TGS,) retired general Hilmi Ozkok may be invited to testify in the 
ongoing case.  Ozkok has earlier said he would make a deposition if 
the prosecutors ask him to do so.  Ozkok was the chief of the 
Turkish military from 2002-2006. 
 
Papers report Ozkok told daily Milliyet on Tuesday that the young 
generation in the military "thinks differently, receives a good 
education, and are more democratic."  In addition, Ozkok said, 
"Knowledge of a foreign language enables them to closely follow the 
developments around the world," adding that serving in NATO 
"broadens the horizons" of military officers.  Ozkok said military 
takeovers were closely related to a country's level of development. 
"Countries that have developed in economic and social terms do not 
face military coups."  Citing the "Transformation Command" within 
NATO as an example, Ozkok said scientific studies that help people 
"learn from the past" was another important factor in preventing 
military takeovers. 
 
Turkey Lends a Hand on the Topic of Afghanistan 
Media outlets note Turkish officials are exerting efforts to 
contribute to a more peaceful Afghanistan by hosting an upcoming 
summit between Afghan President Karzai and Pakistani President 
Zerdari.  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye reports, "At the 
beginning of April, a trilateral summit will be held in Ankara 
between Turkey, Pakistan, and Afghanistan," in order to "strengthen 
cooperation."  Liberal Radikal reports, "Turkey is exerting efforts 
in order to keep the neighboring countries of Afghanistan and 
Pakistan from fighting each other over Islamist militant elements 
such as the Taliban and Al Qaeda." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "The Trilateral Summit Will Take Place in Turkey Within A 
Week's Time," and "Turkey will bring together the Pakistani 
President and the Afghan President for the fourth time," so "Turkey 
can mediate between the two countries prior to the NATO summit." 
Cumhuriyet also notes that U.S. Envoy for South Asia Richard 
Holbrooke "Wants Broad Support" from NATO and EU officials regarding 
"the White House's new strategy to provide more support to 
Afghanistan through aid and training." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000454  003 OF 003 
 
 
In a related story, Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Even Reuters 
is saying Turkey can help the U.S. in the Middle East," and "Before 
Obama takes a step forward with Iran he will consult with Turkey." 
 
An 'Extremist Cabinet' in Israel (Yeni Safak) 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports "A coalition is formed between 
the extreme right and the extreme left."  Far right Ortadogu 
reports, "After lengthy talks Netanyahu has reached an agreement 
with Labor Party Leader Ehud Barak and they are making preparations 
for a coalition."  Mainstream Milliyet reports "The Right and the 
Left Reach a Coalition in Israel." 
 
Rasmussen Still Not the Man for The Job of NATO Chief 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Deputy Prime Minister Suat Kiniklioglu 
said, "It's unacceptable to put someone who is disrespectful to our 
religious beliefs and sacred values in charge of NATO," and "its 
particularly unacceptable at this moment because the U.S. president 
is putting such emphasis on Afghanistan" and Rasmussen is not the 
person to show "respect for religion" for Muslims in Afghanistan at 
this time. 
 
Speculations Continue Regarding Obama Visit 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports on its front page, "Michelle Obama is 
not coming to Turkey so she can be with her children."  In addition, 
Hurriyet cites anonymous U.S. officials as saying "Turkey will not 
be the venue for Obama's address to the Muslim world," and "Obama 
will meet with opposition political leaders in addition to the 
ruling party so he does not come across as favoring the ruling party 
in Turkey." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Cumhuriyet newspaper's Ankara bureau chief and columnist Mustafa 
Balbay, currently under arrest in the 'Ergenekon' investigation, 
claimed his diaries "were altered in order to strengthen the slander 
campaign" against him.  The diaries attributed to Balbay include 
notes of meetings with top military officials for toppling the 
government. 
 
- Ahead of the March 29 municipal elections, the state-owned Ziraat 
Bank has announced a 10 billion Lira "Spring Package" that brings 
easy payments and interest rate cuts for its 6 million customers. 
 
- Industry Minister Zafer Caglayan said about the "soaring" car 
sales following a recent cut on private consumption tax, "It was not 
a huge cut, but people, in herd mentality, began buying cars." 
 
- Gypsies forcibly evicted from their homes in Istanbul's Sulukule 
district now have been evicted from the new homes after they failed 
to pay for their new houses. 
 
World 
 
- The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe calls on 
Turkey and Greece to respect European standards in the treatment of 
minorities. 
 
- Foreign Minister Ali Babacan will join the March 27 Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization's "Afghanistan special meeting" in Moscow. 
 
 
- Reconciliation talks between the rival Palestinian factions Hamas 
and Fatah will resume in Egypt on April 1. 
 
- Al-Qaeda's second-in-command, Ayman al-Zawahiri, urged the 
Sudanese people to prepare for a "long guerrilla war" following the 
ICC's charging President Omar al-Bashir with war crimes. 
JEFFREY