09ANKARA731
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Fri May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0780
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0731/01 1421027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221027Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9710
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0050
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5766
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3862
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7316
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7194
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3776
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000731 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, MAY 22, 2009 
 
IN TODAY'S PAPERS 
 
Turkish Military Wants Better Ties with Armenia, Without Losing 
Azerbaijan (Sabah) 
Mainstream, pro-government Sabah claims the pressure of army 
generals was the main factor that made Prime Minister Erdogan go to 
Baku to mend ties with Azerbaijan.  During his visit to Baku, 
Erdogan ensured Azerbaijani officials that the Turkey-Armenia border 
would not be opened before Armenia ends the occupation of Nagorno 
Karabakh.  Sabah says that at the National Security Council (MGK) 
meeting on April 28, generals stressed they wanted to advance 
Turkey's ties with Armenia, but without harming Turkey's ties with 
Azerbaijan.  On May 13, Erdogan went to Baku to convey this message. 
 The paper notes Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) sources expect the 
withdrawal of Armenian troops from Nagorno Karabakh to take at least 
five years, and they don't expect stability in the Caucasus in the 
short term.  Sabah also claims Ankara wants to keep the opening of 
the Turkey-Armenia border on the agenda with an aim to speed up a 
settlement on Karabakh. 
 
Intelligence Report Shapes Ankara's Kurdish Initiative (Vatan) 
Mainstream Vatan says a report presented by Emre Taner, the head of 
the National Intelligence Organization (MIT), to President Abdullah 
Gul had been effective in Ankara's new "Kurdish initiative" that 
aims to end terrorism.  MIT Undersecretary Emre Taner, whose mandate 
has been extended for another six months, is said to have presented 
a report to Gul regarding the Kurdish initiative, which is currently 
under debate.  Unnamed sources are quoted by Vatan as saying Gul 
found the report's analysis and its proposals for a solution 
"appropriate," and announced Turkey was "close to a solution." 
Taner's report proposes "re-socializing the PKK terrorists on the 
mountains who have not been involved in terrorist acts."  The report 
also includes several economic and educational projects for the 
mainly Kurdish southeast, says Vatan. 
 
Ankara Plans PKK Members' Return Home through Makhmour Camp (Taraf) 
Leftist Taraf says on its front page reports that MIT Undersecretary 
Emre Taner's extended term overlaps with Ankara's plan to "disarm" 
the PKK.  Taraf expects the first stage of the plan could be the 
evacuation of the Makhmour Camp in northern Iraq.  Then, according 
to Taraf, if Ankara and the Kurds agree that the PKK will lay down 
its arms, the PKK members who come down from the Kandil Mountains 
could leave their arms to "third parties," including Iraq, the U.S., 
the EU and the UN, and return home through the Makhmour Camp. 
 
Iraqi Politicians Intensify Visits to Turkey Ahead of Iraq Elections 
(Cumhuriyet) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet points to the intensive visits by 
Iraqi politicians to Turkey prior to the forthcoming general 
elections in Iraq.  Following a visit to Turkey earlier this month 
by Shiite leader Muqtada al-Sadr, the current chairman of the Iraqi 
Front for National Dialogue, Saleh al-Mutlaq, came to Ankara. 
Mutlaq is known to be close to Iraq's former ruling Baath Party.  He 
met yesterday Turkey's Iraq envoy Ambassador Murat Ozcelik and was 
received by Prime Minister Erdogan.  The leader of Turkmen Decision 
Party, Faruk Abdullah Abdurrahman, also came to Ankara, reports 
Cumhuriyet. 
 
State Institutions to Recruit Kurdish-Speaking Employees (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah report the state is preparing to recruit employees 
speaking Kurdish for services in the mainly Kurdish areas.  The 
Health Ministry has prepared Kurdish-language brochures in support 
of its vaccination campaigns, and it also plans to send health 
specialists speaking Kurdish to Kurdish-speaking areas.  The 
religious affairs directorate (Diyanet) plans to recruit 
Kurdish-speaking imams, and the Culture Ministry has asked the State 
Theaters to stage plays in Kurdish. 
 
U.S. Congressional Committee Denounces Demolition of Gypsy 
Settlements in Istanbul 
 
ANKARA 00000731  002 OF 003 
 
 
Mainstreams Hurriyet and Milliyet report Benjamin Cardin and Alcee 
Hastings, co-chairs of the U.S. Congress' Helsinki Committee, 
denounced the demolition of the settlements in Istanbul's gypsy 
neighborhood Sulukule.  Earlier this week, Istanbul municipality 
bulldozers destroyed the last few homes that were left in Sulukule 
after protests by the remaining residents.  American senators said 
the demolition "purged part of Istanbul's history and disrespected 
the Romas."  Sulukule is an ancient gypsy settlement within the 
conservative Fatih Municipality, whose AKP-mayor ordered the 
controversial demolition as part of an "urban redevelopment" 
program.  "The bulldozing of Sulukule by the Turkish government 
shows a lack of regard for the Romani people," Senator Cardin said. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-EU; U.S.-Israel 
 
Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in tabloid Posta: "Turkey once again is 
missing an opportunity by not taking action to reopen the Halki 
Seminary. It looks like due to fear from opposition as well as the 
military's not being supportive about it, the ruling AKP is not 
taking concrete steps on Halki even though it wants to.  In the end, 
Turkey wrongly shoots itself in the foot and violates international 
agreements.  Besides, Turkey creates an image of exercising pressure 
on Orthodox people and opposing religious freedom.  Turkey shoots 
itself in the foot as this inaction on Halki casts out important 
allies and religious leaders such as Bartholomeos.  It is easy to 
expand this list endlessly. No matter from which angle you look at 
it, this government is insufficient regarding the seminary issue." 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "There is constant lip 
service from the government about the EU process but there is a 
sincerity litmus test on the horizon.  The election period is over 
and we have to see some tangible acts.  Sweden is about to take 
charge the EU presidency for the next 6 months and it is obvious 
that Cyprus will be at top of EU agenda.  Given current conditions, 
it is unlikely to see any steps toward the Cyprus issue including to 
open ports to Greek Cypriots.  And there is more to this.  The 
government's recent action to establish a Human Rights Supervision 
Board without even consulting human rights NGOs makes one really 
wonder about sincerity on the EU commitment." 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "For the first time, Israel 
felt that Washington's unconditional support is no longer in 
question.  During the Israeli PM's visit to Washington, President 
Obama made it very clear.  In that respect, it becomes even more 
important than before to hear what President Obama will have to say 
during his upcoming speech in Cairo.  He will undoubtedly give some 
clues about the American policy initiatives in the Middle East in 
the period to come." 
 
The Obama-Cheney Duel 
Media outlets report that President Obama and former vice president 
Dick Cheney are engaged in a 'duel' over their respective approaches 
to countering the threat of terrorism.  Mainstream Milliyet 
headlines, "A Major Duel in Washington," and reports, "Cheney 
defends torture," while "Obama says 'we lost our way'" during the 
Bush administration in the war on terror.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet headlines, "The Obama-Cheney Wrestling Match," and notes, 
"Obama defended his decision to close Guantanamo after the Senate 
rejected a spending bill aimed at closing the facility," while, 
"Dick Cheney accused (Obama) of weakening America's security."  In 
"Transfer the Prisoners to the U.S.," liberal Radikal reports, 
"despite the opposition, Obama still argues that Guantanamo should 
be closed by January 2010, and he wants the prisoners to be 
transferred to the U.S.," as "Cheney launches an intense answer to 
the new president." NTV reports "Cheney Tells Obama 'You Are 
Thoughtless.'" 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
 
ANKARA 00000731  003 OF 003 
 
 
Domestic 
 
- On Friday, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu will travel to 
Damascus for a meeting of the Organization of the Islamic Conference 
(OIC). 
 
- Two swine flu-infected Iraqi Americans were treated and discharged 
Thursday from Istanbul's Haseki Hospital.  The patients flew to 
Diyarbakir from where they will move on to Iraq. 
 
- On Friday, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu will make a courtesy 
tour in the parliament of the leaders of CHP, MHP, DTP and DSP. 
 
- An OECD report says Turkey is the country posing the highest risks 
for drivers after Russia, Slovakia and Poland. 
 
World 
 
- Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu says the pressure exerted on 
Turkey on the Cyprus question despite the EU's failure to meet 
pledges for ending the isolation of Turkish Cyprus was "not 
good-intentioned." 
 
- Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, in Turkey on a 
state visit, said Brazilian state oil company Petrobras will start 
joint oil explorations with Turkey's TPAO in the Black Sea.  Lula 
added the Brazilian aircraft manufacturer Embraer is also in talks 
with Turkish companies regarding a possible collaboration. 
 
- Israeli security forces demolished a minor Jewish settlement 
outpost in the West Bank, three days after President Obama told 
visiting Prime Minister Netanyahu that he must halt settlement 
activity. 
 
- Iran has barred women candidates from the presidential race but 
has granted permission to the four main contenders to contest the 
June vote. 
 
- Five Muslim community workers in Britain have accused MI5 of 
waging a campaign of blackmail and harassment in an attempt to 
recruit them as "informants." 
 
JEFFREY