09ANKARA868
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jun 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5705
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0868/01 1731227
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221227Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9979
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0115
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5896
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3936
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7375
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7264
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3844
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000868 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, JUNE 22, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan Cancels Scheduled Visit to Athens 
Papers report Prime Minister Erdogan has cancelled his scheduled 
trip to Athens, reportedly over high blood pressure.  Erdogan was 
planning to be among the foreign dignitaries attending the opening 
of the new Acropolis Museum on Saturday.  Papers report Greek TV 
channels comment the cancellation "came in reaction to Greek 
pressure" regarding the EU's statement June 11th regarding "deep 
concerns about the lack of progress in the implementation of the 
judgments in the Turkish cases of Hulki G|nes, Ggmen and Sylemez." 
 
 
The U.S. May Use Turkish Ports and Harbors (Haberturk) 
Saturday's Zaman, Yeni Safak and Aksam report Ambassador James 
Jeffrey told NTV American troops may use Turkish bases and harbors 
during a U.S. withdrawal from Iraq, which is scheduled to begin June 
¶30.  "We haven't come up with concrete plans yet, but we have a 
great deal of equipment there and some of this equipment will be 
left in Iraq, some will be transferred to Afghanistan, some may be 
pulled out and one way to pull it out would be through Turkey," 
Jeffrey said.  "We have various agreements that would cover at least 
part of this, we have the Incirlik air hub that we share with 
Turkey.  And we would take a look at whether there are 
possibilities, particularly to move bulk materials out." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and mainstream Aksam say Jeffrey said 
technical talks with Turkish officials were underway whereas 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says the parties have not reached deal on 
concrete plans so far. 
 
Izmir 'Republic Rally' Held with Modest Participation 
This weekend's "Republic Rally" in support of secularism was held in 
Izmir with a participation of 10,000 - immensely lower than what was 
at the rally held last year, which was 1.5 million demonstrators. 
The participants protested the ruling AKP and the detention of 
intellectuals under the controversial 'Ergenekon' probe in a 
peaceful gathering, say reports. 
 
Davutoglu: Turkey's Face Has Been Turned to Europe Since The 19th 
Century 
Mainstream Haberturk reports that in a statement to German Der 
Spiegel, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said the EU entry bid was 
Turkey's "top strategic target," and that Turkey has turned its face 
toward Europe since the 19th century.  On a question about Iran's 
nuclear program, Davutoglu said that "each country had the right to 
use nuclear energy for peaceful means," adding that countries "had 
to abide to the agreements against the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons."  "All countries, including Iran, have to win the trust of 
the international community.  We are not willing to have nuclear 
weapons in front of our door," emphasized Davutoglu. 
 
The Green Intifada (Milliyet) 
Media note the street demonstrations continue in Iran despite 
religious leader Ayatollah Ali Khomeini's warnings during Friday 
prayers.  Mainstream Vatan headlines "Khomeini's Photo Is Burned!" 
and the article notes, "Demonstrations reach a peak," when, "Friday 
saw the strongest protests yet in Tehran as demonstrators burned a 
photo of the successor to the leader of the Iranian revolution." The 
paper adds that this "marks the first time the revolt has targeted 
Khomeini."  Vatan also reports, "Khomeini took a gamble by 
threatening bloodshed," and "Mousavi answered that gamble with his 
own," as he "defied Khomeini."  Leftist Taraf's correspondent in 
Tehran, Tugba Tekerek, reports in "The Demonstrators Won't Back 
Down," that "between the hours of 21:00 and 22:00 every night people 
shout from the windows of their homes 'Death to the Dictator,' and 
'Allahu Ekber,'" which Tekerek says "was a phrase used during the 
Iranian revolution to support the religious regime, but it's 
possible in this case that it is being shouted (in protest) against 
security forces."  Mainstream Haberturk reports in "Our Neighbor Is 
In Civil War," that "The rebellion started by Mousavi's supporters 
is growing due to Khomeini's threat during Friday prayers," and "the 
 
ANKARA 00000868  002 OF 004 
 
 
demonstrators are now targeting Khomeini." Meanwhile, mainstream 
Milliyet notes, "U.S. President Obama, for the first time, called on 
the Tehran administration to halt violence against its own 
citizens," and Ahmadinejad answered "Don't interfere in our internal 
affairs." 
 
In an interesting contrast, several pro-AKP and Islamist-oriented 
papers blame Mousavi for the continuation of violence.  Mainstream 
pro-government Sabah reports, "Mousavi's criticism of Khomeini is 
bringing forth an escalation in the events."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman writes, "Violence returned to the streets when, despite the 
warnings from the country's spiritual leader Khomeini, thousands of 
people filled the streets and clashed with security forces." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports in "Ultimatum to The West," 
that Ahmadinejad "abandoned his silence" and "sent a harsh warning 
to the West."  In addition, the paper emphasizes, "Iranian Foreign 
Minister Muttaki said Britain has been long trying to target Iranian 
elections" and "The British Secret Service is in Iran." 
 
Columnists Chime In on Iran 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Protesters are 
asking for their votes to be counted.  However, given their constant 
clashes with security forces and ongoing vandalism, it is quite 
possible they will be considered wrong even if they were acting with 
right intentions.  There is no way for Iran to transform into a 
velvet revolution, but at this point, it is possible that the 
Iranian regime can take some steps toward diminishing public anger. 
Such steps should start with revising the regime's current ideology 
which is based on creating tension through foreign enemies.  It is 
certain that following Obama's strategic initiative for dialogue, 
Iran has lost its balance which was designed on the threat of war 
with Israel and the U.S." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "There are more reasons 
every day why Turkey has to watch Iran closely.  Western diplomats, 
along with diplomats of Arab countries, ask why Ankara acted so 
hastily to congratulate Ahmadinejad.  Given all of this, Turkey is 
not in a position to properly comprehend the Iran developments.  In 
days to come, the Iranian regime will face difficulty ruling the 
country.   Given Iran's complex ethnic structure as well as 
discomfort among minorities, it is quite possible that Iran might 
descend into chaos.  The Mullah Regime will either implement a 
reasonable reform process or will try to enhance its totalitarianism 
through their 'foreign enemy' rhetoric.  Iran is headed to the point 
of no return." 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Washington has been very 
careful in treating the developments in Iran.  President Obama has 
picked careful language when commenting on Iran by emphasizing the 
importance of 'justice' which has a direct reference in Islam 
instead of the usual (Western) rhetoric regarding democratic values. 
 Washington also stayed equal to both sides of Iran and tried to 
engage itself to either Mousavi or others.  I wish Ankara were as 
careful as Washington, instead of speedily congratulating 
Ahmadinejad." 
 
Neda, The Symbol of the Resistance (Vatan) 
Media draw attention to the young girl Neda's death that has also 
captured Western media's attention.  As in Western media, Turkish 
media see it as both a symbol of the resistance and a symbol of the 
efficacy of amateur video postings on the internet.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports, "The Revolution Silences Neda," as "Iran is 
experiencing its most bloody street violence in the past 30 years," 
and "yesterday the whole world watched as a sixteen-year-old girl 
was killed" and "turned into a martyr of the resistance." 
Mainstream Sabah headlines, "She Died In Front of the World's Eyes." 
 Mainstream Haberturk notes "the photograph of the dying Iranian 
girl is a symbol of the rebellion." 
 
'Kurdish Summit' Held at Presidential Palace 
 
ANKARA 00000868  003 OF 004 
 
 
Papers report Saturday President Gul held a "summit meeting" with 
the NGO representatives from the mainly Kurdish southeastern 
province of Diyarbakir, in which "solution proposals" for the 
Kurdish question were discussed.  Diyarbakir representatives said 
for the first time, a solution was "close."  "President Gul took the 
initiative in the problem, which is hope-inspiring," they said. 
President Gul said, "We must find a solution ourselves.  The 
continuation of violence obstructs solution efforts.  Everyone must 
watch their wording.  We are going through a very sensitive period, 
we have to find a common language," emphasized Gul. 
 
Kurdish Language to be Allowed in Prisons 
Mainstream Hurriyet's webpage reports the Justice Ministry sent 
regulations to prisons that will allow Kurdish inmates to converse 
with their relatives in Kurdish.  The conversations will be recorded 
and analyzed by a translator.  If any conversation is found to 
violate the law, that person will be banned from speaking in 
languages other than Turkish.  In the past, conversations in other 
languages were banned even if the prisoner or relative did not speak 
Turkish.  The move is seen as part of the government's initiative to 
open up to the country's Kurdish community, and as part of broader 
steps being taken to meet the EU criteria, says Hurriyet. 
 
DTP Leader Ahmet Turk: PKK Ready to Lay Down Its Arms for a 
Solution 
Papers report Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP chairman Ahmet Turk 
told a party congress over the weekend in Adana that the PKK was 
"ready to lay down its arms" once a "solution" regarding imprisoned 
PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan is found and the PKK is brought under a 
"civilian project" in which the DTP could also take a role. 
"President Gul is good-intentioned, but the AKP government seems 
incapable," said Turk. 
 
Netanyahu: No to Golan Heights Mediation 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Israeli PM Netanyahu told U.S. envoy 
George Mitchell Israeli is not interested in indirect talks with 
Syria mediated by Turkey.  The paper says "Hareetz newspaper says 
this is because of Turkey's stance during the Gaza operations," and 
"Netanyahu said he didn't want to make any promises to withdraw from 
the Golan Heights."  Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "Netanyahu 
Opposes Turkey's Mediation."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
headlines, "Netanyahu Seeks Revenge for Davos," in a reference to 
Prime Minister Erdogan's outburst against the Israeli President 
during a panel on Gaza at the Davos World Economic Forum. 
 
New Regulation Introduces 'Indirect Ban' on Alcohol 
Mainstream Hurriyet and Milliyet report Turkish alcohol producers 
and experts raise their concerns over changing the regulations on 
sales of alcohol and tobacco products to put an "indirect ban on 
alcohol consumption."  The newly changed regulation drafted by the 
state-run Tobacco Products and Alcoholic Beverages Regulatory Board 
(TAPDK) that will take effect in July, alcohol products in public 
ads will not be allowed to be associated with other foods as well as 
geographical, historical and cultural icons in advertisements. 
Turkey's national alcoholic beverage, raki, for instance, will not 
be displayed together with its most popular accompaniments cheese or 
fish. 
 
Alcohol advertisements will be confined solely for people 18 and 
older, they will not include sexual and pornographic elements, 
notable figures as well as those who are withwith the charity 
organizations for children and youth will be banned in the alcohol 
advertisements, according to the regulation.  The press will not be 
able to use alcohol advertisements targeting children in their 
pages.  "If the aim is to protect the health of children and youth, 
then it is a positive development.  The new move, however, is likely 
to bear other implications when some of the government's former 
implementations such as to impose alcohol bans are taken to into 
consideration," said the education workers' union Egitim-Sen. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Lifesytle and Booze Sale 
 
ANKARA 00000868  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
Mehmet Y. Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The recent 
regulation on alcohol and tobacco sales is the AKP government's 
attack against different lifestyles.  Banning the sale of booze 
through the Internet and placing a three-year sentence on the 
offense is an indication of fascism as well as an indication that 
Turkey is turning into Iran, step-by-step." 
 
Suicide Bomb Attack Kills 73 in Kirkuk 
Media outlets report a suicide truck bomb has killed 73 people and 
wounded 194 others in Kirkuk in northern Iraq.  Ankara offered 
medical assistance to people injured in Saturday's suicide attack in 
Kirkuk without waiting for the aid request of the Kurdish 
administration of northern Iraq, report papers. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- On Tuesday, President Abdullah Gul will travel to Beijing on a 
state visit to strengthen the image of the Turkish market and 
Turkish products in China. 
 
- The ruling AKP's Nurettin Canikli said Turkey's economy has proven 
it has enough strength to overcome the economic crisis without the 
IMF loans. 
 
- DTP leader Ahmet Turk says violence cannot help solve problems. 
 
- A new motorway to be constructed in 22 years will shorten travel 
from Istanbul to Izmir to 3.5 hours. 
 
World 
 
- 21 people were killed in clashes between the police and reformist 
demonstrators in street unrest in Iran after the elections held on 
June 12. 
 
- Newsweek: Rather than giving the Iraqi Kurds gas money -- which 
would bolster their de facto independence from Baghdad -- Turkey 
prefers to get more gas for the Nabucco Project from Azerbaijan. 
 
- Iran spent nearly twice as much on U.S. imports during President 
Obama's first months in office over the same period in 2008. 
 
JEFFREY