09ANKARA764
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Fri May 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5751
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0764/01 1491047
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291047Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9772
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0065
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5802
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3881
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7331
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7210
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3793
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000764 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, MAY 29, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
PKK Landmine Kills Six Soldiers in Hakkari 
Media outlets report that at 23:40 Wednesday night, six soldiers 
were killed and 11 others wounded when a landmine exploded in 
Cukurca town in Hakkari province near the border with Iraq.  The 
remote-controlled blast occurred when a military vehicle carrying 
soldiers ran over a landmine believed to have been planted by the 
PKK.  Papers report the Turkish military said that right after the 
attack, F-16 fighter jets that took off from Diyarbakir and attacked 
a "crowded group of the PKK terrorists in the region of 
Avasin-Basyan" in northern Iraq. 
 
The pro-Kurdish DTP leader Ahmet Turk released a statement 
expressing "deep regret" about the death of the soldiers.  Turk said 
those supporting a democratic settlement to the Kurdish question 
meant people had to "take their fingers off the trigger."  Liberal 
Radikal notes Turk used to criticize the army for ignoring the 
ceasefire declared by the PKK.  Yesterday's statement, however, was 
different, says Radikal, quoting Turk: "The killings must stop in 
order to clear the way for politics.  We will not be able to solve 
our problems while the killings continue."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports analysts said Turk's condolences came swiftly and might 
suggest that the DTP does not want to undermine the political 
efforts aimed at ending the conflict.  In "Nasty Attack on A 
Historic Opportunity for Peace," mainstream Vatan writes "the PKK 
martyred six soldiers at a time when Turkey's president, its 
government and opposition were taking 'historic steps' to end 
terror."  Mainstream Sabah strikes a similar tone, and quotes 
analysts as saying the deadly attack came in the aftermath of the 
words of President Gul that there was a "historic opportunity" for a 
settlement in the Kurdish issue and the statement of CHP leader 
Baykal that the PKK "could be granted amnesty if it agrees to lay 
down its weapons." 
 
Hurriyet and the leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carry a statement by 
the U.S. Ankara Embassy, which denounces the attack.  Hurriyet 
reports the statement reads, "We will continue our cooperation with 
Turkey against PKK terrorism.   We are also encouraged by the 
constructive statements by Turkish leaders calling for an end to 
violence and a commitment to resolve differences through peaceful 
means." 
 
'44-Year Lease' Article Removed from AKP's Mine-Sweeping Bill 
Media outlets report the AKP government stepped back in the face of 
objections coming from the opposition to a controversial draft for 
sweeping the landmines along the border with Syria.  On Thursday, 
the AKP government withdrew the bill in order to resubmit it to the 
parliament again on Tuesday, with the article allowing the land to 
be leased for 44 years after the sweep is done.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
says PM Erdogan has approved the changes to the bill. 
 
Meanwhile, CHP Leader Deniz Baykal said, "The lands should be 
allocated to local people to improve the regional economy. The 
territory can be turned into a haven of agriculture under the 
state's guidance." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Debate on Sweeping Landmines 
 
Yalcin Dogan wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The landmine-sweeping 
bill did not even get support from the ruling AKP members.  The 
deliberate refusal to attend the parliament's debates forced the 
Prime Minister to reevaluate the situation, which ended up sending 
the bill back to the commission process." 
 
Taha Kivanc wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "It was wrong 
from the beginning to allow the use of territory for 44 years.  It 
was also wrong to put pressure on members of the parliament by 
imposing the bill's content.  Now the best thing is to separate the 
mine sweep and the use of land since the bill has been sent back to 
 
ANKARA 00000764  002 OF 004 
 
 
the parliamentary commission.  The use of the cleaned land should go 
to one of the local firms anyway." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Let's hope, even though 
belatedly, the government has realized the fact that the 
mine-sweeping bill was improperly composed.  There is a constant 
talk about the opposition being an obstacle in the passage of the 
bill, but fact of the matter is that it was not supported by a 
significant number of AKP members either.  One thing is very clear: 
If the revised bill separates mine sweeping and permission for the 
land for farming, support from the opposition parties is ensured." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "The ruling AKP 
made a mistake by insisting and imposing the terms as described in 
the poorly drafted mine-sweeping bill.  Despite the lack of support 
from its members, the AKP continued to force the debates.  The whole 
thing indicates a second political wound for the PM after the local 
election results." 
 
Pro-Kurdish DTP Drafts New Constitution 
Mainstream Vatan reports Turkey's main Kurdish opposition party DTP 
was drafting a new constitution in an effort to contribute to the 
resolution of the Kurdish question.  The draft prepared by DTP 
includes demands for "democratic autonomy" and "education in the 
Kurdish language."  It also brings changes in the structure of 
institutions like the High Board of Judges and Prosecutors, the 
Higher Education Board (YOK) and the National Security Council 
(MGK). 
 
Dervis Advises Turkey to Strike Deal with the IMF 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports the Brookings Institute deputy chair 
Kemal Dervis told the Forum Istanbul meetings on the global economic 
downturn that Turkey needs short term measures to revive domestic 
demand and long term measures aimed at creating a strong financial 
structure.  On a question regarding whether Turkey could attain 
medium-term fiscal discipline without the IMF, Dervis stressed the 
importance of striking a deal with the IMF,"The IMF has significant 
amount of funds, which are in high demand.  It'd be good if Turkey 
used those funds.  A constructive and forward-looking agreement 
should be made which takes Turkey's existing conditions into 
consideration." 
 
Meanwhile, papers report State Minister Ali Babacan sent a "message 
of confidence" to the business world, saying "Even if the IMF funds 
arrive, we will not loosen fiscal discipline." 
 
YOK Increases Theology Students by 115 Percent (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Turkey's Higher Education Council (YOK) 
board has increased the capacity of theology faculties by 115 
percent for the next education year, moving up the existing number 
of 2680 theology students to 5620.  State universities were given a 
15 percent increase while foundation universities were allowed a 20 
percent increase. 
 
The Eastern Mediterranean Heats Up (Cumhuriyet) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports "The Greek Cypriots' latest 
diplomatic maneuver could create serious tensions between the U.S. 
and Turkey in the Eastern Mediterranean."  The paper says that the 
Greek Cypriots' decision to allow a U.S. company to explore for oil 
and natural gas "violates international and could lead to a 
confrontation between the U.S. and Turkey," as "the area off the SW 
coast of Cyprus is within Turkey's maritime jurisdiction." 
 
The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued today a statement on 
the issue and said the following:  "Such efforts from Greek Cypriot 
Administration are not compatible with the ongoing comprehensive 
negotiation process.  These actions have a potential to cause 
tension and exhibit a lack of legality, which also damage the 
Turkish Cypriot people's equal rights and interests on the island's 
natural resources.  It was registered by the UN that Turkey has 
 
ANKARA 00000764  003 OF 004 
 
 
fundamental rights and interests on sea fields located 32016'18" of 
the East Longitude.  Naturally Turkey will maintain these rights. 
Under this framework, it is our hope to see actions with common 
sense to avoid tension-causing during the ongoing negotiation 
process." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish-American Relations 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Istanbul's Bahcesehir 
University is hosting a conference on Turkish-American ties, an 
event organized by the university's Center for American Research. 
There are vast variety of issues, from Iraq to Afghanistan to the 
Caucasus and the Middle East,that the two countries engage in close 
cooperation.  From a general perspective, there are many 
similarities between Turkish and American foreign policy lines 
especially with the Obama administration's priorities.  However 
certain differences come up when details and strategies are 
concerned.  Cooperation between Turkey and the U.S. will continue to 
go smoothly until one of these differences becomes a point of 
crisis.  The Iran nuclear issue, for instance, is subject to be 
problematic in the days ahead.  Most likely Washington will work on 
sanctions against Iran through the United Nations before the end of 
¶2009.  It remains to be seen how Ankara will respond to that." 
 
Israel Rebuffs the U.S. (Milliyet) 
Media note Israel has not heeded Secretary Clinton's call to halt 
the construction of Jewish settlements on Palestinian land in the 
West Bank.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines, "A Gamble from 
Israel to The U.S." and reports, "Despite the Obama administration's 
call to end the spread of Israeli settlements, settlement 
construction continues."  Liberal Radikal agrees in, "Israel Is 
Gambling with The U.S.," and notes, "While Obama is receiving 
Palestinian Leader Abbas, Israel is gambling with the U.S. by 
continuing to construct Jewish settlements in the West Bank." 
Leftist Taraf headlines, "The U.S. Says 'Stop' to Israel," and 
reports, "U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that she 
wants Israel to stop constructing settlements on Palestinian land," 
but "The Israeli government said they would continue with the 
settlements until the peace talks." 
 
Iraq Abuse Photos Show Torture, Rape 
Media outlets report former U.S. general Antonio Taguba told 
Britain's Daily Telegraph that graphic images of rape and torture 
are among the photos of Iraqi prisoner abuse that President Obama's 
administration does not want released.  Mainstream Sabah carries the 
headline, "Censor to Rape Photos." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
and mainstream Hurriyet quote Taguba, who oversaw the U.S. 
investigation into the abuses at Baghdad's Abu Ghraib prison, as 
saying he "agreed with Obama's decision not to release the 
pictures."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and Zaman report according 
to the Telegraph, the new photos depicted "much more serious abuses 
than previously documented" in Abu Ghraib.  Liberal Radikal quotes 
the general as saying "it's enough to describe the photos as 
horrendous." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- 72 civic organizations in the predominantly Kurdish city of 
Diyarbakir released a statement in support of the statements of 
President Gul regarding the Kurdish issue, and urged the PKK to 
support the peace process. 
 
- On Thursday, 35 were detained in anti-PKK operations in five 
provinces including Istanbul, Ankara, Izmir, Manisa and Van.  The 
offices of public workers union KESK and education workers' union 
Egitim-Sen have also been searched in connection with the 
investigation. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000764  004 OF 004 
 
 
- The Chief of the military General Staff (TGS), General Ilker 
Basbug is visiting the U.S. as the official guest of Admiral Michael 
Mullen; Basbug will also attendance the American Turkish Council 
meetings in Washington. 
 
- On Friday, President Abdullah Gul will travel from Kyrgyzstan to 
Tajikistan on the last leg of his tour of Central Asia. 
 
- The Turkish Central Bank says there were improvements in economic 
indicators over the recent months. 
 
World 
 
- U.S. seismologists say the nuclear bomb detonated by North Korea 
this week was about five times more powerful than the country's 2006 
test. 
 
- French President Sarkozy cancels his June 2 trip to Sweden, 
allegedly in reaction to the support Swedish FM Carl Bildt gives to 
Turkey's EU membership. 
 
- Muslim migrants in Greece will rally to press the police and the 
related ministry to apologize for a recent incident when a policeman 
defaced a Koran. 
 
- UNSYG special advisor on Cyprus Alexander Downer says there were 
no plans to change the structure of the UN peacekeeping force in 
Cyprus. 
 
- The UN labor agency ILO says the ranks of the unemployed could 
swell by 50.4 million worldwide this year because of the economic 
downturn. 
 
SILLIMAN