09ANKARA256
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4172
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0256/01 0481229
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171229Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8809
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9478
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5398
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3612
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7125
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6988
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3576
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000256 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Unemployment Reaches Highest Point in Five Years 
Papers report the Turkish Statistics Institute announced 
unemployment figures for November 2008 reached 12.3 percent, which 
marks the highest figure over the last five years.  524,000 people 
lost their jobs in the last quarter of 2008, and one in four young 
people have no jobs.  The total number of unemployed seeking 
benefits stands at 2,995,000, while two million more remain 
unemployed and have lost hope in their search for jobs.  Mainstream 
Milliyet and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet say the actual 
unemployment figure stands closer to 20 percent. 
 
Hundreds Detained in Demonstrations Marking the Anniversary of the 
Capture of PKK Leader Abdullah Ocalan 
Media outlets reported over the weekend and today that on February 
15, protestors across the mainly Kurdish southeastern cities such as 
Diyarbakir, Batman, Sirnak, and Hakkari as well as the southern 
cities of Adana and Mersin clashed with police on the tenth 
anniversary of the capture of the PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports about 400 demonstrators were 
detained and more than 70 others wounded.  The pro-Kurdish DTP 
leader Ahmet Turk told the press yesterday that police used 
"disproportionate force" during "brutal" efforts to quell the 
demonstrations.  "Erdogan, who showed off in Davos with his 
traditional but fake anti-Israel and anti-violence speech, is the 
one who is responsible for the February 15 incidents," said Turk. 
 
IDF: Mizrahi's Remarks on Turkey and Erdogan Reflect Mizrahi's 
Personal Views, Not Those of the IDF 
All papers reported over the weekend and today that an Israeli 
Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson said criticism of Turkey made by 
the Land Forces Commander, Major General Avi Mizrahi, "does not 
reflect the official position of the Israeli military."  Saturday 
papers reported Mizrahi said Prime Minister Erdogan should "look at 
himself" before accusing Israel of killing civilians in Gaza. 
Mizrahi accused Turkey of "massacring the Armenians many years ago, 
and massacring the Kurds today."  Mizrahi also criticized, "Turkey's 
occupation of northern Cyprus."  On Erdogan's call to expel Israel 
from the UN, Mizrahi said "in such a case, the international 
organization should expel Turkey as well."  The Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) protested Mizrahi's comments via diplomatic note on 
Saturday.  In a separate statement, the Turkish military said the 
general's remarks "could harm bilateral ties," and called on the 
Israeli military to "clarify Mizrahi's statement." 
 
Abant Platform Convenes for a Conference in Erbil 
Media outlets report academics, journalists, writers and researches 
met in Erbil for a two-day conference entitled, "The Kurdish 
Question - a Joint Search for Peace and the Future," which was 
organized by the Abant Platform.  Discussions during the meeting 
called on Turkey to open a consulate in Erbil and name a special 
envoy for the region.  Huseyin Avni Botsali, Turkey's consul general 
in Mosul, said Turkey was "Iraq's gate to Europe," and noted,  "This 
door will never be closed."  Around 100 Turkish intellectuals joined 
their Kurdish interlocutors in northern Iraq to discuss the various 
aspects of the ties between Turkey and the regional administration 
in northern Iraq, according to papers. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Abant Platform and the Kurdish Issue 
 
Emre Akoz wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Kurdish attendees at the 
Abant Platform meeting in Erbil were concerned about the name of the 
territory in northern Iraq.  Around 100 Turkish intellectuals refer 
to this territory as "northern Iraq" while some call it the "Kurdish 
Autonomous Region."  Moreover,  Kurdish intellectuals call it 
"Kurdistan."  Ankara considers the name "Kurdistan" sensitive and 
Ankara thinks that if "Kurdistan" is used, then, it will mean that 
Kurds are being recognized as a nation in Iraq and that will also 
mean that Kurds in Turkey will also be considered as a nation.  This 
 
ANKARA 00000256  002 OF 004 
 
 
is against our principles of a single state, a single flag and a 
single nation.  Therefore, we should ignore the name "Kurdistan." 
However, Turkish intellectuals who attended the platform did not 
think like this, as a matter of fact, they criticized this kind of 
mentality.  Nevertheless, Ankara's stance against the Kurds is 
changing gradually.  In addition, Ankara is also starting to see the 
Kurdish region as more of an opportunity than a threat." 
 
Mumtazer Turkone wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: " In order to 
establish a future with peace and stability, Turkey should learn to 
trust its own Kurds and the Kurds across its borders.  The Abant 
Platform Meeting in Erbil was a very beneficial start which will 
trigger many important developments." 
 
President Gul Visit to Russia 
Media outlets reported yesterday President Abdullah Gul returned 
home Sunday from a state visit to Russia and Tartarstan.  Gul told 
journalists, "The Russian and Turkish policies and viewpoints are 
similar.  President Medvedev and I signed a joint declaration aimed 
at bringing our ties to a new level, covering all areas of the 
bilateral cooperation."  Gul described his meetings in Moscow and 
Kazan as "very useful for trade and bilateral economic ties."  Gul 
added that in recent past, Ankara and Moscow had certain trade 
disagreements, including Turkish fruit and vegetable exports delayed 
at Russian customs, but an "efficient solution" would be found soon, 
according to papers. 
 
Double Praise for Ankara (Sabah) 
In top feature stories, media proudly report that U.S. President 
Barack Obama called both President Gul and Prime Minister Erdogan to 
praise them for Turkey's role as a regional leader.  Mainstream NTV 
reports, "Obama Called Gul and Erdogan to praise Turkey's regional 
leadership."  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "Obama Initiates First 
Official Contacts with Gul and Erdogan."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
headlines, "Obama's First Messages to Turkey" and reports, "Obama 
emphasized Turkey's leadership in the region and U.S. support for 
Turkey's EU bid."  Liberal Radikal reports, "Praise to Turkey from 
Obama" for "Turkey's regional leadership regarding the Middle East 
and Armenia."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Obama emphasized 
that he wants to work with Turkey on peace in the Middle East, 
ending PKK terror, and improving bilateral relations between Turkey 
and Armenia."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak notes, "Obama emphasized 
the importance he places on relations with Turkey." 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Domestic Political Debates; Talks with the 
IMF 
 
Taha Akyol wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "During the AKP's second 
term in power, PM Erdogan has shown his temper very often.  Even 
circles within the AKP complain that they miss Erdogan's open 
attitude when he was first elected PM, when he embraced everyone. 
Let me remind Erdogan of Lenin's wise words "Temper is a bad 
advisor."  Erdogan's temper is pushing him in the wrong direction on 
a variety of issues.  He must suppress his temper and avoid inciting 
tensions within the public; he should instead attempt to carry the 
public towards calm." 
 
Sukru Kizilot wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "Since no agreement has 
been reached with the IMF yet, we understand that there are many 
serious problems with the negotiations.  The most important problem 
is the IMF has requested that the government implement new measures 
to require explanations about the sources of one's financial wealth. 
 Unfortunately, the AKP government, and mostly PM Erdogan, do not 
approach this condition warmly.  Moreover, due to upcoming local 
elections, the government has postponed an agreement with the IMF." 
 
 
Sharia Takes Hold in Pakistan (Cumhuriyet) 
Non-Islamist media report with alarm that a deal reached between the 
 
ANKARA 00000256  003 OF 004 
 
 
government of Pakistan and the Taliban allows for Sharia law in the 
northwestern region of Svat.  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "The 
Taliban and Pakistan reached an agreement in which the winter resort 
area of Svat will be administered under Sharia law."  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports in "A Molla Coup" that "the Pakistan Administration 
has handed over the northwestern region to Molla Mevlana Fazlullah 
of the Taliban, who attack girls' schools, cut off heads, and 
confine women to the home."  In addition, Hurriyet says, "The 
Zerdari Administration has accepted the application of Sharia law in 
a former tourism center in order to put an end to armed 
insurgencies."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "Pakistan makes a risky 
decision in order to end the radical Islamist insurgency - Sharia 
law is allowed in one region of the country."  Under the headline, 
"America Strikes Pakistan Again with an Unmanned Plane, 28 Dead," 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "In the interest of ending the 
clashes between state security forces and the Taliban, Pakistan 
accepted the application of Sharia law in one region of the 
country," while, "Zerdari is expecting reactions from the U.S. which 
reflect anxiety that this will strengthen the hands of Al Qaeda and 
the Taliban." 
 
This Song Won't End, This Chavez Won't Go (Hurriyet) 
Media note that Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez is celebrating over 
a public referendum  to end constitutionally-mandated term limits 
for the president.  Leftist Taraf headlines, "A Lifelong Dictator Is 
Elected."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines, "Chavez's Huge 
Victory," and reports, "The Venezuelan leader wins approval for 
constitutional changes so he can run as a presidential candidate 
again and again."  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "Chavez Opens the 
Way to Lifelong Presidency."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "The 
Opposition Chokes Back Their Tears," as "The results of the 
referendum secures what Chavez wanted."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
headlines, "The Venezuelan Public Opens The Way to Chavez for an 
Endless Presidency."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines, 
"Chavez - The President for All Time." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- On Wednesday, Turkey will dispatch a frigate, TCG Giresun, with 
six commandoes aboard, to the Gulf of Aden to protect vessels from 
pirate attacks. 
 
- Opposition CHP's Hakki Suha Okay says his party will not support 
constitutional reforms proposed by "a government which is the focal 
point of activities against secularism." 
 
- The DTP Mayor of Batman, Huseyin Kalkan, is sentenced to 15 months 
in prison for "inciting hatred" when he voiced support last year to 
the DTP provincial head who said that any Turkish military attack on 
Kirkuk would be seen as one made on Diyarbakir. 
 
 
- Murat Tetik is sentenced to 13 years in prison on charges he acted 
as an "al-Qaeda commander in Turkey." 
 
World 
 
- On February 18, Kosovo will mark the first anniversary of the 
declaration of its independence.   "Serbia will never recognize an 
independent Kosovo," Serbian President Tadic is reported by the 
Serbian media as saying. 
 
- In his first reshuffle since 2005, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia 
dismissed two influential religious figures and appoints the first 
woman to a senior government post. 
 
- Secretary Clinton begins a one-week Asia trip with a visit to 
 
ANKARA 00000256  004 OF 004 
 
 
Japan. 
 
- Turkish Cyprus Airlines is to start in April regular fights to 
Tehran. 
JEFFREY