09ANKARA1207
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4835
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1207/01 2300443
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180443Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0562
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0251
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6162
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4087
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7495
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7383
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3965
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001207 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, AUGUST 17, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Holbrooke to Ask for More Troops for Afghanistan (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet carries a front page story which reports the 
U.S. Special Envoy for Afghanistan and Pakistan Richard Holbrooke is 
expected to ask Turkey to send combat troops to Afghanistan during 
an upcoming visit to Turkey. Hurriyet reports "Several U.S. 
diplomats have confirmed the troop demand," but, "Turkish Foreign 
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has denied it." 
Ocalan's 'Road Map' Leaks 
All papers:  Mainstreams Sabah and Vatan report that jailed PKK 
leader Abdullah Ocalan's "road map" for a solution to the Kurdish 
issue was leaked over the weekend.  The "road map" was scheduled to 
be announced in the Southeastern city of Eruh on Saturday, August 
15th - the 25th anniversary of the PKK's rebellion - however at the 
last minute the announcement was postponed.  Vatan reports that, 
according to sources from the government and the Democratic Society 
Party, Abdullah Ocalan's "road map for a solution" is comprised of 
six parts, the improvement of Ocalan's prison conditions at Imrali, 
a democratic constitution, the recognition of Kurdish political 
rights, negotiations with the PKK, the abolishment of village guard 
system and the application of general amnesty for PKK who lay down 
their arms and return from the mountains." Ocalan also reportedly 
spoke through his lawyers, saying that the solution plan should 
include "the recognition of the Turkish state by Kurds in Turkey and 
the state should accept the right of Kurds to become a democratic 
nation." 
PKK Ringleader Karayilan Interviewed with Le Monde 
Mainstream Sabah reports that while Turkey debates the government's 
Kurdish opening, PKK leader Murat Karayilan told Le Monde that 
"Turkey should apologize for the mistreatment of the Kurds," and 
then Turkey "should adopt Europe's democratic standards in order to 
resolve the Kurdish issue." 
 
Atalay Meets Families of Soldiers Martyred by the PKK 
Papers report Interior Minister Besir Atalay met with the families 
of martyred soldiers in fighting with the PKK to discuss the ruling 
AKP government's Kurdish initiative.  Mainstream Vatan says family 
members said Turkey did not have a "Kurdish issue" but a "PKK 
terrorism issue," and the families blamed the government for 
"engaging in partnership" with the "killers of their sons."  Atalay 
told the press after meeting families from 12 provinces of Turkey, 
"We have taken note of their expectations and sensitivities.  We 
respect them." 
 
Editorials on Kurdish initiative 
 
Mehmet Barlas wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The fact of the matter is 
the Kurdish initiative is the name of a searching process for 
finding ways toward democracy and peace.  At this point even PM 
Erdogan does not know what exactly it includes.  On the other hand, 
given the harsh stance from the opposition, one wonders what could 
have happened if there were a concrete proposal put forward?" 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The government does not 
look well prepared about the initiative but it is still a good thing 
to see efforts in this nature.  The PKK is the main factor to 
sabotage the Kurdish initiative as it moves forward.  In order to 
prevent such sabotaging attempts, the government should focus on a 
comprehensive democratization package and work with main opposition 
CHP at the parliament. Advancing democracy will be the right 
approach to address the problem and it will marginalize the PKK." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Along with the Kurdish 
initiative, PM Erdogan's recent meeting with religious minority 
leaders has been another important development.  Erdogan talked 
about the government's "struggle for democracy" during this meeting. 
 If it is not a common rhetoric for populism, democracy struggle 
requires full tolerance and upgrading standards of human rights and 
freedoms in their most advanced forms.  It remains to be seen 
whether the PM will act on this nature or it will remain another 
 
ANKARA 00001207  002 OF 004 
 
 
populist approach." 
 
Yasin Oktay wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The government 
took a risky path but it is certainly worth the effort. This is a 
process and will expand Turkey's horizon in the end.  It will also 
completely reverse the ongoing 'citizens are for the state' 
mentality." 
 
Erdogan Meets Minority Representatives 
Sunday papers report that in an effort to expand the scope of his 
government's "democratic opening" regarding the Kurdish question, 
Prime Minister Erdogan met with the representatives of minority 
groups in Turkey, including the Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomew 
I and Rabbi Ishak Haleva.  Addressing the representatives, Erdogan 
said his government will never get involved in regional, ethnic and 
religious chauvinism, reports Islamist-oriented Zaman.  Erdogan 
underlined some mistakes were made in the past, and added that his 
government was working to handle them.  Erdogan said that in all 
parts of the country, the problems were not merely psychological and 
sociological, but military, political and diplomatic as well as 
economic ones.  The PM said his government's investments in 
southeast Turkey totaled 13.5 billion lira.  Erdogan acknowledged 
there were problems in implementation, but added that the democratic 
initiative launched by the government would change many things. 
Mainstream Hurriyet said the discussions focused on the problems of 
minority foundations.  According to liberal Radikal, the minorities' 
clerics did not put forth any demands during the meeting. 
 
Ahmadinejad's 'Women's Initiative' 
Media note Iranian President Ahmadinejad's appointment of three 
women to his new cabinet as "an opening" or "an initiative" toward 
women.  Mainstream Hurriyet says, "Ahmedinejad announced in a live 
TV interview that this is the first time since the establishment of 
the Islamic Republic in 1979 that women will have seats in the 
cabinet."  Ahmedinejad nominated Fatima Acurlu for the welfare and 
social security ministry and Merziye Vahid Destcerdi for the health 
ministry and added that at least one more woman will be nominated 
for the cabinet.  Mainstream Posta headlines, "Reform in Iran." 
Mainstream Hurriyet comments that Ahmedinejad "launched the women's 
initiative in order to gain political support from women voters who 
played a positive role during the turmoil following the disputed 
election.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines, "Three Women 
Ministers in Iran," and hails the event as historic since, "This is 
the first time in the Islamic Republic's 30-year history that women 
have entered the cabinet."  Mainstream Haberturk headlines, "The 
Iranian Cabinet Is Opening Up to Women."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
headlines, "A Woman Minister Surprise in Iran," and the paper 
reports, "Conservative Iranian President Ahmadinejad has taken a 
surprise step by appointing three women to his cabinet," in "a first 
since the Islamic Revolution in 1979."  Leftist nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports, "Women will enter the cabinet for the first time 
since the Islamic Revolution."  Mainstream Vatan reports, "An 
Initiative For Women Ministers in Iran."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
headlines, "A First Since 1979." 
 
In a related story, Mainstream Milliyet reports that on Sunday Iran 
put 28 more activists and opposition supporters on trial for their 
alleged involvement in the post election turmoil.  French Academic 
Clotilde Reiss, who had been in jail since July 1, was released on 
bail.  Reiss was teaching French at the Isfehan University in Tehran 
and was accused of taking an active role in the protests. 
 
Dostum Returns to Kabul (Yeni Safak) 
Media outlets report exiled General Abdul Rashid Dostum has returned 
to Afghanistan on the eve of the presidential elections in the 
country on August 20.  Dostum is expected to be in the city of 
Sibirgan in northern Afghanistan today.  In a rally to be held soon 
in the city, the ethnically Uzbek general is expected to rally 
support for President Karzai in the upcoming elections.  Liberal 
Radikal says Dostum, who has won 12 percent of the votes in 2004 
elections, could help Karzai win the first round of elections to be 
 
ANKARA 00001207  003 OF 004 
 
 
held on Thursday.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak notes, "The U.S. 
Embassy in Kabul expressed 'deep concern' over the General's 
return," to Afghanistan after he has lived in exile in Turkey. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in, "Dostum Is In Afghanistan Prior 
to Elections," that, "Dostum, the ethnically Uzbek Afghan General, 
has lived in exile in Turkey and made a surprising return to 
Afghanistan yesterday."  Zaman also notes, "The U.S. Embassy in 
Kabul expressed concern over his return."  Zaman says American press 
has reported President Obama ordered an investigation into Dostum 
for massacring hundreds of Taliban prisoners.  Mainstream Vatan 
headlines, "The Banned General Dostum Returns to Afghanistan," as, 
"An important name in the alliance against the Taliban has returned 
to Afghanistan after a year-long exile," to "a crowd of supporters 
who were waiting to greet him."  A column in mainstream Hurriyet 
notes, "Karzai is making alliances with notorious Afghan figures 
like General Dostum," and the column reminds, "The Obama 
administration has initiated an investigation into whether Dostum 
committed war crimes," against Taliban fighters in Afghanistan. 
 
Tensions Prior to Afghan Elections 
Media note Taliban threats against voters has worsened the already 
tense climate of fear in Afghanistan prior to the elections this 
week.  Islamist oriented Zaman and mainstream Milliyet share the 
same headline, "The Taliban Threatens (Afghanistan's) Election 
Ballots."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak says "The Taliban Threatens 
to Cut Off Voters' Fingers," and the paper reports that security 
considerations are threatening the reliability of the vote, adding 
that "Karzai leads the opinion polls with 44 percent support." 
 
In a related article, leftist Taraf carries a front page story on 
how women's participation has increased in the Afghan political 
environment, "Even though women are still covered by their burkas, 
they are participating in rallies and expressing support for 
Karzai."  On the inside pages, however, Taraf notes, "The Elections 
Face An Open Threat from The Taliban."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
headlines, "Afghan Women's Stubbornness," and the paper notes, 
"Despite the threats against women, many are determined to vote," as 
"Afghan organizations are targeting the participation of 5 million 
women voters." In a related column, Hurriyet's Ferai Tinc harshly 
criticizes Afghan Leaders Karzai's attitude of "giving all possible 
concessions against women's rights in order to win the election," 
as, "The Karzai administration accepted demands from Shiite tribes 
for the sake of their electoral support and the government passed a 
law which fully violated women's rights and the role of women in 
society.  Women's rights have turned into a trump card that Karzai 
used like a bribe." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- MHP leader Devlet Bahceli criticized the AKP's Kurdish Initiative 
by warning PM Erdogan against "falling in the trap of separatists." 
 
 
- Independent MP Kamer Genc says the Alevis should establish their 
own party. 
 
- Turkey, the U.S. and Israel will launch Monday the "Reliable 
Mermaid" search and rescue exercises in the Eastern Mediterranean. 
 
 
- Cumhuriyet editor Ilhan Selcuk is hospitalized over the weekend in 
intensive care unit after suffering a stroke. 
 
World 
 
- A radical Muslim sheikh's call for the creation of an Islamic 
emirate in Gaza has sparked clashes with Hamas forces that left 21 
people dead and injured 121 others. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001207  004 OF 004 
 
 
- A huge car bomb explodes in the center of Kabul, killing seven 
people and wounding 91. 
 
- At least six people were killed in two bomb attacks on a popular 
restaurant in Baghdad. 
 
- Iran's ambassador to Syria Ahmad Mousavi says Syrian President 
Bashar al-Assad postponed his visit to Iran. 
 
SILLIMAN