10ANKARA46
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5662
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0046/01 0121238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121238Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1657
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0227
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6735
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4371
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7718
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7630
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4228
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000046 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, JANUARY 12, 2010 
 
Media Highlights: General McChrystal on NTV; Obama in 2010: Op/Eds; 
Secretary Clinton To Meet US Armenians; US-Turkey Model Partnership; 
Erdogan Warnings on Iran, Israel and the Iraq Syndrome; Cyprus 
Talks; Survey on Turkey's Orthodox Citizens; TV Spotlight 
 
McChrystal: "Turkish Soldiers Are the Best Communicators with Afghan 
People" (NTV) 
In evening news cast on 1/11 and today, NTV gave prominent play to 
their exclusive interview with General Stanley McChrystal, the 
commander of ISAF and American forces in Afghanistan.  General 
McChrystal lauded the contribution of Turkish soldiers serving in 
Afghanistan, saying, "The Turkish military has unique influence in 
Afghanistan.  They communicate with Afghan people very well and they 
understand the environment.  Their presence is important for the 
coalition's success."  On a question on the demand over Turkish 
combat troops to Afghanistan, McChrystal said whether it be civilian 
aid, development or military security, whatever Turkey does makes an 
"effective and valuable" contribution in the region.  The General 
said about the changing Afghanistan policy under President Obama, 
"One of the most important things we do is the protection and 
respect of Afghan people, and minimization of civilian losses.  We 
must try to convince the Afghan people that we are here for them." 
 
 
Obama in 2010:  Commentaries on Yemen and Security 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak's correspondent Ali Akel reported on 
1/11 that "The hope President Obama rendered to the Islamic world 
during his inauguration ceremony is losing ground in the face of the 
desperation in the Muslim world.  Except for some partial 
developments in Iraq, no progress was seen in Israel, Palestine and 
Syria, and the White House is unclear about the strategies to be 
followed regarding Afghanistan and Pakistan.  Confusion over a 
possible US intervention in Yemen makes the Muslim world 'clench its 
fist' again.  The Washington Administration conducts 'shivering' 
policies regarding internal and foreign policies but maintains its 
position on the issues of Iran's nuclear program and the closure of 
Gitmo.  President Obama had made a good kickstart on January 20 last 
year, and the world responded by awarding him the Nobel Peace Prize. 
 Let's see if 'Mr Cool' will be able to defuse the dynamites which 
had been placed under the Peace Prize." 
 
In Islamist-oriented Zaman, Virginia Commonwealth University 
academic Dr Fahrettin Sumer wrote a guest column that noted: "It's 
in the benefit of all to prevent Yemen from falling into internal 
strife and instability.  Therefore, it's important that the US and 
Western powers conduct their relations with Yemen by paying 
attention to the country's delicate balances.  Besides fighting 
against terrorism, Yemen must be helped in its efforts for economic 
development and democratization.  We hope that Obama, under constant 
criticism from Republicans for being soft on terror, will not be 
influenced to conduct Bush-style policies." 
 
Clinton to Meet Armenians in US (Hurriyet Daily News) 
Columnist Umit Enginsoy with Hurriyet Daily News reports that 
representatives of major Armenian-American groups are planning to 
hold talks with Secretary Clinton on the recent thaw between Turkey 
and Armenia.  Enginsoy quotes Armenian Assembly of America (AAA) 
executive director Bryan Ardouny as saying that "Turkey continues 
its counterproductive actions with respect to normalizing relation 
with Armenia" and that a meeting planned for sometime in February 
would offer "an important opportunity to discuss the US 
administration's efforts to hold Turkey accountable." 
 
US-Turkey Model Partnership:  In "Roadmap for Model Partnership with 
the US" mainstream Aksam columnist Cigdem Toker reports that Deputy 
Prime Minister Ali Babacan chaired a meeting of government ministers 
and private sector representatives to discuss the necessary 
groundwork for implementation of the model partnership proposed by 
President Obama.  The group saw US cabinet level focus on the 
partnership as positive and different from the earlier strategic 
partnership model. Foreign Trade Undersecretary Ahmet Yakici will 
 
ANKARA 00000046  002 OF 004 
 
 
chair a "model partnership team" with hopes for positive impact on 
industrial zone projects and military procurement. 
 
 
In the Headlines 
 
PM Erdogan Warnings: Israel Tensions Mount Today's media outlets 
widely cover PM Erdogan's press conference with Lebanese Prime 
Minister Saad Hariri on Monday, giving widespread play to his 
comments on Israel.  All papers report that Erdogan confirmed he 
would not participate in the World Economic Forum annual meeting in 
Davos.   Mainstream Vatan said PM Erdogan fiercely criticized Israel 
for its new attacks in Gaza where he said they used phosphorous 
bombs against civilians.  According to Vatan, Erdogan rhetorically 
asked:  "Israel bombed Gaza again.  Why did you do this?  Will you 
accuse them again for firing missiles? But there are no such 
happenings at the moment.  Israel gives the message that it is the 
superpower of the region and uses disproportionate force and 
violates UN resolutions."  CNN Turk reported that Israel described 
Erdogan's comments as "insolent scolding" in an MFA statement 
released late on 1/12. In the statement, the Israeli Foreign 
Ministry's defended its full right to protect its citizens from the 
missiles and terror of Hamas and Hezbollah and noted that "the Turks 
are the last who can preach morality to the State of Israel." 
 
PM Erdogan Warning on Iran Gets Major Play 
WashingtonTV and other online outlets were quick to report on 
Erdogan's comments late on 1/11 under the headline "Turkey Slams 
Western Pressure over Iran Nuclear Program."  The online services 
noted that "Erdogan criticized major powers for pressuring Iran on 
its nuclear program while tolerating Israel's assumed nuclear 
arsenal" while also "blasting Israeli violations of Lebanese 
airspace and air strikes in the Gaza Strip."  Islamist Today's Zaman 
on line noted that Erdogan was "actually commenting on the Iranian 
nuclear issues" and that "Erdogan noted that Turkey was warning the 
Iranians against their bid for nuclear weapons." 
 
The semi official wire service Anadolu Ajansi carried Erdogan's 
remarks as follows:  "This is about peace in this region, this is 
what we are sensitive about.  We stand against whoever and whatever 
threatens the regional peace.  If you want to establish peace, you 
have to act together with peace seekers.  Otherwise peace in the 
region cannot be achieved.  Of course the region cannot bear a new 
Iraq Syndrome.  We do not want to have this again in this region. 
Arguments with Iran are about nuclear weapons.  Our stance is clear 
on this matter.  We do not approve any country in this region to go 
for nuclear weapons.  We tell this to our Iranian friends and 
brothers as well.  But at the same time, there are nuclear weapons 
in Israel too.  Those who warn Iran do not make a similar warning to 
Israel.  There is a problem here.  On this issue, the permanent 5 
have to be fair.  They have to issue a similar warning to Israel. 
Because there are nuclear weapons there.  Israel has never denied 
having nuclear weapons, on the contrary, Israel has acknowledged 
this.  And they have used weapons of mass destruction, i.e. 
phosphorus bombs in Gaza.  Nobody can argue that phosphorus bombs 
are not weapons of mass destruction.  We have seen it, we lived 
through it.  Thus we have a message to the voice of conscience, a 
message to the voice of humanity: we will be fair.  Our approach to 
this region will be fair.   If we don't act fairly, then the problem 
will not only hit [damage] this region but also it will spread out 
through other regions.  Peace in the Middle East is peace for the 
entire world, and uneasiness in the Middle East is an uneasiness for 
the world.  Therefore we attach great importance to Middle East 
peace." (US Embassy translation) 
 
Commentary on Erdogan and Iran:  Analyzing PM Erdogan's comments on 
Iran and Israel, "Government remains skeptical to the US approach on 
Iran" writes Murat Yetkin in liberal Radikal.  In "Erdogan Warns the 
US About Iran" he says: "What PM Erdogan said was a disclosure of 
Ankara's position regarding tension with the Iran issue which is on 
the verge of escalating particularly after remarks by General 
 
ANKARA 00000046  003 OF 004 
 
 
Petreaus.  When a US commander talks about bombing Iran which is 
located right between Iraq and Afghanistan, it is more serious than 
it seems.  Erdogan considers Washington's approach as another Iraq 
syndrome like it is looking for an excuse to attack."  Noting that 
Turkey remains the only NATO member who is skeptical about US 
approach to the Iran nuclear issue, the columnist concludes: "Turkey 
wants no nuclear weapons around itself and that covers not only Iran 
but Israel as well.  Ankara is asking Washington to work on Iran 
nuclear issue by being fair and not causing any damage to the world 
peace by using force.  Turkey strongly believes that a military 
option with Iran will lead to global problems." 
 
Cypriot Leaders: "We Will Continue Negotiations Until the End" 
(Sabah) 
All papers today report that the Cypriot leaders launched 
intensified talks under the shadow of the Greek Cypriot refusal of 
Turkish proposals.  However, mainstream Sabah highlights that 
following nine hour meeting between Turkish Cypriot leader Talat and 
Greek Cypriot leader Hristofyas, the leaders stressed that none of 
the parties will run away from the negotiations and they will 
continue until the end.  Hurriyet headline reads "The Summit Starts 
With Crisis Again", Liberal Radikal headline reads "All Hopes for 
Solution in Cyprus Depends on the Talks," 
Intellectual/Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines the talks as "Most 
Critical Talks Started in Cyprus" and reports that the talks has 
high importance especially for Turkish-Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali 
Talat.  If no concrete decision comes out of talks, it is likely 
that Talat will lose his chair at the elections in April.  Columnist 
Sami Kohen in mainstream Milliyet notes a fundamental difference 
between the two sides:  "Turkish Cypriots are targeting a loose 
federation system while Greek Cypriots are determined to have a 
centralized federation.  No significance can come out as long as 
this fundamental difference remains." 
 
Poll: Orthodox Turks Concerned of Their Security (Cumhuriyet) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries a public opinion survey 
headlined "How non-Muslims live in Turkey, and what they want."  The 
survey was conducted January 7-9 by Eurasia Public opinion Research 
Center (AKAM) through face-to-face interviews with 820 Orthodox 
citizens in the country.  66.6 percent of the respondents said they 
faced "discrimination," and 77 percent said they were concerned of 
their security, since they were non-Muslims.  With regard to the 
Orthodox citizens' most important expectations from the Turkish 
government, 47.8 percent responded by saying "the reopening of Halki 
Seminary," 44.6 percent "the recognition of the Patriarchate's 
Ecumenism," and 5.2 percent "respect to our efforts to spread our 
religion." 
 
Erdogan to Strengthen Ties with Moscow 
In "Erdogan to Moscow in Search of Alliance" Hurriyet Daily News is 
reporting that Turkey and Russia will set up a strategic cooperation 
working group co-chaired at the prime ministerial level when PM 
Erdogan meets with PM Putin on Wednesday.  Accompanied by five 
cabinet members and a group of businessmen, Hurriyet Daily News 
reports that talks will focus on strengthening energy and business 
ties and according to a Turkish official find "a mechanism to 
prevent any more crises and put the relations on a sound footing." 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan goes to Russia on January 12.  Energy will be 
the main issue on the agenda. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan said Turkey was "very close" to reaching a 
long-delayed deal with the IMF. 
 
Foreign Minister Davutoglu is in the UK on an official visit to meet 
with his British counterpart Miliband.  Davutoglu will deliver a 
speech at the King's College. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will be given the King Faisal Award, known as 
 
ANKARA 00000046  004 OF 004 
 
 
the Nobel Prize of the Arab world. 
 
CHP leader Baykal insists the popularity of AKP was declining, and 
urges PM Erdogan to reveal the results of the public opinion polls 
he was conducting. 
 
The newly founded Kurdish party BDP will hold a convention February 
¶1. 
 
Italian PM Berlusconi returned to official duties a month after he 
was injured by an attacker in Milan. 
 
SILLIMAN