10ANKARA175
Science Envoy Finds Strong Programs, Opportunities in
Wed Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #0175/01 0341232
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031232Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1984
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 1000UNCLAS ANKARA 000175 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/STC: William Lawrence 
STATE please pass to OSTP: Jason Rao 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SENV TU
SUBJECT:  Science Envoy Finds Strong Programs, Opportunities in 
Turkey 
 
REFERENCE: Ankara 22 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: On a January 13-15 visit to Ankara and Istanbul, 
Science Envoy Dr. Ahmed Zewail met with academics, government 
officials, and PM Erdogan.  He was impressed by the GOT's strong 
commitment to S&T development and the programs being implemented in 
academia and the private sector, all of which made clear Turkey's 
potential role as both a partner to the U.S. and a regional leader 
in supporting other countries in developing their S&T sectors. 
Several interlocutors noted the U.S. presence in S&T in Turkey has 
declined as that of the EU has grown, and all--including 
Erdogan--said they would welcome increased U.S.-Turkey 
collaboration.  The meeting with Erdogan will be reported septel. 
End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) U.S. Science Envoy Dr. Ahmend Zewail, Senior Policy Advisor 
Dr. Jason Rao of the White House Office of Science and Technology 
Policy, ESTH Hub Officer Manu Bhalla, and mission staff met with 
representatives of government and academia in Ankara and Istanbul 
January 13-15 to identify possible areas for strengthened 
U.S.-Turkey collaboration in science and technology.  The delegation 
was received warmly to quite enthusiastically by the various 
parties. 
 
ACADEMIA 
-------- 
 
¶3. (U) The delegation visited Middle East Technical University 
(METU) and Bilkent University in Ankara.  METU, a public university 
with more than 20,000 students (6,500 grad students) enrolled in 13 
departments, is proud of its science faculty.  Faculty are provided 
extensive funding and time for research while supporting their 
teaching responsibilities.  An impressive science park on the campus 
houses 240 companies -- some started through the university and some 
that chose the venue for the R&D tax incentives provided. 
 
¶4. (SBU) METU was established based on a U.S. university credit and 
program structure and maintains ties with several U.S. schools. 
METU staff told the delegation, however, that interest in student 
exchanges with European countries is growing while interest in U.S. 
exchanges is falling, largely due to the significantly better 
funding offered to foreign students by European universities and 
through EU programs.  Commenting on this shift, one METU official 
remarked, "Before, the EU was just a connecting flight."  METU 
President Dr. Ahmet Acar said METU receives very little research 
funding from U.S. sources--nothing in comparison with funds from the 
EU.  Acar commended the GOT's commitment to S&T and to increasing 
access to education throughout the country.  He worried, however, 
that the government might spread its efforts too thin and 
recommended even further funding increases and a strategy more 
focused on "networks of excellence."  In the region, Acar ranked 
Turkey second only to Israel in S&T and saw great potential for 
deepened U.S.-Turkey collaboration.  He suggested one avenue could 
be establishing networks of universities and/or technology parks 
generally to promote the exchange of best practices and to engage in 
increased advocacy, joint marketing, and joint projects. 
 
¶5. (U) At Bilkent University, Turkey's first private university, 
Zewail met with 14 professors with U.S. PhDs and discussed their key 
areas of research, ranging from lasers to bio-genetics.  According 
to Provost Abdullah Atalar, Bilkent's endowment is over USD 2 
billion, including 40 private companies that the university owns. 
Funds from these operations allow Bilkent to "reverse the brain 
drain" by hiring top professors, both foreign and Turkish. 
 
¶6. (SBU)Zewail also discussed the need for a change in Turkish law 
to enable universities to work with professors to commercialize the 
product of research.  The Bilkent professors noted that under 
current Turkish law, universities are barred from any ownership in 
the intellectual property resulting from the work of their 
professors.  Bilkent's attorneys have advised that this law also 
bars the university from buying out a professor's interest or going 
into a joint venture with a professor.  While this appears positive 
for Turkish professors, in fact, given the almost total lack of 
venture capital or scientific understanding in the financial 
community, it results in most Turkish research products being sold 
at low prices to foreign companies to develop. 
 
TUBITAK 
------- 
 
¶7. (U) The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey 
(TUBITAK) administers most of the GOT's R&D funding.  It is an 
independent body under the Prime Ministry and State Minister for 
Science, Technology and Information Mehmet Aydin.  TUBITAK also 
serves as the secretariat of the GOT's advisory Supreme Council for 
Science and Technology Policy.  TUBITAK President Nuket Yetis, 
representatives of the Supreme Council, and members of the TUBITAK 
 
staff met with the delegation on January 14. 
 
¶8. (U) In an overview presentation, TUBITAK Vice President Omer 
Anlagan said the GOT has set a target of raising R&D funding levels 
to 2 percent of GDP by 2013 and has made remarkable progress in 
increasing its funding to the current allocation of 0.7 percent of 
GDP, with almost USD 500 million in research funding available 
through competitive grants.  Turkey currently ranks 17th in R&D 
budget allocations as a percentage of GDP, and 18th globally in 
number of scientific publications.  Spurred by increased GOT 
funding, R&D expenditures in Turkey rose fourfold from 2002 to 2008. 
 Anlagan noted that although government funding of academia had not 
decreased, R&D expenditures by the private sector surpassed those of 
academia in 2008.  As a result of private sector R&D, Turkish 
companies lay claim to the world's fastest washing machine and 
Europe's most energy efficient refrigerator.   Anlagan summarized 
the various funding and incentives offered by the GOT for R&D, 
explaining that generally, the nationality of the researcher does 
not matter if the work is being done in Turkey.  He said if a 
company uses all the available incentives, it is cheaper to employ 
R&D staff in Turkey than in India.  He also highlighted the "Young 
PhD" career program, through which the GOT provides USD 500 million 
per year to support academics who have received their PhD within the 
last five years.  When Zewail asked why the government provides more 
funding for industry research than basic research, Yetis cited a 
need to stimulate private sector demand for R&D, which in turn 
should stimulate demand for basic research.  She added that without 
tangible results, it is hard to convince politicians to increase 
funding. 
 
¶9. (U) Yetis commented that she hopes we will soon have a 
U.S.-Turkey S&T Agreement, but simply to have one means nothing. 
She stressed the need for an action plan, with specific mechanisms 
and unique and meaningful programs to strengthen our S&T 
relationship.  Dr. Zewail responded that his vision for any 
collaboration that grows from this initiative is that it be 
sustained, be in an area of importance to both the U.S. and Turkey, 
and yield tangible outcomes that enhance development, preferably, 
with regional benefits as well.  He suggested forming a center of 
excellence as one possibility, noting he defines "center" more 
broadly than just a building and considers the people involved to be 
the key factor.  Yetis recommended identifying up front the desired 
end products for any collaboration. 
 
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
-------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) Minister of Industry and Commerce Nihat Ergun welcomed the 
delegation and the CDA to his office, saying he hoped this U.S. 
initiative would succeed and he would be happy to help with the 
undertaking.  He outlined the GOT programs that have significantly 
strengthened R&D in recent years, noting that 37 technoparks have 
been established in the last 7 years and 60 new public universities 
have been opened, such that each of Turkey's 81 provinces now has at 
least one university.  Asked to identify Turkey's particular areas 
of strength in S&T, Ergun observed that Turkey has a very young 
population with lots of good ideas.  He said the top sector for them 
is informatics, and they are very successful at software 
development.  Other areas where they excel are those especially open 
to new technologies, including space research, defense, medical 
research and nanotechnology. 
 
¶11. (U) In separate meetings, Minister of State for Science and 
Technology Mehmet Aydin and Justice and Development Party (AKP) R&D 
Representative Reha Denemec both highlighted for the delegation the 
AKP's strong push for science and technology over past eight years 
and affirmed that it will continue.  Denemec particularly noted the 
wiring of all schools for internet and expansion of internet-based 
learning and software.  Both Aydin and Denemec also welcomed the 
idea of broader engagement between the U.S. and Turkey on science 
and technology.  Aydin commented that President Obama's speeches in 
Ankara and Cairo were "very enlightening."  Denemec identified 
aviation, avionics, space and defense as areas of strength in R&D. 
 
¶12. (U) Manu Bhalla and Jason Rao cleared this cable. 
 
JEFFREY