10ANKARA203
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9393
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0203/01 0400615
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 090615Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2030
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0291
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6919
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4480
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7778
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7693
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4296
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000203 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - February 8, 2010 as 
prepared by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
Secretary Gates Visits Turkey:  Turkish media gave extensive and 
prominent attention to Secretary's February 5-6 visit to Ankara for 
bilateral talks.  All major papers, from mainstream to 
pro-government, highlighted his remarks at a press event with senior 
Turkish and travelling American press.  Reports focused on the 
Secretary's remarks on the PKK, Iraq, Afghanistan, Iran and the 
Turkey-Armenia protocols but some media regurgitated the 2003 
"hooding" incident of Turkish soldiers who had crossed into Iraq. 
 
Missile Shield.  Liberal Radikal headlined on Sunday "U.S. Knocks on 
Turkey's Door for Missile Shield" by reporting Secretary Gates 
proposed placing two radars in Turkey for the missile shield project 
against Iran.  Media noted he refrained from specifics regarding 
naval plans for the Black Sea. 
 
Regarding the PKK:  Mainstream Milliyet, in "We Can Not Solve by 
Killing All of Them," wrote that Turkish Chief of General Staff Gen. 
Basbug emphasized "we cannot solve anything by killing all of them," 
while explaining to Secretary Gates Turkey's views on the fight 
against terrorism. Gates told reporters that he shared the views. 
The U.S. executive said that "while speaking with the leader of the 
regional administration in the north of Iraq, Massoud Barzani, I 
have stressed the importance of placing pressure on the PKK to end 
violence." Gates said they also discussed the missile shield that 
would be established by NATO, adding that "we have discussed the 
possibility of erecting two radars in Turkey."  Conservative-pro 
government Turkiye says "Last Blow on PKK" emphasized the meeting 
between Secretary Gates and Minister Gonul and said they made 
important steps to put an end to the PKK's  terrorist activities. 
Gates said the United States attached great importance to the move, 
sending the commander of U.S. forces in Iraq, General Ray Odierno, 
to Ankara to explore joint steps. Gates said they also put pressure 
on Barzani, the leader of the regional administration in north of 
Iraq, regarding terrorist organization PKK.  Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak headlined "Predator Support Against PKK" and notes that 
Secretary Gates promised to provide military equipment, including 
three Predator unmanned aerial vehicles, flight control systems, and 
advanced communication and data processing devices in order to 
support Turkey's fight against the PKK.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
headlined "Turkey's Multi-dimensional Foreign Policy is Positive," 
and reported that Secretary Gates said that "Turkey is situated on a 
crucial geography. As such, Turkey's efforts in all fields must be 
received positively." 
 
Protocols:  Mainstream Aksam in  "On Gates Agenda:  PKK, Iran and 
Missile Defense" highlights the Secretary's comments, practically 
verbatim, including his remarks on the Turkey-Armenia protocols and 
the possible impact a planned March Congressional hearing on the 
genocide issue will have on their passing.  Aksam noted that 
Secretary Gates stressed "Turkey and Armenia have started down an 
important road.  For us, anything that causes difficulty in this 
process is objectionable." 
 
Odierno and Turkish Sensitivities: Hurriyet headlined "U.S. 
Secretary of Defense Gates Supports General Who Caused the "Sack" 
Incident," emphasizing that "Secretary Gates expressed his full 
confidence in General Odierno," and also noted that Gates said  "We 
give relations with Turkey the highest importance and to the Turkish 
people, and to Turkish soldiers, our greatest respect."  CNNTurk 
said on 2/6 that Secretary Gates "brushed aside" questions about 
General Odierno, by saying "I was managing a university in Texas. I 
do not know the details of the incident." Several columnists on 2/8 
questioned the US sincerity over Turkey's sensitivities.  Columnist 
Fatih Cekirge in mainstream Hurriyet wonders why the US sent General 
Odierno to Ankara while "he still has a bad reputation for putting 
 
ANKARA 00000203  002 OF 004 
 
 
hoods on Turkish soldiers."  The columnist says, "pictures of 
Turkish soldiers hooded with sacks cannot be erased from many 
people's minds.  The person, who ordered that incident, including 
the interrogation of Turkish soldiers by Americans, was General 
Odierno and he was in Ankara recently.  The US sent that General to 
Ankara in order to talk about disarming PKK and sharing intelligence 
in Fight against PKK.  It seems the US wanted to refresh our 
memories about that sad incident."  In mainstream Vatan, columnist 
Necati Dogru claims a "joint effort" between the deep state elements 
of the US and Turkey "to defame Turkish military" before the eyes of 
people. 
 
Afghanistan Reporting: Risky Patrols:  Tabloid Aksam observed that 
Secretary Gates on 2/6 confirmed "I didn't ask for more troops," 
from Turkey, which plays an "impressive," "varied" role in 
Afghanistan with its 1700 troops, two provincial reconstruction 
teams, several operational mentoring and advising teams and command 
of regional command capital, Kabul.  Turkish columnists on 2/8, 
however, had other views.  Mainstream Hurriyet's Ferai Tinc in 
"Risky Patrol" opines that in an effort to pull forces out of the 
"Afghan quagmire," the international coalition is embarked on the 
"Afghanization" of the war by training and strengthening the Afghan 
army and security forces. She notes that ISAF is using Turkish 
troops as trainers to get the Afghanis ready, and quotes General 
McChrystal that "following a training period, we will send Afghan 
troops to the field," accompanied by coalition forces.   Extreme 
Islamist Vakit observes in "You Can't Make History By Banking on 
Westerners," that the US and its supporters have "lost in 
Afghanistan after facing defeat in Iraq," and in a "last ditch 
effort" are increasing their soldiers but notes that "collaborators 
in Iraq, Pakistan and Afghanistan who place Western interests above 
those of their own people will soon be disappointed." 
 
Turkish-Armenian Protocols/Genocide:  Davutoglu Says "I Don't 
Believe This is a Coincidence" 
Mainstream Hurriyet reflects FM Davutoglu's uneasiness regarding the 
Armenian Genocide draft coming on the US Congress agenda on March 4. 
 Davutoglu described the act as the "last loop" of the Armenians' 
strategy and said "Nobody can expect Turkey to believe that these 
developments are just a coincidence.  We've been disturbed by the 
timing of the developments.  Turkey will not bow to April 24 
pressure.  Bringing this draft on the Congress' agenda now will not 
serve for the interests of the US, Turkey or Armenia.  This 
initiative will damage the process and will bring it to the 
bottle-neck situation.  We expect the Washington Administration to 
be sensitive on this issue." In "Tough Mission" columnist Semih Idiz 
in mainstream Milliyet on 2/6 comments on the tough task ahead for 
Turkish Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Sinirlioglu who left for 
Switzerland and the US in order to convince both capitals on 
Turkey's points on protocols.  Idiz warns "Sinirlioglu starts his 
mission with a very weak hand and it is surprising that Turkish MFA 
cannot see that weakness.  Having a written assurance from the US 
and Switzerland against Armenian Court's interpretation remains 
highly unlikely.  As Western diplomats emphasize if that happens 
then Armenia will ask for a written assurance about no linkage with 
Karabakh issue." 
MFA Statement/Ambassador Jeffrey: Sunday papers carried a statement 
by Turkish Foreign Ministry which calls for caution not to interfere 
in internal affairs.  The MFA spokesman Ozugergin mentioned an 
interview with Ambassador Jeffery in a newspaper (Sabah) which 
"carried remarks commenting on Turkey's internal matters."   Turkish 
opinion is divided.   A nationalist columnist, Yigit Bulut, in 
mainstream HaberTurk thinks MFA did the very right thing because 
"Ambassador Jeffrey was clearly interfering and he was making 
comments as if he was a colonial governor."  Islamist and 
pro-government Zaman's sister publication, English-daily Today's 
Zaman, carried an op-ed by by Ihsan Dagi, who labeled the MFA 
approach "old fashioned."  He concludes: "The old motto of 
non-interference in domestic affairs is no longer practical. The 
line of demarcation between the domestic and the international has 
blurred in this age of globalization. What goes on inside a country 
 
ANKARA 00000203  003 OF 004 
 
 
may have direct consequences on another country. Boundaries do not 
bind; ideas, crimes, individuals, goods, etc., travel across 
national borders. The fate of one country is increasingly tied to 
the fate of others.  For me the interview was enlightening in the 
sense that we heard what a senior American diplomat and old-time 
observer of Turkey thinks about politics, political actors and 
prospects in this country." 
 
Entrepreneurs from the Middle East:  Sunday's Adana-area Yeni Asir 
daily reported that the paper's entrepreneur Baybars Altuntas is one 
of five Turkish entrepreneurs who will participate in the upcoming 
White House Summit on Entreprenuers in Washington.  The paper quotes 
Altuntas as saying "Obama is the only President in the world history 
who takes action on this issue at the presidential level.  That is 
why he is the world's most entrepreneurial leader." 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Bosnia Herzegovina-Serbia to Mutually Open Embassies (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah and Hurriyet online report today that on 2/9, the 
foreign ministers of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Serbia will announce at 
a meeting in Ankara a decision for the normalization of bilateral 
ties.  The two countries will mutually appoint ambassadors.  The 
development is "historic" according to Sabah, which notes FM 
Davutoglu has been trying for five months for a settlement between 
the two countries.  Hurriyet comments Ankara is concerned with NATO 
recently failing to extend an invitation to Bosnia-Herzegovina to 
join the Membership Action Plan as well as with the EU for lifting 
visa restrictions for Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro but keeping 
Bosnia and Albania outside. 
 
Gul: Parliament Missed the Opportunity for a New Constitution 
(Hurriyet) 
Papers report President Gul, en route to New Delhi on Sunday, told 
reporters aboard his plane that the Turkish Parliament missed a key 
opportunity for drafting a new constitution.  The parliament had 
reached a consensus about a new constitution, Gul said, and stressed 
that the failure to adopt a new constitution had been a "pity." 
"Everyone had their own draft constitution, and the parliament 
should have handled this in the very beginning.  I don't know what 
they can accomplish now by changing the constitution piece by 
piece," said Gul.  Gul also said Turkey's "National Security Policy 
Document," which enlists possible threats to the country's security, 
did not and could not stand above the laws.  "This document has been 
considered as if it were above the constitution.  This is totally 
wrong; the document is neither a law nor an article of the 
constitution," emphasized Gul. 
 
Iran:  Ahmedinejad Orders More Enriched Uranium 
Mainstreams Hurriyet, Milliyet and Sabah report Ahmedinejad told a 
national TV audience that  "Even though we had the capability of 
enriching uranium by 20%, we proposed exchange to the Western 
countries.  We gave them 2-3 months period to reach an agreement. 
But they started a new game and I ordered for the uranium to be 
enriched  for 20% to be used in the nuclear reactor."   Sabah adds 
that SecDef Gates, during his Ankara meetings, emphasized that the 
time had come for the international community to pressure Iran to 
stop its nuclear program. 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
Israel is expected to deliver Heron drones to Turkey in the 
beginning of March. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will receive Monday Osama al-Tikriti, the 
head of the Iraqi Islamic Party. 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said he expected early elections 
this year. 
 
15 million elementary and secondary students will begin school 
 
ANKARA 00000203  004 OF 004 
 
 
Monday following the end of winter recess. 
 
Tokyo will lend Turkey USD 1-1.5 billion at a relatively lower cost 
this year.  Ankara has proclaimed 2010 as the "Japanese Year in 
Turkey." 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan said Turkish embassies would be established 
in 27 of 52 African countries by the end of 2010. 
 
A former Pakistan military official says former President General 
Pervez Musharraf could return to the country soon. 
 
PM Netanyahu has attempted to end a war of words with Syria, saying 
Israeli was open to peace talks with Damascus. 
 
The New York based Human Rights Watch (HRW) said Israel has failed 
to properly investigate war crime allegations against Palestinians 
in the Gaza Strip. 
 
Britain is to tighten the rules on immigrants entering Britain on a 
student visa. 
 
JEFFREY