10ANKARA91
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3047
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0091/01 0201542
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201542Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1757
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0249
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6801
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4413
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7739
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7652
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4250
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000091 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 20, 2010 
 
Media Highlights: 
 
How the US Is Playing 
 
US Missionary Weapons.  'Bible Coded' American Rifles in Iraq (Yeni 
Safak) 
All major papers carry an ABC report about passages from the Holy 
Bible inscribed on the binoculars mounted on the rifles used by 
American soldiers in Afghanistan and Iraq.  Mainstream Sabah says 
the serial number, 32JN812, on "Advanced Combat Optical Gunsight" 
binoculars refers to a verse in Holy Bible, "Those who follow and 
believe in Jesus will not be left in the dark."  Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak says such "mystery" weapons used by the US has recalled 
President Bush's remark of "Crusades" regarding the war in Iraq. 
 
Violence and Looting On the Rise in Haiti.  Media outlets continue 
sensationalist reports on the humanitarian crisis in Haiti. 
Mainstream Milliyet headline reads, "Violence Grips Haiti," and 
notes, "looting and violence are growing in Port-au-Prince, the 
capital of quake-hit Haiti, as international aid workers strive to 
provide the survivors with basic supplies."  Liberal Radikal carries 
a front page headline "Eyes of Haiti" with a picture of an orphan 
and expresses concern over the young victims in Haiti noting that 
"UNICEF fears that as many as 'two million children' have been 
affected by the disaster.  French and US governments are easing the 
entry of orphaned Haitian children into their countries in the wake 
of the devastating earthquake."  Radikal also adds the "US Aid 
campaign Continues" and says that "US troops provided security for 
water and food aid deliveries in Haiti." Islamist oriented Yeni 
Safak in "Don't Leave Me," observes "violence and chaos slow aid 
delivery in Haiti. Some of the search and rescue teams leave the 
collapsed areas for lack of security," and highlights "Turkish IHH 
has been looking after 700 orphans. Turkish search and rescue team 
GEA has also pulled three more people alive from the rubble."  In an 
attached story, Yeni Safak headline reads "We Won't Occupy Haiti" 
and quotes US Secretary of Defense Robert Gates that "the US is 
chiefly involved in distributing relief and will support the UN in 
providing security." 
 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Yerevan's 'Genocide' Obstinacy (Sabah) 
Media outlets report Ankara had been uneasy over a top Armenian 
court's reference to the "killings of 1915" in its justification 
about the "constitutionality" of protocols with Turkey.  The Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) sources said the "reference" is against the 
essence of the normalization process with Yerevan.  "This decision 
contains preconditions and restrictive provisions that impair the 
objective and spirit of the protocols," the MFA said in a statement 
Monday.  The Armenian court's January 12 decision says the protocols 
with Turkey conform to the Armenian Constitution, but stipulates 
that the agreement must not contradict Paragraph 11 of the 
Declaration of Independence, the section that offended Ankara.  It 
states, "Armenia supports the task of achieving international 
recognition of the 1915 Genocide in Ottoman Turkey and Western 
Armenia."  The MFA sources told papers the court's reference to a 
declaration rejecting even the questioning of the 1915 killings of 
Armenians at the hands of the Ottoman Empire is against the essence 
of the normalization process with Yerevan.  "Turkey, in line with 
its accustomed allegiance to international commitments, maintains 
its adherence to the primary provisions of the protocols.  We expect 
the same allegiance from the Armenian government," said the MFA 
statement.  Mainstream Haberturk says the ruling of the Armenian 
court "deadlocked" the process between Turkey and Armenia. 
 
Television stations are reporting a statement from Foreign Minister 
Davutoglu this morning as "he conveys his concerns over the protocol 
issue to Yerevan." 
 
Pundits from mainstream Milliyet predominantly dedicate their 
 
ANKARA 00000091  002 OF 003 
 
 
columns to the Turkish-Armenia normalization protocols focusing on 
interpretation differences.  In "Protocols Are Facing Erosion" Sami 
Kohen observes the current process is a result of "both sides 
bringing interpretation based on concrete differences which 
protocols tried to eliminate through diplomatic wording."  Given the 
accusation coming from both Yerevan and Ankara, the columnist 
worries that "it may lead to a complete cancellation of ratification 
procedure."  In "Armenia Protocol Faces Difficulty" columnist Taha 
Akyol considers it an important mistake by the Armenian 
Constitutional Court: "By approving the protocol but at the same by 
inserting genocide claims, the Armenian court broke one of the 
moving legs.  From now on, it will be very difficult to move ahead 
with the protocol process.  International diplomacy should realize 
this is a mistake coming from Armenian side that has to be resolved 
first."  In "Have Protocols Died Already?" columnist Semih Idiz 
notes "it would be too optimistic to believe" that the genocide 
issue will disappear after the protocols: "Eventually all matters 
come down to the Armenian genocide issue.  Even if the protocols are 
fully implemented this issue will not go away.  This is a long 
process which requires a considerable timeframe because both Turkey 
and Armenia have some unchangeable points on this matter." 
 
Energy Minister Yildiz: "Nuclear Agreement Will Come to Parliament 
Soon" (Sabah) 
Energy Minister Taner Yildiz stressed that, whether through opening 
tenders or without it, within the framework of laws and legislation, 
steps will be taken regarding the nuclear plant this year. 
Mainstream Sabah quoted Taner as saying "An international agreement 
will be prepared on this issue and will be submitted to the 
Parliament.  These kinds of agreements are above the legislation." 
Yildiz also said "regarding the 'buy or pay' project on natural gas, 
we expect a gesture from Iran and Russia for two to three years." 
Responding to a question regarding the six billion cubic meter of 
natural gas Turkey buys from Russia, Minister Yildiz said "We can 
say that this issue leans towards the private sector.  This is an 
opportunity." 
 
PM Erdogan: "Saudi Arabia as Important as the EU for Turkey" 
(Milliyet) 
Addressing a group of businessmen in Riyadh, PM Erdogan rejected 
allegations that there is a shift in Turkish foreign policy and said 
"we care about our cooperation with Saudi Arabia as much as we 
attach importance to the cooperation with the EU." 
Intellectual/Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines "Let's Lift Visa 
Procedures" and reports that PM Erdogan proposed eliminating visa 
requirements with Saudi Arabia and urged Saudi businessmen to invest 
in Turkey.  Zaman quoted Erdogan on concern for Gaza:  "There is 
nothing more natural than Turkey to show concern for the 
Palestinians and Gaza, not because we are Muslim but because we are 
humans.  Would we not send aid to Haiti because the majority of them 
are Christian?" 
 
The Head of Al-Qaeda in Turkey, Abu-Zer, is a Turk (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet reports, the head of al-Qaeda in Turkey, Serdar 
Elbasa - who is also known by the codename Abu Zer and Abu Hureyre - 
was captured during operations conducted by counterterrorism teams 
in Ankara and the southern city of Adana on Monday.  Information 
obtained during the operations indicates that Serdar Elbasa, a Turk, 
was serving as al-Qaeda's head for Turkey and the Caucasus region. 
Security forces found evidence showing that the terrorist 
organization was preparing for attacks against the police forces in 
Turkey and Turkish forces under ISAF in Kabul. 
 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
33 suspects were taken into custody in operations against al-Qaeda 
in Ankara and Adana. 
 
On January 25, the presidents of Afghanistan and Pakistan will meet 
in Turkey under the auspices of President Gul. 
 
ANKARA 00000091  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
On January 21, Turkey's business grouping TUSIAD will elect its new 
chairman. 
 
Israeli Foreign Ministry U/S Yossi Gal paid a visit to Ankara for 
"political consultations." 
 
Former Israeli Ambassador to Turkey, Alon Liel, said Israel suffered 
a "defeat" in its attempt to humiliate Turkey. 
 
Energy Minister Taner Yildiz says the Turkish Parliament is going to 
pass a "special regulation" for the construction of a nuclear plant. 
 
 
A London court rules that British couple David and Linda Orams must 
demolish their holiday home in northern Cyprus, hand the land back 
to the original owner of the property, and pay him damages. 
 
A Vatican document says Islamic extremism forments most of the 
conflicts in the Middle East and makes life difficult for 
Christians. 
 
The head of Boeing France said US aircraft manufacturer Boeing has 
received 851 orders for its long-range 787 Dreamliner plane from 56 
airlines. 
 
JEFFREY