10ANKARA214
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9712
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0214/01 0401306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091306Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2045
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0295
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6928
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4485
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7782
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7697
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4300
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000214 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - February 8, 2010 as 
prepared by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
News Alert:  Several television channels reported Tuesday morning 
that FM Davutoglu said he is considering a trip to Iran this 
evening, following his phone conversation this morning with Iranian 
FM Mottaki. 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
US and France Push the Buttons for Harsher Iran Sanctions (Hurriyet) 
 
Turkish media is awash with stories of Iran's latest response to 
international demands, with some clanging the bell of concern for 
Turkey.  In "Iran Alarms the World," mainstream Hurriyet says "Iran 
fakes the super powers again," and notes "Western powers signal 
tougher new sanctions against Iran while Iran argues it needs to 
power medical reactor for cancer patients." Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet in front page headline alerts "Iran Challenges the 
World," and says "against all reactions, Iran both arms itself and 
prepares to open new nuclear plants" in March and will begin 
enriching uranium on February 16.  In "US Pushes the Button for 
Sanctions While Iran Goes For Higher Enrichment," liberal Radikal 
highlights "Iran's uranium enrichment draws fresh sanctions calls." 
Mainstream Sabah in "Missile Defense System in Turkey," cites a NY 
Times story that said "if Iran possesses nuclear arms, Turkey will 
move toward a nuclear program. And only a US missile defense system 
would prevent this."  Meanwhile, CNNTurk and NTV report "Turkish FM 
Davutoglu leaves for Tehran tonight to discuss Iran's nuclear 
program." Utku Cakirozer in mainstream Aksam observes an obvious 
contradiction between Ankara's good will mission and Iranian 
leadership crisis: "At this point, Ankara has started feeling uneasy 
about this.  Therefore, the Turkish government is keeping a very 
close eye on upcoming events planned to mark the anniversary of the 
Iranian revolution on February 11." 
 
Afghanistan: Civilians on the Run 
Accompanied by photos of desparately fleeing civilians, Turkish 
media give prominent play to the pending NATO operation in 
Afghanistan.  Mainstream Milliyet  reports in "Joint Escape has 
Started" that as NATO prepares for its largest offensive yet, 
civilian residents of Helmand province are running away from their 
homes, noting that "although no definite time is given for the 
operation, civilians were warned by brochures thrown from US planes 
to leave the area."  Mainstream Sabah headlines "Tense Waiting in 
Afghanistan" and reports that "thousands of Afghans left Marja town 
of Helmand province already to run away from the NATO operation that 
is expected to start in few days time." 
Islamist-oriented/pro-government Zaman says "Big Escape Prior to 
NATO Operation" and cites Associated Press to say that NATO planes 
threw brochures from air to warn Taliban commanders that "if they 
don't leave the region, they would be killed."  Zaman adds that more 
than 10,000 US and British troops, along with Afghan forces, also 
will participate in the front." 
 
US, EU to Monitor Terror Financing (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reports the US National Security Advisor James 
Jones "called the European Parliament to duty" for allowing American 
inspectors to investigate EU banking data.  "The 'Terror Funds 
Monitor Program' to be voted in the European Parliament on February 
11 is a step and cooperation toward protecting the US and Europe 
from international terrorist attacks," said Jones.  Sabah comments 
European Parliament members to take part in the voting were 
"abstinent." 
 
Babacan: Turkey Considering Obama's Bank Reform Plan 
Mainstream Sabah reports that at a press conference, Deputy PM 
Babacan said that Turkey managed the last century's biggest economic 
crisis very successfully.  Babacan also supported President Obama's 
plan which considers certain limitations for the over-sized banks 
 
ANKARA 00000214  002 OF 004 
 
 
and said "Similar plans could be considered for Turkey.  We already 
started talks with the relevant organizations." 
 
EUCOM and Munich Conference Observations 
In mainstream Milliyet, Asli Aydintasbas recounts (2/8) her Munich 
Security Conference impressions, arguing that "the world is still 
run by white men over the age of 65, even though the Cold War is 
over and the global balances have shifted."  The writer observes 
Supreme Allied Commander Admiral James Stavridis with admiration for 
reading literature, for being in Facebook, and for being an 
open-minded person in general.  She writes: "The concept of a 
general in Facebook made me think how our generals are closed to 
communication."  The columnist concludes her article by talking 
about the busy schedule of Turkish Foreign Minister Davutoglu at the 
conference, stressing that in their contacts with the Iranians 
regarding the nuclear issue, "Turkish diplomats insist on seeing the 
glass full half, and believe that they can persuade the Iranians, 
while the Europeans see these contacts as a waste of time." 
 
First AWACS Will Be Received in 2011 (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reports that the first of AWACS planes (Early 
Warning and Control plane) will be coming to Turkey, in the latest, 
next year.  Qualification and approval tests of this first plane 
will start in March.  It is expected that, following the necessary 
tests, the first AWACS plane will be in Turkish Air Force's 
inventory by the end of this year or, latest in 2011.  The agreement 
for four planes and one support system was signed with the Boeing 
company in 2003.  Equipped with the highest technology, these 
planes, have the ability of separating the friendly and hostile 
planes away hundreds of kilometers, at the high altitude. 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Op-Eds Blast Government's On Turk-Armenia Protocols 
Following FM Davutoglu's criticism of the Armenian lobby activities 
in the US and the Armenian Court's interpretation, columnists dealt 
with the current phase of the normalization process.  In mainstream 
Hurriyet, Yalcin Dogan calls the Minister's complaint as "crisis 
foretold" and he expects a complete bang on the wall: "Everything on 
the protocol is working against Turkey's interests and 
expectations."  Cuneyt Ulsever in the same paper, however,  thinks 
Ankara has no right to lament because "we knew well that protocols 
did not cover a precondition on Karabakh and also the Armenian Court 
decision actually does not have to deteriorate the protocol 
framework."  FM Davutoglu talked about "being caught by surprise" 
regarding the developments, but Cuneyt Ulsever finds it 
unconvincing: "I think the Foreign Minister's remarks make a perfect 
example of Turkish foreign policy's situation, where it is stuck in 
between an ideological foreign policy and real foreign policy. As a 
result, Turkey is still trying to please everyone.  I suggest to him 
that pleasing everyone will fail eventually and to do his politics 
accordingly, instead of questioning coincidences."  In Islamist and 
pro-government Zaman, guest columnist Alin Ozinian questions 
Ankara's sincerity over the protocols: "Turkey constantly complains 
about the Armenian court decision.  If it wasn't the court decision 
it is very unlikely that Ankara would have been working toward 
finalizing the protocols.  Instead the process for ratification will 
be slowed down through parliamentary bureaucracy." 
 
Find Our Fathers' Murderers (Vatan) 
Media outlets report that relatives of 19 intellectuals who were 
murdered in attacks over the last 60 years gathered at a court in 
Istanbul on Monday to support slain Turkish-Armenian journalist 
Hrant Dink's family.  The protestors said the Dink case represents 
an opportunity to find out the "deep forces within state organs" 
that have played significant roles in political assassinations.  The 
families plan to send a petition to the Parliament on February 11, 
asking for the establishment of a parliamentary investigation 
committee to "research organized political murders that have been 
committed in Turkey since 1948."  The protestors carried banners 
saying, "For Hrant, For Justice" and "Face the truth."  Meanwhile, 
 
ANKARA 00000214  003 OF 004 
 
 
on the Dink case that is continuing, mainstream Aksam writes it was 
a "scandal" that the police reportedly "forgot" to bring to court a 
"secret witness" for yesterday's hearing. 
 
Lieberman Criticizes Turkey's "Anti-Israeli" Stance (Hurriyet 
online) 
Mainstream Hurriyet website reports that on Tuesday, the Israeli FM 
Avigdor Lieberman slammed Turkey for its recent "anti-Israeli" 
stance, but said Tel Aviv would continue efforts to rebuild ties 
with long-time ally Ankara.  "Every week to sharply condemn Israel, 
to say Israeli military forces have carried out genocide, to call 
operations to protect our citizens 'a crime against humanity'  ... 
This sharp anti-Israeli line cannot be repeated every week," 
Lieberman told Azerbaijan's Lider television during a visit to Baku. 
 "For 10 years we have supported very close and friendly relations 
with Turkey.  The recent changes in Turkey's foreign policy concepts 
were unexpected to us and not entirely clear.  We are doing 
everything we can in order to preserve relations at their previous, 
very trustful level and to maintain close cooperation in all areas," 
emphasized Lieberman. 
 
Jagland: Military Culture and Behavior Patterns Must Change (Sabah) 
The Council of Europe's new Secretary General Thorbjorn Jagland told 
mainstream Sabah Turkey must cease closing political parties, and 
instead ban individuals from politics.  Turkey needs to do more in 
changing its constitution, said Jagland, and stressed the military 
should also respect and comply with the new laws.  "Military members 
cannot be tried at civilian courts.  This is a problem, because 
according to the superiority of law, everyone should be equal in 
front of the law," emphasized Jagland.  He supported Turkey's 
Kurdish democratic initiative, adding that the overture would help 
Ankara in EU membership negotiations.  Jagland also noted the best 
way for fighting against terror would be providing the minorities 
with civilian, cultural and political rights, "as the Turkish 
government does today." 
 
Islamist Media Banned from NATO Istanbul Meetings 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports correspondents from daily Zaman and 
television channels STV and TV-Net, all Islamist-oriented outlets, 
had been barred from the NATO defense ministers' meeting held in 
Istanbul on February 4-5.  An STV cameraman was taken out of the 
meetings despite the fact that he had an accreditation card.  NATO 
Spokesman James Appathurai said NATO ahd nothing to do with the ban, 
and that it was the doing of the Turkish side. 
 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
Opposition CHP has boycotted a luncheon hosted by Parliament Speaker 
Mehmet Ali Sahin in the parliament for party deputy group chiefs to 
broker peace after a recent escalation of tensions in the 
parliament. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will receive the Foreign Ministers of Serbia 
and Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan has told his party members to start 
preparations for the general elections scheduled for July 2011. 
 
Turkey's Chief EU negotiator Egemen Bagis said EU process was 
important for Turkey, but stressed Turkey would not sacrifice Cyprus 
for the sake of EU membership. 
 
President Gul and his wife have visited landmarks in New Delhi in 
the first day of their visit to India. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan inaugurated 127 schools in Ankara, and 
addressed students. 
 
Turkish industrial output has increased by 25.2 percent in December, 
surpassing all expectations. 
 
ANKARA 00000214  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
A Turkish Central Bank survey shows yearend inflation to stand at 
7.5 percent. 
 
Former PM Viktor Yanukovich has prevailed in Ukraine's presidential 
elections five years after he was ousted in a populist uprising. 
 
Hamas has met with Russian FM Lavrov for talks on securing 
Palestinian unity. 
 
In a joint statement, the US and the EU have condemned human rights 
abuses in Iran. 
 
Swastikas and racial slurs have been painted on the walls of a 
mosque in the French town of Saint-Etienne. 
 
Pope Benedict XVI plans a visit to Cyprus in June. 
 
JEFFREY