08TRIPOLI308
LIBYAN PROPOSAL FOR MIL/MIL MOU
Thu Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO8880
OO RUEHTRO
DE RUEHTRO #0308/01 1011513
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101513Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3340
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 3838UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TRIPOLI 000308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL LY
SUBJECT: LIBYAN PROPOSAL FOR MIL/MIL MOU 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Libyan MFA conveyed to Post via diplomatic note a 
draft MOU on military cooperation.  While the Libyan proposal 
generally tracks with a proposed text conveyed by Deputy 
Secretary of Defense England to Libyan FM Abdulrahman Shalgham 
 
SIPDIS 
during the latter's January 2008 visit to Washington, the Libyan 
version makes significant changes to the preamble.  The Libyan 
draft includes assertions that the U.S. will work through the UN 
Security Council in support of Libya's independence, territorial 
integrity, and its right to defend itself.  The Libyan draft 
also adds language to the preamble committing the U.S. to 
acknowledge Libya's "voluntary renunciation of its WMD programs, 
its counterterrorism actions, and its prominent role in serving 
peace on the regional and international levels," and to "promote 
cooperation to enable Libya to realize its security and 
integrity." 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Embassy translation of the full text of the 
diplomatic note accompanying the draft MOU follows. 
 
 
 
The General People's Committee Secretariat for Foreign Liaison 
and International Cooperation (Americas Office) sends its 
compliments to the US Embassy in the Great Jamahiriya, and 
attaches herewith the draft Memorandum of Understanding between 
the General Interim Committee on Defense in the Great Socialist 
People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the US Department of Defense 
as regards contacts and cooperation in the field of defense. 
 
 
 
The General People's Committee Secretariat for Foreign Liaison 
and International Cooperation (Americas Office) avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the esteemed US Embassy the 
assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
 
 
(Seal of the General People's Secretary for Foreign Liaison and 
International Cooperation) 
 
 
 
To: US Embassy 
 
Tripoli: April 3, 2008 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The full text of the Libyan draft MOU follows. 
 
 
 
Draft Memorandum of Understanding 
 
Between 
 
The General Interim Committee on Defense of the Great Socialist 
People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
 
And 
 
The U.S. Department of Defense 
 
Regarding contacts and cooperation in the field of defense 
 
 
 
PREAMBLE 
 
 
 
The General Interim Committee on Defense in Great Socialist 
People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the US Department of Defense 
in the United States (hereinafter "parties"); 
 
 
 
- Being determined to enhance the existing friendship ties 
between them, and acting on the spirit of partnership and 
cooperation; 
 
 
 
- Approving the importance of the voluntary decision taken by 
Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to renounce its 
WMD programs, they [the two parties] assert the commitment of 
the United States of America to work through the UN Security 
Council to support the independence of the Great Jamahiriya and 
its territorial integrity, and to enable it to defend itself 
with conventional weapons and with the support of the United 
 
TRIPOLI 00000308  002 OF 003 
 
 
Nations in return for its voluntary renunciation of its WMD 
programs, its counter terrorism actions and its prominent role 
in serving peace on the regional and international levels. 
 
 
 
- And In response to both parties' joint commitment to promote 
cooperation in view to enable Great Socialist People's Arab 
Libyan Jamahiriya to realize its security and integrity; 
 
 
 
In Witness whereof, the parties hereto have entered this 
Memorandum of Understanding as follows: 
 
 
 
Section One: Cooperation Scope 
 
 
 
Both parties intend to cooperate in the field of defense in 
accordance with the laws, regulations and policies in force in 
their countries. 
 
 
 
1)- The purpose of this cooperation between both parties is to 
enhance international peace and stability. 
 
2)- The greater purpose sought by both parties is to build a 
permanent defense relationship based on mutual respect that 
contributes to the security of each party, and enhances peace 
and security with other countries in the Mediterranean region, 
and with the African Union and its member nations. 
 
 
 
Section Two: Cooperation Fields 
 
 
 
Both parties can encourage and develop bilateral communications 
and cooperation in the filed of defense, and have agreed on the 
following: 
 
 
 
a-       Sharing of information concerning defense-related 
issues. 
 
b-       Mutual sharing of information as regards execution of 
national military approaches. 
 
c-       Sharing of information and expertise and news bulletins 
with respect to operating and maintenance of military equipment. 
 
d-       Sharing of information as regards promoting security 
with the Mediterranean states and the African Union and its 
member states. 
 
e-       Exchange of expertise in the fields of staff, 
leadership and control. 
 
f-         To provide specialized training for Libyan military 
officers at the military academies in the USA. 
 
g-       To train specialists in the military institutions, 
including linguistic training inside these facilities. 
 
h-       To provide assistance to research and development 
centers and to exchange visits and expertise among the members 
of these centers in both countries, and to provide them with the 
right knowledge. 
 
i-         To conduct talks in relation to the law governing 
armed disputes, and the relation between military and civil 
authorities, and other legal issues as regards military service. 
 
j-         Any other issues mutually agreed upon by both parties. 
 
 
 
Section Three: Cooperation Planning 
 
 
 
1-       The two parties intend to set up a periodic cooperation 
plan, to be approved mutually, and that would specify the areas 
of cooperation in which they decide to proceed. 
 
2-       The two parties, whenever required, shall make more 
 
TRIPOLI 00000308  003 OF 003 
 
 
detailed arrangements regarding specific areas of cooperation. 
 
 
 
Section Four: Amendments 
 
 
 
This MOU can be amended any time, upon written notification and 
through mutual agreement between both parties. 
 
 
 
Section Five: Confidentiality 
 
 
 
Each of the two parties shall commit that any information either 
party obtains from the other party by virtue of this agreement 
shall remain confidential and not to disclose it to any third 
party, except upon prior written approval from the party 
providing the information. 
 
 
 
Section Six: Dispute Resolution 
 
 
 
Any disputes that might arise between the two parties regarding 
the interpretation or the implementation of this MOU shall be 
resolved through negotiations between the two parties solely. 
 
 
 
Section Nine: Entry into Force, its Scope and Termination 
 
 
 
1-       This MOU shall enter into force upon its signature by 
both parties. 
 
2-       This MOU does not include any provisions that entail 
commitments under International Law 
 
3-       This MOU shall remain effective unless terminated by a 
mutual agreement, or by either party, upon 90-day written notice 
submitted in advance to the other party. Should this MOU be 
terminated, all activities related to it shall stop, and both 
parties shall enter into consultations with a view to solving 
any pending issues. 
 
 
 
In Witness whereof, this memorandum is drafted today ~~~~.. 
2008, in two versions: one in Arabic and the other in English. 
Both versions shall have the same validity and legal force. 
 
 
 
(signatures) 
 
 
 
End text. 
STEVENS