09TRIPOLI657
MFA REACTION TO PROPOSED HUMAN RIGHTS DIALOGUE AGENDA
Wed Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO0579
PP RUEHTRO
DE RUEHTRO #0657/01 2241306
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 121306Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5151
INFO RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 5692C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TRIPOLI 000657 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/MAG AND DRL; PLEASE PASS NSC AND OVP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  8/12/2019 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV LY
SUBJECT: MFA REACTION TO PROPOSED HUMAN RIGHTS DIALOGUE AGENDA 
 
REF: Harris/Polaschik email 8/11/09 CLASSIFIED BY: Joan Polaschik, CDA, U.S. Embassy Tripoli, Department of State. REASON: 1.4 (b), (d)

1.(U) This is an action request; see para

¶6. 
¶2. (C) Summary: MFA A/S-equivalent Ahmed Fituri told CDA August 12 that the proposed agenda for the August 18 Human Rights Dialogue was "fine." Fituri, who had reviewed the agenda with FM-equivalent Musa Kusa on August 11, said the Libyan delegation would be led by the Minister of Justice-equivalent and would include representatives from the MFA's Americas, International Organizations, and Refugees and Migration Departments, as well as the General People's Congress. Fituri said the MFA did not intend to announce the dialogue in advance but was fully committed to issuing a joint statement at the conclusion of the talks. FM Kusa had requested that the statement indicate that the Human Rights Dialogue is the first in a series of regular meetings, "one part of a broader dialogue." Fituri suggested that the U.S. submit a proposed draft statement for consideration by August 16. MFA officials - including Kusa himself - appear to understand the importance of this dialogue to the broader relationship, but Fituri warned that other elements - including the General People's Congress - may seek to use the occasion to embarrass the U.S. on its own human rights record. Fituri stressed that pragmatic engagement by the U.S. will be key to the dialogue's long-term sustainability. End summary.

¶3. (C) CDA presented the proposed agenda for the first round of the U.S.-Libya Human Rights Dialogue (ref) in an August 12 meeting with MFA A/S-equivalent Ahmed Fituri and Americas Desk Director Mohammed Matari. Fituri, who had reviewed the agenda with FM Musa Kusa on August 11, said the proposed agenda was "fine" and that the Libyan Government did not have any changes. Fituri also promised to provide the Libyan delegation list no later than August 13, along with information on the timing and venue for the August 18 dialogue. Fituri said the Libyan Delegation most likely would be led by the Secretary of the General People's Committee for Justice (Minister of Justice-equivalent), and would include the MFA's Matari, representatives from the MFA's International Organizations Department and Refugees and Migration Department, as well as a representative from the General People's Congress' Human Rights Commission. Fituri stressed that he had spoken personally with Minister-equivalent of Justice Mustafa Muhammad Abd-al-Jalil concerning the dialogue and that Abd-al-Jalil was "fully on board" with the initiative.

¶4. (C) Fituri said the Foreign Ministry viewed this dialogue as a sensitive undertaking and wanted to ensure its success and continuation over time. To that end, the MFA did not intend to announce the dialogue in advance. However, the GOL is fully committed to issuing a joint statement at the conclusion of the talks. Fituri noted that he had discussed this issue with FM Kusa on August 11, and that Kusa had asked that the dialogue be announced as the first in a series of regular meetings, "one part of the broader dialogue." Fituri agreed that language noting that the human rights meeting was held "in the context of the agreement between our two countries to expand cooperation across a range of issues" would be very appropriate, and asked that the U.S. present a proposed draft statement for consideration by the MFA as early as Sunday, August 16, in order to facilitate the internal Libyan Government approval process.

¶5. (C) Fituri cautioned that although the MFA understood the importance and utility of these talks, there are others in the Libyan Government who may seek to use the dialogue to embarrass the U.S. Government on its own human rights record. Fituri noted that the General People's Congress representatives are likely to raise issues such as Guantanamo Bay and alleged torture cases. Fituri urged the U.S. Delegation to use this initial round of the dialogue to define the terms of reference for the talks, and to seek common ground on areas of mutual concern to both Libya and the United States. He said it would be very helpful if the U.S. could explain some of the concrete areas in which it could provide assistance to the Libyans, such as refugee and migration issues. Fituri believes that this sort of pragmatic engagement is essential to ensuring the dialogue's long-term continuity.

¶6. (C) Comment and action request: MFA officials - including FM Kusa himself - appear to understand the importance of the human rights dialogue to the broader relationship and, as evidenced by Kusa's August 11 meeting with Fituri, are making serious preparations for the talks. We agree with Fituri's assessment that the first session of the dialogue will be most effective if it focuses on a broader discussion of U.S. and Libyan goals for the dialogue and results in a clear, agreed framework for future talks. To help smooth the way for the joint statement, we recommend that the interagency develop a proposed joint statement that could be shared with the MFA on August 16, as requested by Fituri. We will submit our suggestions via email to NEA/MAG and request the Department's TRIPOLI 00000657 002 OF 002 guidance by August 16.POLASCHIK