06PHNOMPENH493
CAMBODIA'S LAND DISPUTE AUTHORITY:  WILL IT WORK?
Mon Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO6474
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0493/01 0720930
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 130930Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6248
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM  PRIORITY
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 1345C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000493 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS; GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/13/2016 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM EAGR KJUS CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA'S LAND DISPUTE AUTHORITY:  WILL IT WORK? 
 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Chief Margaret B. McKean, Reason 1.4 (b) and (d 
) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary.  The recently proposed national land 
dispute authority comprised of officials from ten ministries, 
 representatives from the three political parties, and NGO 
representatives remains a work in progress and has already 
generated controversy.  Three NGOs invited to participate 
have declined, citing the need to protect their role as 
independent watchdogs.  Sam Rainsy has defended the planned 
National Authority on the grounds that it has the potential 
to become an institutional solution for resolving Cambodia's 
intractable conflicts over land.  Other NGOs have indicated a 
willingness to participate; some, like LICADHO, have said 
that NGOs should form their own grouping and consult with the 
new Authority but not participate as members.  Kem Sokha of 
the Cambodian Center for Human Rights and other NGO reps will 
meet with the Prime Minister on March 15 to discuss land 
issues.  End Summary. 
 
New Land Dispute Body 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  On February 26, the Cambodian government issued a 
royal decree establishing a National Authority for Land 
Dispute Resolution, headed by Deputy Prime Minister Sok An as 
the PM's representative.  Also included in the new body are 
15 officials from ten different Ministries, Secretary General 
of the Cambodian Development Council (CDC), a representative 
of the Council of Ministers, a government attorney, 
representatives of the SRP and FUNCINPEC, and an unspecified 
number of NGO representatives.  The actual composition of the 
National Authority will be determined by a future sub-decree, 
as will the organizational structure of the General 
Secretariat of the Authority (which will be housed at the 
 
SIPDIS 
Council of Ministers). 
 
¶3.  (U)  The duties and responsibilities of the Authority 
will include educating the public as to the consequences of 
illegal land seizures, investigate and resolve land disputes 
-- particularly those cases that are beyond the political 
capacity of the National Cadastral Commission (which has the 
legal authority to resolve land disputes), monitor the 
resolution decisions of the Cadastral Commission, and prepare 
reports to the Prime Minister regarding land dispute 
decisions.  The roles and responsibilities of the General 
Secretariat receive and vet cases based on complaints, 
 
SIPDIS 
conduct field visits, arrange the meetings and take minutes 
for the National Authority, maintain documents related to 
land disputes, submit records to relevant courts if 
requested, and publicize resolutions decided by the National 
Authority. 
 
¶4.  (C)  On February 9, Sam Rainsy said that he was prepared 
to join and support the National Authority, at least 
initially.  The proposed body could be a viable institution 
for resolving the most contentious and politically difficult 
of the land disputes -- the estimated 25 percent that the 
National Cadastral Commission refuses to touch.  Rainsy said 
that the Commission has a backlog of over 1,800 cases -- an 
impossible workload and one that requires the formation of 
another body empowered to make tough decisions.  Rainsy was 
dismissive of NGO leader Kem Sokha for rejecting an 
invitation to work with the National Authority and instead 
requesting a meeting with the Prime Minister to discuss 
resolution of land issues.  Rainsy insisted that Cambodia's 
democrats should be seeking institutional improvements to 
improve the democratic framework of the government.  The 
opposition leader said that Cambodia's NGO community needs to 
move beyond simply fulfilling an adversarial role in the 
society, and work with the government on occasion when its in 
civil society's interest.  Rainsy noted that if the group is 
simply a front for giving the appearance of high-level 
government attention to land disputes, but is powerless to 
make decision, then he will be among the first to leave. 
Until that time, however, he believes that the opposition as 
well as civil society should take advantage of these openings 
with the government to further the democratic reform agenda. 
 
¶5.  (C)  On February 12, PM senior advisor Om Yentieng told 
us that the Prime Minister planned to meet with Kem Sokha and 
about 10 other NGOs on March 15 to discuss land issues.  CCHR 
later confirmed that the NGOs will meet with the PM at the 
latter's residence on the morning of the 15th; the group of 
NGOS reportedly met on February 13 to discuss their agenda 
and how best to consult with the government on land disputes. 
 Om Yentieng said he will continue to work with Sam Rainsy on 
several existing cases, as he has done already in the 
complaint lodged by some businessmen in Kampong Thom. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000493  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6.   (C)  An international advisor to the Community Legal 
Education Center (CLEC) told Pol/Econ Chief on February 10 
that CLEC leader Yeng Virak was disappointed that Kem Sokha 
and others initially rejected the invitation to work with 
National Authority.  He said that Virak and other NGO leaders 
had planned to meet to discuss the invitation and proposed 
work of the National Authority; instead, Kem Sokha and 
several others made their decisions to reject the invitation 
and spoke with the press before conferring with the other 
NGOs. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Land disputes are a growth industry in Cambodia, as 
borne out by the National Cadastral Commission backlog 
estimates.  The government seems eager to enlist the 
opposition in dealing with these thorny issues.  If the 
opposition can score some success with the new authority, it 
could give the opposition a political boost.  At the same 
time, there is a danger that the new authority could get 
bogged down in controversial, complex land disputes.  End 
Comment. 
Mussomeli