06PHNOMPENH1691
AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH ECCC CO-PROSECUTOR; FUNDING
Mon Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO5776
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #1691/01 2611019
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181019Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7323
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 2173UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 001691 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, S/WCI, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KJUS EAID CB PREL
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH ECCC CO-PROSECUTOR; FUNDING 
SHORTFALLS HIGHLIGHTED 
 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  On September 15, the Ambassador and 
A/DCM met with ECCC international co-prosecutor Robert Petit, 
who discussed latest developments of the Tribunal staffing as 
well as funding shortfalls.  Specifically, the Tribunal lacks 
money for public outreach, a proper detention facility, and 
victim/witness protection and other services.  UN 
Administrative officials have noted the initial budget is now 
widely acknowledged to be inadequate, and that some 
readjustments will need to be made as well as a future 
request to donors for additional support.  The international 
co-investigating judge, Marcel Lemonde, has arrived in Phnom 
Penh and begun assembling his office staff.  Petit welcomed 
the upcoming visit by INR and S/WCI staff, although noted he 
would be in The Hague during the first week of October.  End 
Summary. 
 
ECCC's Money Woes 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  At the latter's request, the Ambassador met with 
Robert Petit, the Canadian co-prosecutor of the ECCC, on 
September 15.  Petit said that his office is functioning 
well, staff are on board, and work is progressing.  He 
expressed optimism that the ECCC's outcome would be 
successful prosecutions and a sense of justice; otherwise, he 
underscored, he would not be in Cambodia.  Petit is aware of 
the political backdrop around which the ECCC's work is taking 
place, but assured the Ambassador that what happens in the 
courtroom will be according to international law.  He added 
that he is personally committed to ensuring the defense teams 
are equally up to the task; if not, the prosecution will not 
stand and proceed to trial. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Petit encouraged the USG to play a stronger role 
in support of the ECCC's work, citing the importance of USG 
assistance to other international tribunals in which Petit 
has worked.  The Ambassador explained current Congressional 
funding limitations, but noted that the USG is seeking ways 
to support NGOs in areas, e.g., public outreach, media 
support, where the ECCC lacks adequate funds.  A/DCM outlined 
Department initiatives to address both areas, but cautioned 
that funding was not yet guaranteed.  Petit confirmed that 
both areas are underfunded or nonexistent in the current ECCC 
budget.  He noted that he would like to do outreach and 
address Cambodian audiences outside Phnom Penh, but there is 
no money to do so.  The security budget is also inadequate, 
although Petit said that an international security official 
has recently come on board.  (Note:  The Japanese Embassy has 
informed us separately that they plan to fund the 
construction of a temporary detention facility on the ECCC's 
grounds to house suspects who are on trial.  While not 
envisaged in the orginal budget, the Japanese believe it can 
be done for USD 30,000, and plan to pay for the building out 
of existing bilateral development funds.  End Note.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Victim and witness protection is the most urgent 
need, in Petit's opinion.  It is unrealistic to expect the 
Tribunal's proceedings to move forward without any thought 
given to the needs of victims and witnesses, both in terms of 
personal security but also in terms of medical/psychological 
support.  (Note:  This was an area identified early on by UN 
deputy administrator Michelle Lee as a notable oversight in 
the ECCC's overall budget.  End Note.)  While it may not be 
necessary, Petit said that he needs the capacity to safely 
secure victims and witnesses in Phnom Penh but also have the 
option of moving them to a third country if the situation 
dicates.  At present, there is no budgetary provision for 
doing so. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Other than financial woes, the ECCC's work is 
moving apace, said Petit.  The rehabilitation of the court's 
administrative offices is progressing, international 
co-investigating judge Marcel Lemonde has arrived and is 
assembling his staff.  The Ambassador explained that USG 
officials from INR and S/WCI would be coming to Cambodia 
shortly to discuss with the ECCC future document and image 
requirements.  Petit welcomed the visit, but added that he 
would be in The Hague during the first week of October.  His 
staff, however, are well versed in what is required and would 
be prepared to meet with the USG visitors. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  In a separate meeting with A/DCM, an international 
administrative official from the UN noted that the ECCC's 
budget office has concluded that the original USD 56.3 
million three-year budget for the ECCC is now widely believed 
among UN and Cambodian staff to be inadequate.  Presently, 
budget analysts are looking at three possibilities.  First, 
an internal readjustment of year one money will likely take 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001691  002 OF 002 
 
 
place to better rationalize current needs now that the ECCC's 
work is underway.  Secondly, there likely will be additional 
outreach to donors for more funds.  The Japanese have already 
indicated a willingness to be helpful, as evidenced by the 
commitment to build a detention facility on the ECCC grounds. 
 Finally, Michelle Lee has the option of going back to New 
York and asking for more funds from the UN central budget, 
but has not done so. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Petit is receiving high marks from his staff and 
outside observers for his dedication and no-nonsense approach 
to the work ahead.  While aware of the limitations of his 
Cambodian counterparts, Petit nevertheless believes the ECCC 
process will be successful and in keeping with international 
standards.  He sidestepped our questions about any "surprise" 
defendents, as expected, but we understand from other sources 
that he has not ruled out an expansion of the list of likely 
indictees.  The issue of finances was discussed at length at 
the most recent ECCC "Friends" meeting on August 31, and will 
likely continue to be a topic of discussion over the next 
year as actual budget needs are identified versus the 
original projected needs that existed on paper.  End Comment. 
MUSSOMELI