07PHNOMPENH351
2007 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA
Mon Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO4588
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0351/01 0640115
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050115Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8113
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC 0655
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC 0020UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 PHNOM PENH 000351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/RSP, EAP/MLS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID/ANE 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF ELAB SMIG KCRM KWMN KFRD ASEC CB
SUBJECT: 2007 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA 
 
REFTEL: STATE 202745 
 
Other Government-Supported Prevention Programs 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2D. Does the government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking?  (e.g., to promote women's participation in economic 
decision-making or efforts to keep children in school.)  Please 
explain. 
 
The government, working closely with NGOs and international 
organizations, continues to be engaged in a broad effort to 
devote more resources to women's and children's issues.  Areas being 
addressed include domestic violence, gender and human rights, 
improved and more accessible education for girls, preventative 
health care, improved nutrition, more effective treatment for 
communicable disease, and improved access to family planning 
services and information.  The Ministry of Women's Affairs, in 
cooperation with NGOs and donors, has developed its own strategic 
plan of action to address trafficking and women's empowerment issues 
in Cambodia. 
 
In September 2005, the National Assembly passed a new domestic 
violence law.  The law criminalizes domestic violence, seeks 
recourse to protect victims, and authorizes authorities and 
neighbors to intervene.  The Ministry of Women's Affairs is 
currently conducting an information campaign, in conjunction with 
the German International Aid Agency (GTZ) and the Rockefeller 
Foundation.  The campaign consists of passing out pamphlets about 
the rights enshrined in the law as well as conducting townhall-style 
public forums throughout Cambodia where ministry representatives 
explain the law and answer questions. 
 
Government/IO/NGO/Civil Society Relations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2E.  What is the relationship between the government and officials, 
NGOs, other relevant organizations and other elements of civil 
society on the trafficking issue? 
 
There is good cooperation among the Cambodian government, 
international organizations and NGOs, the donors, and foreign and 
domestic NGOs on the trafficking issue.  The U.K., Australia and 
Canada provide funds and program anti-trafficking activities. 
Through training seminars, workshops and other programs, including 
awareness campaigns and treatment and rehabilitation of victims, 
there is enhanced cooperation between all parties on the 
trafficking.  Many NGOs refer the clients they have rehabilitated to 
MOSAVY to help trace family members and for reintegration follow-up. 
 NGOs refer cases of disappearance, suspected trafficking or abuse 
to the Ministry of Interior's hotline or to a hotline managed by the 
Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation.  NGOs 
and donors are  often consulted in the drafting of new laws or 
regulations. 
 
In late 2006, a World Vision conference with U.S. government-funding 
brought NGOS, the Ministry of Interior officials and foreign police 
officers together to discuss best practices in apprehending human 
traffickers and pedophiles. 
 
At the February 2007 Government Donor Coordination Committee 
meeting, donor nations pressed the Cambodian government to pass the 
draft anti-TIP law and to ensure more stringent penalties. 
 
During fiscal year 2006, the U.S. government provided funding to the 
Asia Foundation for a Counter-Trafficking-In-Persons (CTIP) program. 
 The project will attempt to improve coordination of NGO and 
government efforts to eradicate trafficking through better 
protection, prosecution and prevention. 
 
Government Border Monitoring 
----------------------------- 
 
2F.  Does the government monitor immigration and emigration patterns 
for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement agencies screen for 
potential trafficking victims along borders? 
 
The Cambodian government's ability to monitor land borders with 
Vietnam, Laos and Thailand, as well as its coastline, continues to 
be marginal.  Because of its limited resources, the government does 
not have the ability to screen for potential trafficking along the 
borders. 
 
The U.S. and Australian governments have helped the Cambodian 
government set up computerized immigration systems in its national 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000351  002 OF 007 
 
 
airports in Phnom Penh and Siem Riep as well as the overland border 
crossings of Poipet and Koh Kong.  The British government funded a 
border security project which provided training to Cambodian 
immigration authorities; IOM implemented the project that will end 
in spring 2007. 
 
Government Coordination on TIP Issues 
------------------------------------- 
 
2G.  Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication between 
various agencies, internal, international, and multilateral on 
trafficking-related matters, such as a multi-agency working group or 
a task force?  Does the government have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact?  Does the government have 
a public corruption task force? 
 
Several multi-agency working groups and task forces have been 
established for the purpose of coordinating, in concert with 
international organizations and civil society groups, various 
initiatives to address the issue of human trafficking.  On July 5, 
2004, the Cambodian government established a National Task Force to 
implement the MOU between the governments of Cambodia and Thailand 
on bilateral cooperation on the elimination of trafficking in women 
and children and assisting victims of trafficking .  On July 14, 
2005, the Cambodian COMMIT Task Force on the counter-trafficking in 
person in the Greater Mekong Sub-region was established.  On June 
16, 2006, the inter-ministerial working group to implement the 
agreement between the governments of Cambodia and Vietnam on 
bilateral cooperation on the elimination of trafficking in women and 
children and assisting victims of trafficking was established.  In 
November 2006, the Cambodian government, headed by the Ministry of 
Women's Affairs, agreed to establish a single National Task Force to 
implement all agreements and MOUs between the Royal Government of 
Cambodia and other countries on the elimination of trafficking in 
persons and assisting victims of trafficking. 
 
As part of the UN's Interagency Project on Trafficking in Women and 
Children in the Mekong Sub-Region (Cambodia, China, Laos, Burma, 
Thailand, and Vietnam), the Ministry of Women's Affairs chairs the 
project's Coordination Committee in Cambodia. 
 
The government currently does not have an active public corruption 
task force. 
 
National Plan of Action for TIP 
------------------------------- 
 
2H. Does the government have a national plan of action to address 
trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies were involved in 
developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the 
process?  What steps has the government taken to disseminate this 
action plan? 
 
With the assistance of UNICEF, the Cambodian government, led by the 
Cambodian National Council for Children (CNCC), is currently in the 
process of creating a second five-year National Plan of Action. The 
new plan, meant to cover the period 2006-2010, follows the National 
Plan developed in 1999.  The new plan will harmonize Cambodia's 
ongoing anti-TIP activities with the responsibilities Cambodia 
assumed under the COMMIT MOU of October 2004.  The new plan was 
developed and finalized in 2005, with input from NGOs and 
stakeholders, but is still at the Council of Ministers for final 
review. 
 
Background: The Cambodian government in 1999 established an 
inter-ministerial body known as the Cambodian National Council for 
Children (CNCC) to address child labor and other related issues; in 
July 1999, the CNCC worked with international and national 
organizations to develop the first national five-year Plan against 
Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation of Children (2000-2004), which 
delineated the responsibilities of nineteen ministries and 
provincial governments. 
 
The Ministry of Interior in July 2005 also developed an action plan 
to combat human trafficking and exploitation of women and children. 
The MOI's anti-TIP Department started implementing the action plan 
by disseminating the content to local authorities throughout the 
country.  The Deputy Prime Minister/Minister of the Interior called 
in to Phnom Penh all governors, provincial police chiefs and other 
TIP police to brief them on the plan.  During August 2006, Cambodian 
police raided nine brothels in Phnom Penh's Tuol Kork area as part 
of the implementation of this action plan. 
 
In October 2005, the Cambodian government, represented by the 
Minister of Women's Affairs, Ing Kantha Phavi, signed a Memorandum 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000351  003 OF 007 
 
 
of Understanding with Vietnam to eliminate trafficking in women and 
children and assist victims of trafficking. 
 
In October 2004, the Cambodian Minister of Social Affairs, 
Ith Sam Heng, signed a memorandum on combating TIP regionally under 
the Coordinated Mekong Inter-Ministerial Initiative on Trafficking 
process (COMMIT).  This memorandum placed Cambodia on a track to 
developing a National Action Plan and taking a regional approach to 
combating TIP.  The National Action Plan identified priority areas 
outlined in the sub-regional plan of action which was adopted in 
Hanoi in 2005; Cambodia has drafted this National Action Plan but it 
has not yet been finalized.  In May 2006, the six governments met in 
Phnom Penh to review their implementation of the Sub-regional Plan 
of Action, which was adopted on Hanoi in 2005. 
 
Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3A.  Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons - both for sexual and non-sexual purposes 
(e.g. forced labor)?  If so, please specifically cite the name of 
the law and its date of enactment.  Does the law(s) cover both 
internal and external (transnational) forms of trafficking? If not, 
under what other laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, 
are there laws against slavery or the exploitation of prostitution 
by means of force, fraud or coercion?  Are these other laws being 
used in trafficking cases?  Are these laws, taken together, adequate 
to cover the full scope of trafficking in persons? Please provide a 
full inventory of trafficking laws, including civil penalties, 
(e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt). 
 
The legislation most relevant to TIP is the Law on the Suppression 
of the Kidnapping, Trafficking and Exploitation of Humans, which 
covers both domestic and external (transnational) trafficking 
happening in Cambodia..  Other relevant laws pertain to the 
protection of women and children, and the Labor Law, which prohibits 
debt labor, slavery, and the labor of minors (under 15 years) - the 
latter situation is illegal but has no penalty under the law.  The 
Labor Law also prohibits the hiring of someone to pay off debt.  The 
Law on the Suppression of Kidnapping, Trafficking and Exploitation 
of Human Beings was enacted February 29, 1996.  The Labor Law was 
enacted March 13, 1997. 
 
According to NGO and government reports, although the Law 
on the Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking and 
Exploitation of Humans is considered a valuable legislative 
instrument regarding sex trafficking, there are many weaknesses in 
its implementation and interpretation.  The law lacks detail and 
contains unclear clauses that make enforcement difficult. 
Corruption and a lack of training, supervision, and resources have 
also led to major flaws in the implementation and effectiveness of 
the law. 
 
Cambodia's labor laws make child labor under the age of 15 illegal, 
but confusion regarding the issue of parental consent and the lack 
of specific penalties for child labor have prevented successful 
prosecutions of child labor traffickers in Cambodia. 
 
The Ministry of Justice, with the assistance of the Japanese 
Institute for Legal Development, has drafted a new Anti-Trafficking 
Law that is now at the Ministry of Justice for final review before 
being resubmitted to the Council of Minister.  With the 
recommendations from civil society and the Ministry of Women's 
Affairs, the law has undergone substantial amendment.  The new law 
covers both internal and external trafficking, and has 
extraterritorial jurisdiction.  Effective implementation will 
require comprehensive training of judges, prosecutors, and police in 
the provisions of the new law.  This will be especially important if 
penalties under the new law remain as currently drafted: giving 
significant discretion in sentencing to judges.  The Australian 
Government, through AUSAID, plans to provide training through its 
Asia Regional Trafficking in Persons Project (ARTIP). 
 
Penalties for Sexual and Labor Exploitation 
------------------------------------------- 
 
3B.  What are the penalties for trafficking people for sexual 
exploitation? 
 
The Law on the Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking 
and Exploitation of Humans includes a jail sentence of 
15 to 20 years for any person convicted of sex trafficking 
persons under 15 years of age; the penalty is from 10 to 
15 years for sex trafficking of persons over the age of 15. 
This law allows for the prosecution of traffickers as well 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000351  004 OF 007 
 
 
as other exploiters, such as facilitators, pimps, and brothel 
owners. 
 
3C. Punishment of labor trafficking offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for labor 
exploitation such as forced or bonded labor and involuntary 
servitude?  Do the government's laws provide for criminal punishment 
-- i.e., jail time -- for labor recruiters in labor source countries 
who engage in recruitment of laborers using knowingly fraudulent or 
deceptive offers that result in workers being exploited in the 
destination country?  For employers or labor agents in labor 
destination countries who confiscate workers' passports or travel 
documents, switch contracts without the worker's consent as a means 
to keep the worker in a state of service, or withhold payment of 
salaries as means of keeping the worker in a state of service?  If 
law(s) prescribe criminal punishments for these offenses, what are 
the actual punishments imposed on persons convicted of these 
offenses? 
 
According to Article 368 of the Labor Law, employers who employ 
children less than 18 years of age are liable to a fine of 31-60 
days of the base daily wage.  For the hiring of someone to pay off 
debt, the penalty is a fine of 61-90 days of the base daily wage. 
However, there are no cases of these laws being used to prosecute 
traffickers of children under the Labor Law, and lawyers have 
claimed it is not feasible to prosecute traffickers under this law. 
 
Labor export companies are licensed by the government to export 
Cambodian laborers to countries such as Thailand, Malaysia and South 
Korea.  There were reports of these workers falling victim to 
trafficking due to the exploitative conditions in destination 
countries, especially Malaysia, and a lack of monitoring and 
protection in the source country.  The labor export companies and 
the Cambodian Ministry of Labor acknowledge that the recruiting 
agents often retain workers' passports upon arrival in Thailand and 
Malaysia to prevent loss.  There were no cases of labor agents being 
held responsible for the exploitation of workers, or prosecuted in 
the courts of law. 
 
 
Penalties for Rape or Forcible Sexual Assault 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3D.  What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault?  How do they compare to the prescribed and imposed penalty 
for sex trafficking? 
 
Rape is a criminal offense, and punishable by a 5-10 year prison 
sentence, according to Article 33 of the UNTAC Law.  Although 
Cambodia's penal code provides penalties for rape, convictions are 
often not rendered due to the weak judicial system.  The penalty for 
sex trafficking of children under the age of 15 is punishable by 
sentences of between 15 to 20 years in prison; and for persons over 
the age of 15, the penalty is 10 to 15 years in prison. 
 
Prostitution:  Legalized or Decriminalized 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3E. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? Specifically, are 
the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel owner/operator, 
clients, pimps, and enforcers criminalized? Are these laws enforced? 
 If prostitution is legal and regulated, what is the legal minimum 
age for this activity? Note that in many countries with federalist 
systems, prostitution laws may be covered by state, local, and 
provincial authorities. 
 
Prostitution in Cambodia has not been legalized, but the activities 
of prostitutes are not criminalized.  The 1996 Law on the 
Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking and Exploitation of 
Humans allows for prosecution of exploiters of persons for sex work, 
such as facilitators, pimps, human traffickers, and brothel owners, 
with a punishment of 5 to 10 years if the exploited prostitute is an 
adult.  The penalty is doubled in cases of minors.  Prostitutes may 
not be prosecuted for engaging in voluntary sex work.  As applied to 
traffickers and other exploiters of persons for the sex trade, these 
laws are being enforced.  Under Cambodian law, the legal age of 
consent to sexual activity is 15, which is why penalties for 
offenses differ depending on the age of the victim. 
 
Government Prosecution of Traffickers 
------------------------------------- 
 
3F.  Has the Government prosecuted any cases against traffickers? 
If so, provide the numbers of investigations, prosecutions, 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000351  005 OF 007 
 
 
convictions, and sentences, including details 
on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and available.  Does the 
government in a labor source country criminally prosecute labor 
recruiters who recruit laborers using knowingly fraudulent or 
deceptive offers or impose on recruited laborers inappropriately 
high or illegal fees or commissions that create a debt bondage 
condition for the laborer?  Does the government in a labor 
destination country criminally prosecute employers or labor agents 
who confiscate workers' passports/travel documents, switch contacts 
or terms of employment without the workers' consent, use physical or 
sexual abuse or the threat of such abuse to keep workers in a state 
of service, or withhold payment of salaries as a means to keep 
workers in a state of service?  Are the traffickers serving the time 
sentenced:  If not, why not?  Please indicate whether the government 
can provide this information, and if not, why not? 
 
From 1996-1999, the Cambodian government arrested 342 offenders of 
sexual exploitation and trafficking.  From 2000-2004, the 
government's arrest record increased to 1,009 offenders, due to the 
formation on May 13, 2002 of the Ministry of Interior's 
Anti-Trafficking Unit.  The Unit consists of seven bureaus in major 
provinces and urban areas, as well as a section within the police 
departments of other provinces. 
 
The Ministry of Interior Department of Anti-Trafficking and 
Juvenile Protection reported 49 cases of human trafficking, 
involving 65 perpetrators, between March 2005 to January 2006, and 
ten convictions, with penalties ranging from one to 18 years. 
Police also reported the arrests of 62 pimps and accomplices, and 
convictions in two cases.  The rest are in pretrial detention. 
Thirteen foreigners were arrested for debauchery during the same 
period. Three were convicted, with sentences ranging between one to 
18 years in prison, while 2 Americans are in U.S. custody. 
 
In 2006, police arrested 91 perpetrators for human trafficking, 
debauchery and pimping, while Cambodian courts convicted 62 
offenders. 
 
It should be noted that the statistics below may overlap, as a 
consolidated database on trafficking is yet to be available; 
statistics are only representative of the work of each institution. 
 
 
The Ministry of Justice is unable to provide reliable statistics 
given its limited resources and means of communication with the 
provinces.  Statistics from the Phnom Penh Municipal Court have the 
court receiving 51 trafficking cases during the reporting period. 
Out of those cases, the court tried 37 cases resulting in the 
conviction of 53 perpetrators, with penalties ranging from five to 
24 years. 
 
AFESIP reported the arrests of 21 suspects and convictions of 28 
traffickers in 2006, with penalties ranging between one and 19 
years, and civil compensation of between three and ten million riels 
(USD 750- USD 2,500).  Twelve other trials during the year resulted 
in the reinvestigation of the case or acquittal due to lack of 
evidence. 
 
There are no known cases of prosecution of labor recruiters whose 
companies are involved in labor trafficking.  NGOs reported thirteen 
exploitative labor cases involving legal migrants to Malaysia ending 
up in exploitative circumstances, but the companies usually paid 
compensation to the victims and avoided formal remedies. 
 
During a raid on September 7, 2005 of the Chhay Hour II Hotel, 
police arrested six persons and rescued three minors.  On February 
17, 2006, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced two women to ten 
years for human trafficking and two managers of the Chhay Hour II 
Hotel to four years each for colluding in and providing a venue for 
human trafficking.  In the fall of 2006 an Appeals Court decision 
allegedly led to the release of the Chhay Hour II owner and manager. 
 In February 2007, police conducted another raid of the hotel, which 
was renamed the Leang Hour, and rearrested the two original 
detainees along with two additional managers. 
 
Traffickers generally serve the time sentenced. 
 
Who are the Traffickers? 
------------------------ 
 
3G.  Is there any information or reports of who is behind the 
trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers freelance operators, 
small crime groups, and/or large international organized crime 
syndicates?  Are employment, travel and tourism agencies or marriage 
brokers fronting for traffickers or crime groups to traffic 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000351  006 OF 007 
 
 
individuals?  Are government official involved?  Are there any 
reports of where profits from trafficking in persons are being 
channeled? (e.g., armed groups, terrorist organizations, judges, 
banks, etc.) 
 
Reliable information regarding traffickers is difficult to obtain 
and substantiate.  Children trafficked to Thailand for begging are 
generally recruited by neighbors who then provide the children to 
Thai traffickers after they have crossed the border.  Children 
trafficked to Vietnam to beg most often stay with their Cambodian 
trafficker (often someone from their village) while in Vietnam 
before being returned to their parents at the end of the contract. 
 
 
In Cambodia, interviews with rescued victims suggest that the 
trafficking system is not highly organized and many victims know 
those involved in trafficking.  According to the International 
Justice Mission, two-thirds of the traffickers are women operating 
small-scale brothel businesses (between five-ten women). 
 
Traffickers bringing Vietnamese girls for the sex trade in Cambodia 
or transiting for onward trafficking to a neighboring country appear 
to have more sophisticated networks.  NGOs that interview rescued 
trafficked victims report that the trafficking of Vietnamese women 
to Cambodia and Thailand is more organized and involves Vietnamese 
criminal groups.  Cambodians trafficked for sex to Thailand are 
often sold by brothel owners after first having been trafficked 
internally in Cambodia.  There are a growing number of cases of 
Cambodian women being trafficked for sex to Malaysia via Thailand, 
but the police have only apprehended individual traffickers who are 
not part of a larger organization.  NGOs, however, claim that 
victims' interviews suggest that Vietnamese gangs and Chinese-Malay 
criminal groups are involved in the trafficking. 
 
In general, trafficking of Cambodian women for sex within Cambodia 
also is informally organized, with traffickers often convincing 
girls to go with them to Phnom Penh for legitimate employment.  In 
other cases, friends, boyfriends, or relatives may engage in 
trafficking/selling a woman to a brothel.  While there are numerous 
venues in Phnom Penh where there are suspected TIP victims, there is 
no evidence to indicate that girls were procured through a single 
trafficking network.  The role of organized trafficking in Cambodia 
remains unclear, and prosecutions have focused on single 
individuals. 
 
There have been reports that police and government 
officials, including high-ranking government officials or 
their family members, operated, had a stake in, were clients of, or 
received protection money from brothels which housed trafficking 
victims, including underage sex workers.  The police have been able 
to apprehend low-ranking police or military police officers running 
brothel business.  NGOs working with trafficked victims reported 
that border officials in Thailand and Malaysia may be involved in 
trafficking as the victims reported seeing the officials demanding 
unofficial fees at border crossings. Spouses of police officials 
have also been reported to be running travel agencies involved in 
trafficking women and girls throughout Southeast Asia. 
 
Information regarding profits from trafficking in persons is poorly 
understood; however, a study on the impact of closing Svay Pak, 
conducted by AidTous, estimated that 10 to 20 children between the 
ages of 10 and 12 could bring in approximately USD 1,000 per night 
for their pimps, who in turn allegedly paid between USD 200 and 300 
(or about USD 80,000 annually) to police for protection. 
 
Government Investigations of Trafficking Cases 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
3H.  Does the government actively investigate cases of trafficking? 
(Again, the focus should be on trafficking cases versus migrant 
smuggling cases.)  Does the government use active investigative 
techniques in trafficking in persons investigations?  To the extent 
possible under domestic law, are techniques such as electronic 
surveillance, undercover operations, and mitigated punishment or 
immunity for cooperating suspects used by the government?  Does the 
criminal procedure code or other laws prohibit the police from 
engaging in covert operations? 
 
Police raids on brothels are common, and Cambodian law enforcement 
officials often work in concert with civil society to investigate 
trafficking cases and rescue people at risk.  Under the LEASEC 
project, a group of four international NGOs/IOs has supported the 
Ministry of Interior in developing special Anti-Trafficking and 
Juvenile Protection police units, and set up a hot line against 
child sexual exploitation that also handles trafficking cases. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000351  007 OF 007 
 
 
 
The International Justice Mission (IJM) has provided training 
sessions to the police in Phnom Penh, and conducted undercover 
operations to obtain evidence for successful prosecutions of 
traffickers.  IJM searches brothels for underage girls and 
trafficking victims, cooperates with police to conducts raids and 
removes the victims.  The Cambodian police have also worked closely 
with the U.S. Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in 
investigating pedophilia cases for prosecution in the United States 
under the PROTECT Act.  Cambodian law allows for the use of 
undercover investigation and covert operations.  In September 2006, 
the Cambodian National Police signed an MOU with IJM allowing the 
latter to use undercover agents, undercover video and to pose as 
customers to investigate trafficking cases. 
 
Cambodia generally lacks the training and other resources to use 
electronic surveillance or sophisticated equipment to investigate 
cases, as well as the planning skills needed to conduct 
comprehensive undercover investigations. 
 
Government-Sponsored Anti-Trafficking Training 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
3I.  Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in how to recognize, investigate, and prosecute 
instances of trafficking? 
 
The government, in cooperation with national and international 
organizations and businesses such as IJM, LEASEC, ARCPPT and 
Microsoft, conducted training for police officers on investigation 
techniques, surveillance, case preparation and management of 
trafficking cases.  So far,  5,737 police officers have attended 
specialized training courses, workshops and conferences, and 
meetings on human trafficking and law enforcement. 
 
UNICEF has supported the Cambodian Bar Association in the past to 
train lawyers of the Legal Aid Department in children's rights and 
to build their capacity in representing children.  The government 
relies heavily on training assistance from foreign governments, 
international organizations and NGOs.  Cambodian law enforcement 
officials have participated in training at the International Law 
Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in Bangkok. 
 
CAMPBELL