09PHNOMPENH957
CAMBODIA, UNHCR, AND THE UIGHURS: THE MADNESS OF
Tue Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO2715
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0957/01 3561020
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 221020Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1497
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 2593
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 1714C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 PHNOM PENH 000957 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/21/2019 
TAGS: PREF PREL PGOV PHUM CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA, UNHCR, AND THE UIGHURS: THE MADNESS OF 
THE METHOD (PART I) 
 
REF: A. PHNOM PENH 954 (DEPORTATION SCENARIO) 
     ¶B. PHNOM PENH 953 (NOTAL) 
     ¶C. PHNOM PENH 934 (UIGHURS MOVE AGAIN) 
     ¶D. PHNOM PENH 926 (AMBASSADOR MEETING WITH DPM SAR 
        KHENG) 
     ¶E. PHNOM PENH 925 (UPDATE ON UIGHUR ASYLUM-SEEKERS) 
     ¶F. PHNOM PENH 913 (AMBASSADOR MEETING WITH UNHCR) 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires a.i. Theodore Allegra; Reasons 1.4 (B, 
 D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  In a joint demarche on Deputy Foreign 
Minister Long Visalo December 21, Ambassadors and Charge 
strongly protested the deportation of 20 Uighur asylum 
seekers on December 19, noted that the deportation had 
occurred despite repeated assurances by senior Cambodian 
officials that it would not, and sought renewed assurances 
that Cambodia would not deport persons seeking refugee status 
in the future before their cases had been determined.  Visalo 
blamed the result on the repeated failings of UNHCR to accept 
and assert its traditional role and cooperation with the 
Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) in handling sensitive 
refugee cases, and asserted that - after waiting for months 
for appropriate UNHCR action - the RGC had no choice but to 
deport the group as illegal entrants under Cambodian 
immigration laws.  This is Part I of a two-part message; a 
report on a meeting by the same group on the same day with 
UNHCR Regional Director Raymond Hall is Septel.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Charge joined British Ambassador Andrew Mace in a 
demarche to Cambodian Acting Foreign Minister Long Visalo 
December 21 to protest the deportation of 20 Uighur asylum 
seekers to China on December 19.  Ambassador Mace also 
represented the European Union for purposes of the demarche, 
and the resident ambassadors from Australia and Germany also 
participated. 
 
PROTESTS, ASSURANCES, AND CREDIBILITY 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Mace thanked Visalo for his active involvement in this 
case during a very busy weekend, but registered his strong 
disappointment that his urgent request to meet Prime Minister 
Hun Sen before the deportation occurred was not accepted.  He 
noted the EU and UK's strong condemnation of the RGC decision 
to deport the group prior to a credible determination of 
their refugee status as required by international law.  He 
added neither the UK nor the EU took a position as to whether 
the entire group, or a portion of it, would ultimately have 
been eligible for refugee status, but said that Cambodia's 
actions disregarded the process entirely and thus the 
protections under the Refugee Convention were not afforded to 
the group.  Emphasizing that Cambodia's decision had been 
especially disappointing given the "continuing assurances and 
specific undertakings made to UNHCR and others by RGC 
officials" that a credible and legitimate process would be 
followed for the group, Mace concluded that the Cambodian 
decision appeared to be arbitrary.  As a result, he looked 
forward to Visalo's accounting of the issue and why a 
"wholesale abandonment" of its refugee responsibilities took 
place. 
 
¶4. (C) All other diplomats present echoed and joined with 
Ambassador Mace's remarks.  In addition, Australian 
Ambassador Margaret Adamson asked whether the world should 
expect to witness "a repetition of breaches by Cambodia," and 
sought assurances about the future status of "those who 
remain under protection" in Cambodia.  German Ambassador 
Frank Mann stressed his dismay about the seemingly 
intentional unavailability of senior RGC officials during the 
weekend to address this critical issue. 
 
¶5. (C) Charg noted that the United States had reaffirmed its 
strong opposition to involuntary return of this group of 
asylum seekers in several meetings with RGC officials in 
recent weeks.  Each time, the government assured the United 
States that the group would not be deported and that the RGC 
would cooperate with UNHCR to process these cases in 
accordance with international refugee principles.  He 
highlighted the positive remarks made by Deputy Prime 
Minister Sar Kheng to Ambassador Rodley on this issue only 
the day before the deportation process began (Ref D), and 
asked Visalo how the deportation could not put into question 
the government's credibility on this issue.  It was 
especially regrettable, Charg added, that Cambodia deported 
this group to a state which is also signatory to the refugee 
convention.  Finally, Charge underscored the concern 
expressed by the Australian Ambassador about those who remain 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000957  002 OF 003 
 
 
in Cambodia under protection of UNHCR legal process as 
persons of concern or otherwise, and asked for assurances 
that they would not be deported without the benefits of the 
international protections to which they were entitled. 
 
UNHCR DELAYS AND FAILURES GAVE THE RGC NO CHOICE 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6. (C) An unusually nonconfrontational Long Visalo said that 
the RGC remained committed to implementing the refugee 
convention in accordance with international standards, but 
criticized UNHCR for the "many problems" that arose in this 
case.  He argued that the UNHCR had provided "no official 
notification" of the group (Note:  an assertion vehemently 
denied later that day by UNHCR. End Note.), and said that the 
government only learned that the group was in Cambodia from 
media reports, including Radio Free Asia.  Citing the 
successes in resettling scores of Montagnard refugees from 
Vietnam, he argued there was a "big difference" in how UNHCR 
coordinated with the government in this case.  As a result, 
Visalo asserted that the Uighurs were determined to be 
illegal immigrants in Cambodia and had to be deported. 
 
¶7. (C) Visalo continued to blame UNHCR for the debacle he 
seemed to instinctively understand his government's action 
had created.  He said he asked the UNHCR protection officer 
Toshitsuki Kawaudi (Toshi) on December 10 why UNHCR had not 
informed the government and why it had delivered "persons of 
concern" letters without consultation.  He insisted to UNHCR 
that it therefore accept "control" over the group and assume 
responsibility for its safety and security, a request that he 
said was forthrightly dismissed by UNHCR because none of the 
group "had been designated as refugees."  Again referring to 
the successful resettlement of Montagnard cases, Visalo said 
he regretted that what he had learned from those cases - that 
speed was essential to a successful process in sensitive 
cases - was not apparent in how UNHCR handled this group, 
which was characterized by "no information and no 
responsibility." 
 
¶8. (C) By December 14, he said the situation had become "more 
acute" and, in a meeting between Deputy UNHCR Regional 
Representative Giuseppe de Vincentis, the RGC officially 
agreed to "joint control" of the group (REF F).  But Visalo 
said he was still "not satisfied" because the UNHCR did not 
accept the practicalities of what that control meant. 
Accordingly, he said he told de Vincentis that "if you don't 
accept control over this group, we will send them out of the 
country."  Quite animated, Visalo said that he emphasized the 
need for an expeditious process to determine refugee status, 
and that process had not even begun yet despite the fact that 
one of the group had been in Cambodia since June and the 
others had been in country for at least a month - "enough 
time to have good cooperation," he stressed.  Thus, he said 
he told de Vincentis that the group "would be considered as 
illegal entrants and processed pursuant to immigration law" 
if UNHCR did not act to discharge its responsibilities as it 
had in the past.  Two days later, on December 16, the group 
was moved in order to afford more protection for them (Ref 
A).  At that time, Visalo and UNHCR discovered that two of 
the group had gone missing.  "Where are the others?," Visalo 
said he asked Toshi; Toshi replied that he "didn't know." 
Thus, Visalo concluded that it was abundantly clear that 
UNHCR had neither the willingness nor the ability to 
"control" the group as refugee status determinations 
proceeded. 
 
¶9. (C) Concluding, Visalo said he regretted what had happened 
but, under the circumstances it was necessary "in order to 
protect our immigration laws."  He asserted that Cambodia had 
wanted cooperation with UNHCR in this case, and assured his 
objective remained to have fruitful cooperation with UNHCR in 
future cases in accordance with refugee convention 
principles.  He noted that Cambodia fully understood "its 
obligations under the treaty," had always recognized those 
obligations in the past, and remained prepared to implement 
its obligations in the future.  To that end, he said he was 
hopeful that this case would provide good lessons of how to 
avoid problems in the future. 
 
¶10. (C) In response, UK Ambassador Mace underscored the need 
for close cooperation with UNHCR and the need for RGC 
credibility in the assurances that it provided to the 
international community about future cooperation.  But 
whatever procedural shortcomings of UNHCR may have existed in 
this case, they did not invalidate the rights of individuals 
to the protections afforded them under international law. 
Moreover, there is "no incompatibility" between domestic 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000957  003 OF 003 
 
 
immigration laws and the international refugee convention, as 
the latter clearly states that immigration violations are not 
grounds to avoid protection responsibilities for those 
seeking asylum.  Charg added that Cambodia had many 
opportunities to raise with the United States and others in 
the diplomatic community whatever UNHCR deficiencies may have 
existed before taking a decision to deport the group, and 
never did so.  Ambassador Adamson echoed that point, and 
stressed there had been "clear signals from many capitals" 
that alternatives existed to deportation but, because the 
government did not appear to consider them, practical 
solutions to resolve the government's frustrations with UNHCR 
were not possible. 
 
¶11. (C) COMMENT:  Long Visalo is no stranger to international 
law, is usually a technocrat in his approach to legal issues, 
and has had numerous opportunities in the past to implement 
the refugee convention properly and in accordance with 
internationally accepted practice.  Thus, it is perhaps a 
surprise that he didn't resort to familiar tactics to argue 
the law with his interlocutors, but that he based his defense 
to what he knew in advance would be a difficult meeting on 
the failures of UNHCR to do what the RGC expected it to do. 
Much of the international and NGO community actually shares 
at least some of Visalo's view about how UNHCR seemed to 
abdicate its usual role in this sensitive case, but the fact 
remains that the RGC had many opportunities to highlight its 
frustrations and many alternatives to consider short of 
deportation.  That it chose not to do so is likely a 
reflection of the urgencies compelled by rampant publicity, 
persistent frustrations with UNCHR, and pressure from China 
in the runup to Vice President Xi Jinping's visit to Cambodia 
on December 20 (in which USD 1.2 billion in bilateral 
assistance was at stake).  We will analyze these issues in 
greater detail in coming days but, for now at least, it 
appears that Cambodia ran out of time and patience and felt 
compelled to take urgent action at the eleventh hour - 
knowingly discarding its responsibilities under international 
law in the process.  And because the RGC likely did not 
anticipate in advance the strength of international reaction 
to its decision, it is not surprising that Visalo's focus on 
assurances of future cooperation with UNHCR is the best he 
can muster under the circumstances.  END COMMENT. 
ALLEGRA