09PHNOMPENH920
POLL SHOWS POWER OF HAVING A CONCRETE PARTY MESSAGE
Tue Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO6349
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0920/01 3491003
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151003Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1454
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUCGEVC/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC 0188UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000920 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM KJUS SOCI CB
SUBJECT: POLL SHOWS POWER OF HAVING A CONCRETE PARTY MESSAGE 
 
REF: PHNOM PENH 469 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  On December 11, the International Republican 
Institute (IRI) presented the results of its August 2009 Cambodian 
Public Opinion survey.  The USAID-funded survey found solid public 
confidence in the general direction of the country and the ruling 
Cambodian People's Party (CPP).  Questions about confidence in the 
various political parties showed the effectiveness of the CPP's 
disciplined party branding and the issues faced by the opposition 
Sam Rainsy Party (SRP).  Survey respondents indicated that they 
wanted to see more government development of transportation systems 
and more efforts to fight crime.  The U.S. topped the list of 
favorably-viewed countries among general respondents, and placed 
second behind Malaysia among Cham Muslim respondents.  The polling 
revealed a high public awareness of the Khmer Rouge Tribunal and the 
Duch case.  END SUMMARY. 
 
CAPTURING THE NATIONAL MOOD 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On December 11, IRI presented to the Ambassador and Country 
Team the results of its sixth Cambodian Public Opinion Survey, 
conducted in August 2009.  The USAID-funded poll, which is the only 
one of its kind in Cambodia, sought to capture average citizens' 
views on issues such as the direction of the country, political 
parties, and government services.  Cambodian research institution 
Center for Advanced Studies (CAS) conducted face-to-face interviews 
across 24 provinces with a representative sample size of 1,600, 
including 400 Muslim Cambodians, who were asked additional 
questions.  IRI plans to announce the general results of the survey 
to the public, and will limit party-specific results to the 
political parties themselves.  Results regarding hypothetical 
election results will not be disclosed beyond the USG and IRI. 
 
TRENDS:  FAITH IN THE CPP, DIRECTION OF COUNTRY 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Despite a slight dip from the last poll in November 2008, 
the majority of survey respondents (79%) felt that the country was 
headed in the right direction, demonstrating the CPP's resilience in 
the face of the global economic crisis.  As in past surveys, when 
asked in an open-ended fashion why the country was headed in the 
right direction, respondents credited the construction of 
infrastructure such as roads and schools.  Respondents who said the 
country was headed in the wrong direction cited corruption and 
poverty at the top of the list.  Prime Minister Hun Sen 
overwhelmingly received credit for positive developments in the 
country, while about a third of respondents who said the country was 
headed in the wrong direction blamed him personally for negative 
developments. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Overall, public confidence in Hun Sen rose to a high of 
93%, while confidence in Sam Rainsy as a political leader fell 
slightly to 56%.  Human Rights Party (HRP) leader Kem Sokha seemed 
to have increased his visibility since the last survey, as the 
numbers of both respondents who had positive and negative views of 
him rose over the past year to 42% positive and 39% negative. 
(NOTE:  CPP-controlled media have released multiple stories on Kem 
Sokha, often with a negative slant.  END NOTE.)  Confidence in the 
national and commune governments remained strong at 86% and 83%, 
respectively, as did confidence in civil society at 87%. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The survey respondents displayed a streak of optimism on 
the economy, with 72% predicting that their incomes would remain 
stable or increase over the next year.  This positive outlook was 
highest in Phnom Penh and the southeastern provinces bordering 
Vietnam, and was lowest in the northwest. 
 
POLITICAL PARTIES:  IT'S ALL ABOUT THE MESSAGE 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. (SBU) Polling on the political parties showed growing support for 
the CPP.  In a scenario in which national elections were held today, 
66% of respondents chose the CPP, 15% the SRP, 8% the HRP, and 6% 
the two royalist parties combined.  In a second scenario where the 
SRP and HRP merged, 57% of respondents remained loyal to the CPP, 
33% chose the SRP/HRP hybrid, and 4% selected one of the royalist 
parties.  (NOTE: The polling did not take into account the potential 
impact of a SRP/HRP hybrid party having to campaign under a new 
name.  END NOTE.)  Although the hypothetical SRP/HRP party increased 
its total share of votes, it failed to generate much interest from 
young voters aged 18-24, 70% of whom continued to support the CPP. 
In both scenarios, the royalist parties fared the worst, dropping to 
zero National Assembly seats. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000920  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) In a series of open-ended questions about party branding, 
the CPP's disciplined messaging shone through.  Survey answers 
demonstrated strong policy and national identity associations with 
the CPP, such as infrastructure development, economic growth, and 
the country's liberation from the Khmer Rouge in 1979 topping the 
list.  When asked what respondents thought of in relation to the 
SRP, branding issues were apparent with answers ranging from "don't 
know" to "do nothing", "opposition party", and "candle as its logo". 
 In contrast, although a majority of respondents were also 
unfamiliar with the HRP, those that were familiar associated 
concrete policy issues with the party, such as human rights 
protection, seeking justice for workers and the poor, and resolving 
land conflicts. 
 
GOVERNMENT SERVICES:  KEEP US CONNECTED, SAFE 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Survey respondents overwhelmingly said that they wanted to 
see political parties focus more on improving government services 
and fighting corruption, rather than highlighting the leaders and 
histories of their parties or the history of prior regimes.  The 
polling indicated average to low satisfaction with government 
services such as education, transportation systems, security, health 
care, and electricity.  Respondents wanted to see more improvement 
in the areas in which they were the most satisfied, such as 
transportation and security, as they had already seen concrete gains 
and appeared to value these services. 
 
U.S. FAVORABLY VIEWED, THAILAND NOT AS MUCH 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The U.S. topped the list of favorably-viewed countries, 
with 89% of respondents reporting either somewhat or very favorable 
views.  Japan, France, the U.K., and China trailed slightly behind. 
Among Muslim respondents, the U.S. maintained its high ratings, 
falling only into second place behind Malaysia.  Thailand's 
unfavorable rating was high in both groups, jumping from around 35% 
in November 2008 to 71% in August 2009 among general respondents. 
Attitudes towards Vietnam conversely improved, with about half of 
respondents expressing favorable views. 
 
ISLAM IN CAMBODIA 
----------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Muslim respondents, the majority of whom identified 
themselves as Cham, overwhelmingly (99%) reported to be somewhat or 
very satisfied with the government's relationship with the Muslim 
community.  82% felt that Islam agrees with democracy, with 13% 
responding that it neither agrees nor disagrees with democracy. 
Over half of the Muslim respondents indicated that the conflict in 
southern Thailand was important to them. 
 
KHMER ROUGE TRIBUNAL PROVIDING JUSTICE SLOWLY 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The polling revealed a high public awareness of the Khmer 
Rouge Tribunal and the Duch case.  Despite frustration with the pace 
of Duch's trial, 70% of survey respondents said that they felt the 
trial of Khmer Rouge leaders provided justice. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) The IRI poll reinforced some of the trends we've seen 
emerging with the political parties over the past year.  The CPP, 
aside from having the largest platform from which to promote itself, 
has strengthened its support by producing tangible development and 
security results.  Despite statements earlier this year that the 
opposition would seek ways to work more constructively with the 
government (Reftel), Sam Rainsy and his party's distracting 
maneuvers have come at the expense of a solid base, clear message, 
and distinguishable party brand.  If the SRP and HRP successfully 
merge for the 2013 elections, they will have to better emulate the 
CPP's disciplined party branding if they hope to gain or maintain 
influence, especially if they merge under a new name.  If they 
don't, they may find themselves going the way of the royalist 
parties, who according to the poll and our observations, don't have 
much of a presence, or a future. 
 
 
 
RODLEY