10PHNOMPENH138
2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO1726
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0138/01 0550836
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 240836Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1711
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC 0839
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 19 PHNOM PENH 000138 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G-Laura Pena, INL, DRL, PRM, EAP/RSP, EAP/MLS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID ASIA BUREAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL PREF ELAB SMIG KCRM KTIP KWMN KFRD
ASEC, KMCA, CB 
 
SUBJECT: 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA 
 
REFS: STATE 5577 
08 STATE 132759 
08 PHNOM PENH 955 
08 PHNOM PENH 787 
08 PHNOM PENH 753 
08 PHNOM PENH 445 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  DELIBERATIVE MATERIAL. 
 
¶1.  (U) The following is Embassy Phnom Penh's 2010 Trafficking in 
Persons Report for Cambodia, covering the period April 2009 - March 
¶2010.  Responses follow the questions outlined in Ref B.  The entire 
report is Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU). 
 
¶2.  (SBU) CAMBODIA'S TIP SITUATION 
--------------------------- 
 
¶A.  Sources of Information on Human Trafficking 
 
There are no firm estimates or reliable numbers available as to the 
extent or magnitude of the trafficking problem.  Two surveys have 
attempted to measure the commercial sex industry in the country:  a 
1997 report by the National Assembly Commission on Human Rights and 
a 2003 study by a former Fulbright researcher, Thomas Steinfatt. 
The 1997 Commission on Human Rights report included a country-wide 
survey of brothels; it estimated 14,725 brothel workers in Cambodia 
of which 81 percent were Cambodian and 18 percent Vietnamese.  The 
study did not attempt to differentiate between voluntary sex workers 
and trafficking victims. 
 
Steinfatt's 2003 study on the number of prostitutes and sex 
trafficking victims in Cambodia estimated 18,256 sex workers, of 
which 65.6 percent were Cambodian and 32.8 percent Vietnamese.  The 
Steinfatt study estimated 2,000 sex trafficking victims in Cambodia, 
of which 80.4 percent were ethnic Vietnamese.  Although Steinfatt's 
trafficking estimates have been disputed, no separate data exists 
that reliably quantifies sex trafficking victims. 
 
Limited trafficking statistics are available from Royal Government 
of Cambodia (RGC) authorities involved in the repatriation of 
Cambodians from neighboring countries, such as the Ministry of 
Interior's Immigration Department and MOSAVY.  Cambodian 
authorities, in cooperation with international organizations such as 
UNICEF and IOM, try to distinguish between illegal migrants and 
trafficking victims, particularly children, and maintain some 
statistical information.  Within Cambodia, some NGOs that provide 
services to victims referred by police, judicial, and social service 
officials also maintain limited statistical information based on 
their respective operations. 
 
Cambodia's National Committee on the Suppression of Human 
Trafficking, Smuggling, and Labor and Sexual Exploitation collected 
data from 14 government ministries, including from police 
institutions, for its annual report on RGC anti-trafficking 
efforts. 
 
¶B.  Patterns of Human Trafficking 
 
Cambodia is a source, destination, and transit country for 
trafficking in persons, including men, women and children.  Some 
observers reported that a majority of Cambodian trafficking victims 
are trafficked for labor purposes, due to Cambodia's relative 
poverty and poor economic conditions compared with its immediate 
neighbors; Cambodian women and children are also trafficked for 
sexual exploitation.  Cambodians are trafficked primarily within the 
region, particularly to Thailand and Malaysia.  Trafficking also 
occurs within Cambodia's borders, from rural areas to Phnom Penh and 
other population centers. 
 
Cambodian trafficking victims are recruited from or migrate from all 
provinces in the country, generally from rural areas to population 
centers, or from border provinces into neighboring countries.  Debt 
bondage is often a factor in the recruitment of Cambodian 
trafficking victims, who initially believe they are accepting 
legitimate restaurant, factory, or other work opportunities in Phnom 
Penh, other cities, or overseas, but who are then forced to work in 
exploitative conditions.  Foreign victims found in Cambodia 
generally came from Vietnam.  Many ethnic Vietnamese sex workers in 
voluntary sex work were originally trafficked to Cambodia through 
debt bondage; some sex workers are still in debt bondage. 
 
Within Cambodia, from April 1, 2009 through February 10, 2010, the 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  002 OF 019 
 
 
National Committee reported that the Ministry of Interior (MOI) made 
101 arrests in human trafficking cases involving more than 200 
victims, of which 56 were cases of sex trafficking and 45 of labor 
trafficking.  In the same period, the National Committee reported 
that police referred 408 victims of sex trafficking to MOSAVY, which 
made subsequent referrals for aftercare to various NGOs. 
 
Thailand is the major destination country for migrant Cambodian 
workers, but there are no reliable numbers on how many are 
trafficking victims. In 2009, the Asian Development Bank estimated 
that 240,000 Cambodians migrated to Thailand for work, most without 
legal permits.  Cambodian men are trafficked to work in the Thai 
fishing, construction and agricultural industries; women and young 
girls are trafficked for factory and domestic work, and are also 
subject to sexual exploitation in the Thai commercial sex industry. 
 
 
According to UN Inter-Agency Project against Human Trafficking 
(UNIAP), on average Thai authorities deport approximately 36,500 
individuals each year.  However, the number of trafficking victims 
among these deportees is unknown because Cambodian authorities lack 
the resources to interview all the deportees.  An August 2009 survey 
of 400 Cambodian deportees from Thailand found 92 who experienced 
some form of exploitation and cheating by their employers; 
thirty-one of those were held involuntarily and forced to work. 
During the reporting period, MOSAVY reported receiving two victims 
of sex trafficking and 81 victims of labor trafficking returned from 
Thailand. 
 
Malaysia is a common destination for Cambodian migrant workers, 
particularly women and girls looking for work as domestic servants. 
UNIAP estimated that since 1998, nearly 20,000 Cambodians have 
migrated to Malaysia through 25 licensed recruitment agencies in 
Cambodia.  Furthermore, there are incidents of Cambodian men and 
women, who cannot afford the fees charged by recruiting companies to 
migrate legally, migrating illegally to Malaysia via Thailand, and 
thus being more vulnerable to trafficking and exploitation.  The 
number of these workers, both legal and illegal, who become 
trafficking victims is not known.  From April to December 2009, 
MOSAVY received four trafficking victims from Malaysia who were 
trafficked to work on Thai fishing boats. 
 
Vietnam is also a popular destination country for labor migrants, 
some of whom become trafficking victims.  The total number of 
victims is not known, although MOSAVY reported receiving 898 
returnees from Vietnam, 143 of whom authorities identified by survey 
questionnaires as likely victims of labor trafficking. 
 
Additional destination countries reported in the past include South 
Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, although the numbers of victims are 
far fewer. 
 
Neither the RGC nor NGOs reported changes in the patterns of 
trafficking, such as routes or destinations, since the 2009 TIP 
Report. 
 
¶C.  Conditions Faced by Victims 
 
The lack of statistical data impedes attempts to characterize 
changes in the trafficking climate from one year to the next.  As 
long as the economies of Cambodia's neighbors continue to expand, 
Cambodian labor remains cheap and jobs inside the country are 
scarce, Cambodians will continue to migrate out for labor purposes. 
 
 
Conditions on Thai fishing boats have received greater attention 
from the RGC and NGOs.  While the boats are Thai-flagged and 
Thai-owned, they venture into international waters.  Men who flee 
the boats have been found in Malaysia and Indonesia.  On January 21, 
five Cambodian men jumped overboard from such a boat and were 
rescued by fishermen from East Timor.  Cambodian victims in 2008 and 
2009 reported being deceived about their expected length of service, 
how much they would be paid, and how that payment would be made. 
They also reported being forced to labor on the boats for days 
without rest, and complained of lack of food and water, lack of 
medical care, and harsh beatings by boat captains.  IOM reported 
that a number of international and local NGOs repatriate such 
victims unofficially, so the total number of victims returning to 
Cambodia is not known.  IOM assisted the RGC in officially 
repatriating 35 such victims in 2008, but the five in East Timor are 
the only during this reporting period.  The number of repatriated 
victims is believed to be only a fraction of the total number of 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  003 OF 019 
 
 
Cambodian men trafficked onto fishing boats. 
 
Conditions for Cambodians migrating to Malaysia as domestic servants 
have become a focus for the RGC.  Women who returned from such jobs 
and sought assistance reported ending up in forced and abusive labor 
conditions after migrating to Malaysia as domestic workers with the 
assistance of legal labor migration companies.  The RGC has licensed 
25 such labor export companies; however, there is inadequate 
monitoring of migration and work conditions, and a lack of 
protection for domestic workers in Malaysia.  The governments of 
Cambodia and Malaysia are negotiating a memorandum of understanding 
on combating human trafficking and the protection of Cambodians 
working in domestic positions in Malaysia.  Cambodia's Ministry of 
Women's Affairs (MOWA) is leading the MOU process, and has advocated 
establishing a follow-up mechanism to ensure the well-being of 
domestic workers after arrival in Malaysia. 
 
¶D.  Vulnerability to TIP 
 
Due to poverty, lack of jobs, family problems and unequal access to 
educational opportunities, women and children, especially those in 
rural areas where 80 percent of the population resides, are most 
vulnerable to trafficking.  Such persons are particularly 
susceptible to the lure of employment, often via the intercession of 
relatives, friends, neighbors, community members, or unknown 
persons, to pay off personal or family debts incurred due to factors 
such as drought or the serious illness of a family member. 
 
There are no studies that suggest minority groups are more 
susceptible to trafficking.  Some provinces, by virtue of their 
proximity to neighboring Thailand or Vietnam, are source areas for 
migration to those countries, and thus trafficking victims.  In a 
2004 survey, PACT-Cambodia found a correlation between residential 
origins of trafficking victims and communities along major highways. 
 
 
An IOM study in August 2007 identified a high prevalence of 
trafficking among commercially sexually exploited women and girls in 
Siem Reap, Koh Kong and Sihanoukville provinces.  The study showed 
that groups that those persistently vulnerable to trafficking 
include: women and girls who have severed relations with their 
family households, often due to physical and sexual abuse; women and 
girls who preiously worked as child domestic workers; and ethnic 
Vietnamese women and girls who became domestic trafficking victims 
through recruitment or coercion into the virginity trade. 
 
Children are not prevented from crossing the Thai border with 
strangers or alone, and Cambodians can cross the border without the 
need to show identification.  Poipet/Aranyaprathet is the primary 
Cambodia-Thai border post for transit.  Children from Banteay 
Meanchey and Battambang provinces in Cambodia's northwestern region 
continue to be trafficked to Thailand to beg, sell candy or flowers, 
and shine shoes.  Nearly all children repatriated from Thailand at 
the Poipet border crossing receive special screening, and 
trafficking victims are routed through the Poipet Transit Center, 
which is staffed by MOSAVY personnel with support from UNICEF. 
According to UNICEF, there were seven official repatriations 
involving 53 children in 2009; less formal deportations of a further 
1,416 persons included 64 unaccompanied children identified by the 
Mobile Border Team. 
 
Children trafficked for begging in Vietnam are taken across the 
border by Cambodian facilitators three to four at a time.  A single 
trafficker may coordinate several facilitators, and border controls 
are minimal.  Cambodian traffickers personally supervise the 
children in Vietnam, and reportedly have few problems with police 
raids.  A 2007 IOM report stated that some Cambodian children 
migrate together with parents or relatives who migrate seasonally as 
whole families, or one or two children with parents, to beg in 
Vietnam.  In 2009, MOSAVY reported receiving 898 returnees from 
Vietnam, of whom 143 were identified as trafficking victims through 
a questionnaire; all 143 were minors. 
 
On December 3, 2009, the RGC promulgated a new adoption law designed 
to bring Cambodia into compliance with the Hague Convention on 
Inter-Country Adoption and address concerns surrounding trafficking 
of infants for foreign adoption.  A moratorium since 2001 on 
international adoption by some countries, including the United 
States, has largely curbed reports of adoption trafficking, though 
countries still processing adoptions in Cambodia continue to report 
substantial fraud and irregularities in the small number of cases 
processed since then.  The RGC is working with international 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  004 OF 019 
 
 
organizations and other donors to establish transparent, ethical, 
Hague-compliant adoption processes.  As part of this effort, on 
January 19, 2010, the RGC suspended processing of all new adoptions 
until March 2011. 
 
¶E.  Traffickers and Their Methods 
 
Traffickers are sometimes parents who sell their child into debt 
bondage to serve as domestic help for other families, or into 
brothels.  In several cases during the reporting period, police 
arrested immediate family members of victims, such as parents, aunts 
or uncles, siblings, or grandparents.  Due to poverty, lack of jobs, 
family problems and unequal access to educational opportunities, 
families may give their child to other relatives, who subsequently 
traffic the children unbeknownst to the parents.  Traffickers may 
also be more distant relatives or acquaintances who promise work in 
Phnom Penh or secondary cities.  In some cases, boyfriends, husbands 
or fathers take women or underage girls and sell them to a brothel. 
A 2007 IOM study of trafficking recruitment and facilitating 
networks found a system that is evolving in order to evade 
counter-trafficking efforts by communities, local authorities, and 
NGOs. 
 
Research conducted by Friends International and UNIAP in 2007 on 
child begging in Thailand found that the majority of Cambodian child 
beggars traveled to Bangkok with their mothers or other family 
members and that most beggars had a degree of control over their 
day-to-day lives.  In contrast to previous assumptions, the research 
found that the majority of Cambodian child beggars in Bangkok did 
not experience abusive practices or trafficking; the concerns are 
more related to those of vulnerable migrants rather than 
trafficking.  However, the research found also that almost 20 
percent of children questioned came with a facilitator or non-blood 
relative; while most of the children who came with their mother said 
they were happy with the situation, half of those who came with a 
facilitator said they were unhappy. 
 
In labor recruiting, most brokers are independent contractors. 
There are 25 licensed labor recruiting firms in Cambodia, but these 
represent a small portion of the total number of brokers and agents 
operating throughout the country.  Some observers have reported that 
individual recruiters mislead rural and urban victims, claiming to 
work with labor agencies or claiming to have connections to good 
jobs in cities or in other countries (usually Thailand or Malaysia). 
 
 
In April 2009, the RGC instituted a new process for foreigners 
seeking to marry Cambodian citizens.  The new process reflects 
efforts of the RGC to prevent human trafficking to other countries 
through sham marriages, though some believe the new procedures were 
weakly enforced.  The MFA reviews documents in the application 
process, and the prospective couples must be interviewed by officers 
of the Anti-Human Trafficking and Juvenile Protection Department of 
the Cambodian National Police before MOI will authorize the 
marriage. 
 
The Svay Pak brothel area continues in operation, despite numerous 
attempts by anti-TIP police to close it down.  Underage girls are 
available in Svay Pak establishments upon demand, but generally do 
not stay on site.  Current trends show that underage girls from Svay 
Pak are delivered to various brothels and establishments during the 
evening, or are available on order.  A trafficker convicted in 
December 2009 operated a business from Svay Pak, brokering deals 
with pedophiles and then delivering victims to the perpetrators' 
hotel rooms.  IJM reported continued difficulty in raids of the 
area, due to attempts to hide the crime and the nearly impenetrable 
layout of the area which allows traffickers to escape quickly. 
 
Vietnamese women and children, many in debt bondage, were trafficked 
from Kieng Yang, Can Tho, Dong Thap and other provinces in Vietnam 
to Cambodia for commercial sex work.  Information from AFESIP, CWCC, 
and UNICEF indicates that Vietnamese women and girls also are 
trafficked through Cambodia by organized Vietnamese criminal gangs 
to onward destinations in Thailand and Malaysia. 
 
Cambodians are often brought through porous borders with Thailand or 
Vietnam without documentation.  Some women are reportedly trafficked 
by boat from the Cambodian province of Koh Kong to Thailand to enter 
the sex trade.  Women are reportedly trafficked to Malaysia with 
valid Cambodian passports, with allegations of complicity on the 
part of Thai and Malay border and immigration officials.  RGC 
attempts to persuade Malaysia to grant legal rights to foreign 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  005 OF 019 
 
 
domestic workers have been unsuccessful, although the Ministry of 
Women's Affairs continues discussions on this issue.  Some NGOs 
claim that trafficking networks run by Vietnamese, Thai and 
Chinese-Malay criminals traffic drugs, guns, women and children to 
Thailand and Malaysia.  A UNIAP representative reported that 
although trafficking networks were likely involved in some cases, 
small brokers were responsible for most trafficking cases. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE RGC'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
--------------- --------------- --------------- ---------- 
 
¶A.  Acknowledgement of TIP 
 
The RGC openly acknowledges that trafficking is a serious problem in 
Cambodia.  The Prime Minister has called for more extensive RGC 
efforts to combat the problem and Deputy Prime Minister (DPM) and 
Minister of Interior Sar Kheng repeatedly reiterated in 2009 the RGC 
commitment to combating trafficking. 
 
On September 25, 2009, the Prime Minister signed the sub-decree 
establishing a new National Committee on the Suppression of Human 
Trafficking, Smuggling, and Labor and Sexual Exploitation.  The 
National Committee merged the former National Task Force with the 
High-Level Working Group to form a single body designed to 
facilitate better communication and coordination among relevant 
government ministries and agencies, and civil society partners.  The 
government formally launched the National Committee on December 9, 
2009, chaired by DPM Sar Kheng with wide participation from national 
committee members, members of the provincial committees, civil 
society partners and international organizations.  A National 
Committee Secretariat, which leads the day-to-day coordination work 
of the government's anti-TIP efforts, has six working groups with 
interministerial membership.  Each group also has a permanent 
vice-chair for an NGO representative, to ensure inclusion and 
dialogue between the RGC and NGO community. 
 
Each province has a provincial committee (PC), a local governmental 
committee that coordinates anti-trafficking efforts and reports to 
the National Committee.  The PCs developed provincial action plans 
to monitor entertainment and other establishments for TIP cases, 
report such suspected cases to local police, supervise protection 
efforts within the province, and direct public awareness and other 
prevention activities.  The PCs of Siem Reap and Svay Rieng 
Provinces have served as models; they developed structured, 
realistic action plans partly based on input from the 2008 
provincial dialogues and aligned with Cambodia's National Plan of 
Action for 2010.  Among the results achieved was a public awareness 
campaign presented to university students, featuring a documentary 
film about anti-trafficking and a local official from the Department 
of Social Affairs who hosted a question-and-answer session following 
the film. 
 
¶B.  Lead Agencies and Interagency Cooperation 
 
The National Committee on the Suppression of Human Trafficking, 
Smuggling, and Labor and Sexual Exploitation leads anti-trafficking 
efforts in Cambodia, under the direction of DPM Sar Kheng.  Four 
vice-chairs of the National Committee are the Ministers of Justice, 
Social Affairs, Labor, and Women's Affairs.  The remaining 13 
members are the Ministers of Tourism, Health, and Education; the 
Commissioner General of the National Police; the Commander of the 
Military Police; and secretaries of state from the ministries of 
Interior, Defense, Foreign Affairs, Information, Economy and 
Finance, Culture, and Post and Telecommunications.  USAID provides 
technical assistance to the National Committee. 
 
¶C.  Limitations and Challenges Faced by the RGC 
 
The RGC has made great strides to coordinate anti-trafficking 
activities internally and with international partners, but its 
ability to combat trafficking effectively remains limited.  The lack 
of resources is acute; training and funding for law enforcement and 
courts are wholly inadequate, and the overall level of human 
resources -- trained and competent people -- is still greatly 
affected by Cambodia's legacy of decades of civil war.  For example, 
there are only 309 prosecutors and judges to staff Cambodia's 24 
provincial courts, plus the Appeals and Supreme Courts.  Newly sworn 
in judges and prosecutors represent a better educated and more 
sophisticated civil service.  However, enrollment at the Royal 
Academy for Judges and Prosecutors is capped due to resource 
constraints at 55 students per year.  More graduates are needed to 
handle the existing judicial workload, let alone an increased 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  006 OF 019 
 
 
workload generated by more vigorous police action. 
 
There are approximately 50,000 police in the Cambodian National 
Police force.  The average education for most police officers, as 
for most Cambodians, ends in middle school.  While a National Police 
Academy exists, most police officers, particularly those in 
provinces distant from Phnom Penh, do not receive training in law 
enforcement techniques.  Funding for specialized training in complex 
issues such as anti-trafficking is extremely limited.  Observers 
generally perceived evidence collection and its use in court to be a 
particular weakness of the Cambodian criminal justice system due to 
a lack of training, equipment, and funding.  If a victim did not 
testify, police typically had little evidence to use against the 
perpetrators.  The National Committee and Ministry of Justice (MOJ) 
officials recognized the need for training of court and other RGC 
officials on the new law.  Section 4F details 2009-2010 RGC training 
programs on TIP. 
 
Law enforcement and court officials also typically lack necessary 
equipment to handle cases appropriately.  There is a severe lack of 
capital resources such as vehicles, computer and communication 
equipment, investigative tools such as cameras, and office space 
where perpetrators and victims could be held separately. 
 
Standardized collection of statistics on trafficking crimes and 
their disposition by the courts remains a limitation.  A 2007 
sub-decree described the need for courts to provide case information 
to the Ministry of Justice, and an April 2009 letter to all 
provincial and municipal courts from MOJ requested standardization 
of statistics reporting.  The letter included a sample statistical 
table used by the Phnom Pehn Municipal Court and provided detailed 
instructions on completing the table.  Nonetheless, most courts lack 
sufficient human resources to report statistics in a timely fashion. 
 Reports are hand-written and not stored in a centralized location 
at each court.  Computer support is nonexistent.  MOJ official 
travel to provincial courts in order to obtain statistics is limited 
by funding. 
 
Under the French-based civil code system, police and court officials 
investigate TIP cases separately, and the relationship between 
police and investigating court officials was largely limited to 
cases in which police requested search and arrest warrants. 
Although coordination efforts improved in 2009, prosecutors and 
judges only occasionally called on police for clarification, follow 
up information, or to testify during trials. 
 
Impunity, endemic corruption, and related rent-seeking behavior 
continue to impede progress in combating trafficking in persons. 
Donor countries have continued to press the RGC on anti-corruption 
efforts generally, and to pass an anti-corruption law consistent 
with international standards.  At year's end the Council of 
Ministers approved a draft Anti-Corruption Law and transmitted it to 
the National Assembly, which is expected to debate the legislation 
beginning April 2010. 
 
The Supreme Council of Magistracy (SCM) has the power to remove 
judges, but has done so only rarely.  The SCM also lacks the 
investigative resources to respond to allegations of corruption. 
 
There are approximately 1,250 social workers nationwide, serving a 
population of 14 million that is widely believed to suffer high 
levels of post-traumatic stress disorders stemming from decades of 
civil war.  According to NGOs, there are very few accredited 
psychiatrists, psychologists, or other trained mental health 
professionals. 
 
RGC resources for victim assistance must be augmented by assistance 
from international organizations and foreign and domestic NGOs.  The 
RGC has difficulty in defining issues of temporary guardianship 
pertaining to victims and witnesses taken from brothels, and the 
legal authority of NGOs to take temporary guardianship of children 
is unclear. 
 
¶D.  RGC Monitoring of Anti-Trafficking Efforts 
 
Under the National Committee structure, 14 participating ministries 
provide data on their anti-trafficking activities to the Secretariat 
of the National Committee on a quarterly basis.  MOSAVY has a 
database to keep track of victims officially repatriated under RGC 
agreements.  MOI has a database to track police intelligence, 
investigations, and arrests of sex crime offenders.  The National 
Committee Secretariat provides the data it collects, and individual 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  007 OF 019 
 
 
ministries cooperate and provide information upon request. 
 
The most persistent challenge has been the institutional and 
resources limitations that hinder MOJ from collecting accurate and 
complete statistics from the court system.  To remedy shortcomings 
in the collection, analysis and reporting of TIP-related prosecution 
data, MOJ has requested technical assistance with short- and 
long-term efforts to build a new reporting structure, train 
judiciary officials on that structure, and develop data collection 
systems to capture and analyze trafficking prosecution data. MOJ 
created a new paper-based data collection system, and is 
collaborating with a USAID implementing partner to develop a 
computer database to match. 
 
¶E.  Establishing the Identity of Local Populations 
 
The MOI administered a modernized birth registration system, but not 
all births were registered immediately, due principally to parent 
delays. In addition, children born from the mid-1970s to mid-1990s 
were often not registered under any system as a result of the Khmer 
Rouge regime, Vietnam occupation, and persistent civil conflict 
during those decades.  Many of these unregistered persons who later 
had families of their own did not perceive a need for registration. 
It was common for young people not to be registered until a need 
arose. 
 
¶F.  RGC Data Gathering Capability 
 
As stated above, the RGC is not capable of gathering the data 
required for an in-depth assessment of law enforcement efforts, 
although the structures are now in place to do so, through the 
National Committee and its Secretariat.  The principle challenges to 
gathering such data are lack of equipment and lack of human 
resources - both in training existing staff and hiring additional 
staff to address the workload.  Additional time and funding is 
needed to sustain and improve RGC efforts. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
--------------- -------------- -------------- -------- 
 
¶A.  Existing Laws against TIP 
 
In February 2008, the RGC promulgated the Law on the Suppression of 
Human Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation (hereafter the 2008 TIP 
Law).  The law criminalizes all forms of trafficking, including 
trafficking through debt bondage, and covers both internal and 
transnational forms of trafficking.  Chapters Seven and Eight 
provide civil penalties such as asset forfeiture by perpetrators, 
and nullifies any contracts made in the process of a trafficking 
offense, including loan contracts that would be considered illegal 
debt.  In October 2009, the National Assembly passed a new Penal 
Code that includes the same language from the 2008 TIP Law in its 
articles.  The Penal Code came into partial effect in December 2009 
and will come into full effect in December 2010. 
 
Previously, police and court officials charged child sex 
exploitation perpetrators with debauchery under a general 1996 law. 
The 2008 TIP Law contains articles to prosecute for child 
prostitution, sexual acts with a minor, and indecent acts with a 
minor, as well as containing more specific definitions of other TIP 
crimes.  The 2008 TIP Law made it easier to separate true TIP crimes 
from trafficking-related crimes, but also presented challenges to 
police and judicial officials in proving the more specific charges 
in the law. 
 
RGC officials, especially those in the National Committee, 
understood the need for training on the new law.  Training efforts 
during the reporting period are described in Section 4F.  MOJ 
officials are drafting Explanatory Notes on the 2008 TIP Law to be 
distributed to judges, prosecutors, and other RGC officials in late 
2010; a legal advisor to assist MOJ with this effort was funded by 
UNICEF.   One goal of the Explanatory Notes is to provide clarity on 
which articles of the 2008 TIP Law are trafficking crimes. 
 
Other relevant laws under which traffickers could be prosecuted 
include the 1997 Labor Law, which prohibits debt labor, slavery, and 
the labor of minors.  The Labor Law makes child labor (by those 
under age 15) illegal, but allows children aged 12-15 to engage in 
light work provided the work is not hazardous to the child's health 
or mental and physical development.  The work must also not affect 
regular school attendance or participation in guidance programs or 
vocational training.  However, confusion regarding the issue of 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  008 OF 019 
 
 
parental consent and the lack of specific penalties for child labor 
have prevented successful prosecutions of child labor violations in 
Cambodia.  Articles 363 and 368 of the Labor Law set monetary 
penalties for violating child labor provisions at 31 to 60 times the 
basic monthly wage. 
 
Articles 172-181 of the Labor Law generally proscribe certain forms 
of hazardous child labor.  Persons 15-18 years old may only work in 
non-hazardous occupations.  Responsibility for determining whether 
jobs are either "light" or "hazardous" rests with the Labor Advisory 
Committee (LAC).  The Labor Law also prohibits the hiring of someone 
to pay off debt. 
 
There are six declarations, signed by the Ministry of Labor and 
Vocational Training (MOLVT) in 2007 and 2008, that govern child 
labor conditions in Cambodia.   One of these defines hazardous child 
labor as work that is detrimental to the health and physical 
development of children.  The declaration includes a determination 
of the types of light work, limits the working hours of children 
ages 12 to 14 to no more than four hours on school days and seven 
hours on non-school days, and forbids them to work between the hours 
of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  The other five declarations on child 
labor conditions include:  (1) working and living conditions in 
plantations, (2) working conditions in the garment and foot wear 
sectors, (3) working conditions in the fishing industry, (4) working 
and living conditions in brick-making enterprises, and (5) working 
and living conditions in the salt production industry. 
 
¶B.  Punishment of Sex Trafficking Offenses 
 
Penalties under the 2008 TIP Law are comprehensive and vary 
according to crimes and their severity.  According to Article 15, 
trafficking people for sexual or other forms of exploitation is 
punishable by seven to 15 years in prison.  In aggravating 
circumstances, such as when the victim is under the age of 18, the 
perpetrator is a public official, or the crime is committed by an 
organized group, the punishment is 15 to 20 years. 
 
Judges typically imposed sentences between the minimum and maximum 
penalties allowed for crimes, except in aggravated cases where the 
maximum penalty was usually applied.  As permitted in Chapter Eight 
of the 2008 TIP Law, judges have discretion to add mandatory 
deportation from Cambodia upon completion of the sentences by 
foreigners convicted in child sexual exploitation cases. 
 
¶C.  Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses 
 
The 2008 TIP Law provides criminal penalties for the illegal 
recruitment of a person using force, or fraudulent or deceptive 
means.  Penalties for unlawful movement of a person for the purpose 
of exploitation, including for forced labor or services, is seven to 
15 years.  If the victim is under the age of 18, the punishment is 
15 to 20 years. 
 
According to Article 368 of the Labor Law, employers who employ 
children less than 18 years of age for "hazardous work," as defined 
under Articles 173 to 178 of the Labor Law, are liable to a fine of 
31-60 days of the base daily wage.  Indentured servitude is 
punishable by a fine of 61-90 days of the base daily wage.  However, 
there are no cases in which the Labor Law has been used instead of 
the 2008 TIP Law to prosecute traffickers. 
 
There are 25 labor recruiting companies licensed by the RGC to 
export Cambodian laborers to countries such as Thailand, Malaysia, 
and South Korea.  There were reports of some workers becoming 
trafficking victims due to the exploitative conditions in 
destination countries, especially Thailand and Malaysia, and a lack 
of monitoring in the source country.  The 2008 TIP Law includes 
criminal punishment for recruiters who knowingly use fraudulent or 
deceptive practices in order to subject workers to compelled service 
in a destination country, but there have been no prosecutions of 
labor recruiting companies in Cambodia for the exploitation of 
workers elsewhere.  NGO Cambodian Women's Crisis Center (CWCC) 
assisted the return of trafficking victims from Thailand and 
Malaysia to Cambodia and reported that when victims file a complaint 
against labor recruiting companies or employers, CWCC generally 
obtains compensation for the victim. 
 
¶D.  Penalties for Grave Crimes 
 
Rape is a criminal offense, and punishable by a five to 10 year 
prison sentence, according to Article 33 of the UNTAC Law.  The new 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  009 OF 019 
 
 
Penal Code Article 239-245, which take full effect in December 2010, 
contain the same penalties for rape, with additional higher 
penalties in certain aggravating circumstances.  According to the 
2008 TIP Law, sex trafficking of minors under the age of 18 is 
punishable by sentences of between 15 to 20 years in prison; and for 
persons over the age of 18, the penalty is seven to 15 years in 
prison. 
 
¶E.  Law Enforcement Statistics 
 
The MOI Department of Anti-Trafficking and Juvenile Protection 
reported 101 arrests of human trafficking offenders between April 
2009 and mid-February 2010.  In addition, there were 20 arrests 
during the same period on child prostitution charge, which all 
involved foreign pedophiles. 
 
There are 21 provincial and municipal courts, including Phnom Penh; 
of these, 18 provided basic data to the MOJ.  The 18 courts reported 
that during the first ten months of the reporting period there were 
106 prosecutions, of which there was one acquittal and 16 
convictions for confirmed trafficking.  [NOTE:  There were two 
convictions for confirmed trafficking in Phnom Penh on March 25, 
2009; this information was not available in time for inclusion in 
2009 TIP Report, so is included here.  END NOTE.]  An additional 14 
convictions are likely trafficking convictions.  The MOJ was not 
able to provide sufficient information to confirm whether these 
convictions were based on specific trafficking offenses or on 
related offenses, but Post is verifying this information directly 
with court officials.  There are 77 ongoing cases.  [NOTE:  In all 
106 cases, the articles related to TIP covered charges of "selling, 
buying or exchanging a person", "procurement of prostitution" and 
"unlawful removal with purpose." END NOTE.] 
 
AFESIP reported that in cases involving victims they assisted, 
police arrested 10 suspects and courts convicted 15 traffickers in 
2009, with penalties ranging between two and 18 years in jail, and 
civil compensation of three million riel in some cases 
(approximately $725 USD). 
 
There are no known convictions of labor recruiting firms for labor 
trafficking offenses.  Most labor recruiters are small, independent 
brokers, not formally employed by licensed labor recruiting 
companies.  Provincial police in Kampong Chhnang arrested one such 
broker for the unlawful removal of nine victims, ages 12 to 16, with 
the intent of sending them to work as servants in Malaysia.  The 
broker is in pre-trial detention and the case is with an 
investigating judge. 
 
Convicted trafficking offenders generally serve the time sentenced. 
In two cases, perpetrators were convicted and sentenced in absentia; 
warrants for the arrest of the perpetrators remain active.  Judges 
also began adding mandatory deportation to sentences completed by 
convicted foreigners.  One such foreigner, Belgian pedophile 
Phillipe Dessart, who had completed his prison sentence in April 
2009, was deported in September 2009. 
 
¶F.  RGC Training for Law Enforcement and Other Officials 
 
The RGC implemented an extensive training initiative to educate 
police officers and other RGC officials on the enforcement of human 
trafficking provisions in the 2008 TIP Law.  RGC officials held a 
direct leadership role in most training sessions, contributing to 
the design of training curricula and delivering the training to 
participants.  Due to limited resources, the RGC sought and received 
assistance from NGOs to provide logistical and technical support for 
the training, such as securing training venues, printing 
RGC-produced training materials in volume, and assisting with 
participant expenses.  The National Committee requested that donors 
voluntarily coordinate their activities with the National Committee, 
in order to direct resources to priority areas identified by the 
RGC. 
 
The RGC provided significant police training with technical 
assistance from the Law Enforcement Against Sexual Exploitation of 
Children (LEASEC) program, a project between the RGC, UNICEF, IOM, 
World Vision, Save the Children Norway, and the UN Cambodian Office 
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.  All training conducted 
with LEASEC technical assistance is delivered by national police 
trainers from the Training and Anti-Human Trafficking Departments of 
the Cambodian National Police, who also contribute to curriculum 
development.  In the provinces, national trainers are accompanied by 
trainers from the provincial Anti-Human Trafficking police.  This 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  010 OF 019 
 
 
program delivered quarterly training to 200 Anti-Human Trafficking 
police officers in 10 provinces; taught 950 district and commune 
police chiefs and deputy chiefs on legal procedure and skills in the 
investigation of trafficking and child exploitation cases; trained 
1,700 officers of all ranks and departments through the Cambodian 
Police Academy and its five regional training schools on handling 
trafficking and exploitation cases; held two national workshops for 
50 Anti-Human Trafficking police each, focusing on advanced aspects 
of the law, investigation techniques, and case studies; and provided 
medical forensics training in TIP and exploitation cases for 30 
Anti-Human Trafficking police officers. 
 
The RGC held a launch ceremony for approximately 100 police 
officials for the initial screening of a training film on victim 
identification and treatment during the rescue process.  The film, 
"Saving Seca," is being used as a training aid for police officers 
across the country. 
 
Cambodian National Police officials provided investigative skills 
training for trafficking and sexual violence cases to 120 police 
officers, with technical assistance from TAF through the Southeast 
Asia Investigations into Social and Humanitarian Activities (SISHA) 
organization. 
 
The Ministry of Justice (MOJ) conducted a series of training courses 
for district police, district governors, and provincial government 
officials on Strategies for Combating Human Trafficking.  The six 
workshops, taught by eight RGC officials and developed in 
consultation with the UN Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking 
(UNIAP), the International Organization for Migration (IOM), and the 
International Labor Organization (ILO), were held in Siem Reap, 
Preah Sihanouk, Koh Kong, Svay Rieng, Banteay Meanchey, and Prey 
Veng Provinces and focused on the 2008 TIP Law and discussions of 
prosecution, protection, prevention, and policy.  Approximately 
50-60 participants attended each workshop. 
 
Judges and prosecutors benefited from a coordinated training plan 
envisioned by the RGC.  The Royal Academy for Judges and Prosecutors 
(RAJP) is the only training school for attorneys who wish to become 
judges or prosecutors.  RAJP conducts annual continuing-education 
training for all of Cambodia's 309 sitting judges and prosecutors, 
as well as the intake program for 55 new judges and prosecutors each 
year.  In both, RAJP developed and delivered a module on 
interviewing child victims of trafficking and exploitation, with 
technical assistance from the LEASEC program.  Also in both training 
programs, RAJP designed and delivered a module on understanding and 
using the 2008 TIP Law to investigate and prosecute trafficking 
cases, with technical assistance from TAF.  RAJP contributed to the 
design of curricula and only RAJP judges and prosecutors delivered 
the training modules in the programs.  In November 2009, the 
Ministry of Justice conducted a workshop on TIP data collection for 
90 judiciary officials, including the presiding judges, chief 
prosecutors, and chief clerks from each of the 21 provincial and 
municipal courts.  The workshop was designed and delivered by an MOJ 
Undersecretary of State, focusing on elements of each article in the 
2008 TIP Law, differentiating between TIP and TIP-related crimes, 
and a process for collecting and submitting TIP prosecution and 
conviction data. 
 
Training for social workers was also a priority for the RGC.  Nearly 
700 social workers received specialized training on working with 
child victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation.  The training 
was delivered by MOSAVY, and created in consultation with LEASEC. 
RGC trainers, with assistance from TAF, also trained 60 social 
workers on participating in victim rescues, conducting victim 
identification, and providing emergency psycho-social assistance to 
victims.  The RGC released a Policy and National Minimum Standards 
for the Protection of the Rights of Victims of Human Trafficking in 
September 2009, and MOSAVY officials created and held a workshop on 
orientation and use of the new standards for 300 RGC officials. 
 
The U.S. Government provided specialized training in a few cases. 
The Department of State sent six Cambodian National Police officers 
to attend the International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) course on 
trafficking in persons.  The Department of Homeland Security sent 
one Cambodian police officer to the Asia Transnational Crime 
Seminar, and another police officer to a course on child sex 
tourism, forced labor and human trafficking. 
 
¶G.  Cooperation with Other Governments 
 
The RGC cooperates with other governments in the investigation and 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  011 OF 019 
 
 
prosecution of trafficking and child sex exploitation cases.  The 
RGC cooperates with U.S. law enforcement officials to return 
American citizens to the United States to stand trial under the 
PROTECT Act, and has done the same with nationals of other countries 
that have laws to prosecute their nationals who travel abroad to 
exploit children sexually. 
 
Cambodia is an active member of the Coordinated Mekong Ministerial 
Initiative on Trafficking (COMMIT) process.  Through this process, 
the six nations of the Greater Mekong Sub-Region meet regularly to 
discuss a regional anti-trafficking agenda and share information. 
Cambodia has a COMMIT Task Force, chaired by senior officials from 
the Ministries of Justice and Women's Affairs. 
 
Cambodia also has bilateral memorandums of understanding with 
Thailand and Vietnam on combating trafficking, including cooperation 
to investigate and uncover domestic and cross-border trafficking. 
The MOU with Thailand was signed in May 2003, and with Vietnam in 
October 2005. 
 
The Cambodian Police and MOJ cooperate with the Malaysian police on 
international TIP cases, and the RGC is working with the Malaysian 
government on a proposed MOU to combat trafficking. 
 
¶H.  Extradition of TIP Offenders 
 
The governments of Cambodia and Thailand have an extradition treaty 
which came into force in April 2001.  Although the treaty is a 
foundation for cooperation to address trafficking cases, bilateral 
relations between Cambodia and Thailand remained very difficult 
throughout the reporting period, and no traffickers were extradited 
under the treaty to Thailand. 
 
The RGC continues to cooperate with foreign governments to remove 
persons charged with pedophilia for acts committed in Cambodia for 
prosecution in their countries of citizenship. 
 
Despite the lack of a bilateral extradition treaty, Cambodia has 
cooperated to return to U.S. custody numerous Americans accused of 
being child sex offenders.  Since the 2003 passage of the U.S. 
PROTECT Act, the RGC has cooperated with the U.S. in 26 cases, nine 
of which have resulted in PROTECT Act convictions, and four of which 
have resulted in convictions on charges other than the PROTECT Act. 
During the reporting period, four Americans charged in PROTECT Act 
cases were returned to U.S. custody. 
 
¶I.  Evidence of RGC Involvement in or Tolerance of TIP 
 
The RGC has a clear policy against human trafficking.  Senior 
government officials have spoken on a number of occasions about a 
zero-tolerance policy toward human trafficking and officials 
involved in trafficking.  Because corruption is pervasive in 
Cambodia, it is widely assumed that some individual Cambodian 
officials -- including police and judicial officials -- are involved 
in or tolerated some aspects of human trafficking, but no evidence 
of such activities appears to exist. 
 
¶J.  RGC Steps to Counter Official Involvement in TIP 
 
Senior RGC officials have often stated that official corruption that 
aids or abets trafficking or other crimes will not be tolerated. 
 
In June 2009, police arrested Ministry of Justice official Prum 
Piseth on charges of accepting bribes and forging documents.  The 
forged documents were intended to secure the release of Alexander 
Trofimov, currently serving 17 years in the Preah Sihanouk Province 
jail for criminal sexual exploitation of children.  Prum reportedly 
forged the signatures of Minister of Justice Ang Vong Vathana and 
Prime Minister Hun Sen on a counterfeit release and extradition 
order, in exchange for USD 250,000 that was used to facilitate the 
scheme.  Prum is in pre-trial detention; the Phnom Penh Municipal 
Court charged him with bribery and forgery, and the case is with an 
investigating judge. 
 
In September 2009, the Ministry of Interior demoted and reassigned 
Heng Huon, the director of the Preah Sihanouk Province prison, after 
Heng the previous May authorized the temporary release of the same 
convicted perpetrator, Alexander Trofimov, in order to check on 
several business investments in the province.  Heng claimed he was 
not paid to allow the temporary release. 
 
¶K.  Anti-TIP Training for International Peacekeepers 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  012 OF 019 
 
 
 
In 2009, 139 deminers from the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces deployed 
to foreign countries on UN peacekeeping missions.  There are no 
reports that any of the demining mission members engaged in, or 
facilitated, severe forms of trafficking or exploited victims of 
such trafficking.  Prior to their departure, deminers received 
anti-TIP training coordinated by the National Committee and 
delivered by trainers from the Anti-Human Trafficking and Juvenile 
Protection Department of Cambodian National Police. 
 
¶L.  Child Sex Tourism in Cambodia 
 
Cambodia is identified as a destination point for pedophiles. 
Between April 2009 and January 2010, MOI reported the arrests of 19 
foreign nationals (four Americans, five French citizens, one British 
citizen, and nine other foreign nationals) for sexually abusing 
Cambodian children.  In the same period, the Phnom Penh Municipal 
Court reported that they convicted a total of six foreign nationals 
(two Americans, two British citizens, one French citizen, and one 
Greek citizen).  Prison sentences ranged from one to 10 years and 
civil compensation from USD 250 to USD 5,000. 
 
The 2008 Law on Suppression of Human Trafficking and Sexual 
Exploitation has extraterritorial coverage, allowing for the 
prosecution of Cambodian citizens committing similar crimes in 
another country, and the prosecution of a foreigner committing a 
crime involving Cambodian victims in another country.  There is no 
information that Cambodian nationals have traveled to other 
countries to engage in child sex tourism. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
--------------- --------------- -------------- 
 
¶A.  RGC Protection for TIP Victims and Witnesses 
 
The government has limited ability to provide protection for victims 
and no ability to protect witnesses at this time.  RGC resources for 
victim assistance are augmented by assistance from international 
organizations and foreign and domestic NGOs.  NGO shelters represent 
the safest place for witnesses during the trial phase of a case 
against a trafficker.  Police have no practical ability to protect 
NGOs, victims, or witnesses in high-profile cases.  NGOs fill the 
void by providing shelter and support to victims through vocational 
training and start-up capital to start businesses.  A number of 
shelters and foster home programs are available for child victims of 
trafficking. 
 
The RGC is unable to fund victim assistance shelters, and has 
concentrated on improving policy for victim assistance.  In 
September 2009, the RGC released a Policy and National Minimum 
Standards for the Protection of the Rights of Victims of Human 
Trafficking.  In January 2010, Cambodia was recognized as the only 
one of six COMMIT countries with national minimum standards for 
victim protection.  The new policy and minimum standards define 11 
rights guaranteed to victims of human trafficking, including the 
right to safety and protection, the right to privacy and 
confidentiality, the right to dignity, the right to services, and 
the right to freedom of movement.  The minimum standards also set 
out expectations of case management.  A crucial component is the 
expectation that all persons who come in contact with potential 
victims of human trafficking take steps to determine if they are 
indeed victims.  For example, the minimum standards require that 
service providers (including police) ensure a safe place for 
conducting interviews, ensure separation of victims from 
perpetrators, and conduct interviews using an approach that is 
mindful of the trauma victims may have experienced.  Training on the 
understanding and adherence to the policy and minimum standards 
began during the reporting period, and will continue throughout 
¶2010. 
 
¶B.  Victim Care Facilities 
 
The Royal Government of Cambodia strongly supports the concept of 
trafficking victim care and devotes a disproportionately greater 
share of government human resources to this problem.  MOSAVY 
operated a temporary shelter for victims of trafficking, rape and 
domestic violence in Phnom Penh, in order to provide temporary 
shelter and basic assistance until victims can be placed with an 
NGO-operated shelter and reintegration program.  MOSAVY works 
closely with AFESIP, IOM, UNICEF, World Vision and a variety of 
NGO-managed shelters throughout the provinces to assist initial 
reintegration of victims and follow-up investigations.  Foreign 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  013 OF 019 
 
 
victims of trafficking have the same access to victim care 
facilities as domestic trafficking victims.  Although growing in 
number, there are a limited number of shelters with the ability to 
provide proper care for foreign victims due to a lack of foreign 
language capabilities, and sometimes due to perceptions about 
language barriers and cultural differences. 
 
When TIP victims were repatriated to Cambodia from Thailand, the 
Poipet Transit Center, staffed by MOSAVY social workers with 
assistance from UNICEF, conducted preliminary assessments and 
assisted in tracing family members and reintegrating victims into 
their home communities, or placing victims at appropriate NGO 
shelters to serve their needs.  Since April 2009, MOSAVY identified 
83 victims of trafficking among persons repatriated from Thailand, 
and placed them temporarily at the Transit Center. 
 
For children who cannot reintegrate into their communities, MOSAVY 
will work to place them in long-term care and reintegration programs 
such as vocational training, job placement, and income generation. 
 
Most of the NGO shelters assist victims of all forms of violence, 
including rape, domestic violence and trafficking.  For example, 
World Hope International manages a short-term assessment center for 
victims of trafficking, but also accepts rape victims when there is 
space available. During the reporting period, the shelter assisted 
65 victims of trafficking.  Victims were provided with medical, 
psychological and legal services. 
 
Despite the number of victim assistance providers operating in 
Cambodia, there are not enough places in shelters to accommodate all 
victims, particularly minors.  IJM reported that a raid operation 
planned for December 2009 in Svay Rieng Province had to be postponed 
indefinitely, as all aftercare shelters reported they were at 
capacity and unable to receive additional victims. 
 
In December 2007, the Council for Legal and Judicial Reform, 
published a 65-page Legal Aid Services directory, a 
province-by-province, nationwide directory of service providers 
including information on which have lawyers or staff who offer 
counseling and referral services, and specialties such as human 
rights and women and children's issues, including trafficking in 
persons.  The Council distributed 5,000 directories in 2007 to 
government offices, NGOs, and villages in eight provinces.  An 
additional 5,000 were distributed in 2008 following an update. 
 
¶C.  Access to Legal, Medical, and Psychological Services 
 
MOSAVY continues to budget for Seva Kahpia Komar (SKK) (Child 
Protection Services), which has primary responsibility for placement 
of TIP victims with NGOs for additional care and support.  During 
the report period, SKK assisted 408 trafficking victims.  On 
occasion, the RGC also provides in-kind contributions to 
partnerships with NGOs, such as land, office space and staff 
support. 
 
Because of inadequate resources, the Cambodian government relies 
heavily on bilateral donors and multilateral institutions for 
approximately 50 percent of its total annual national budget, and 
has few resources to devote to trafficking victims.  While devoting 
more resources to trafficking than most other social ills, the 
government relies on foreign and domestic NGOs to provide many 
services to victims of trafficking. 
 
¶D.  RGC Assistance for Foreign Victims of Trafficking 
 
The government's record in assisting victims of trafficking is 
generally good, in view of its limited resources and lack of 
institutional capacity.  Foreign victim assistance is usually 
conducted by an NGO or international organization, or combination of 
the two, after referral by a governmental agency. 
 
The 2008 TIP Law does not contain protection measures specific to 
foreign victims.  There are no reports of foreign trafficking 
victims being charged or deported under immigration rules. 
Cambodia's commitment under the multilateral COMMIT process and its 
bilateral MOUs with Thailand and Vietnam sets out procedures for 
voluntary repatriation to home countries.  On December 3, 2009 
Cambodia and Vietnam signed a new MOU specific to victim 
identification and repatriation, including a Standard Operating 
Procedure for such actions.  During the reporting period, eleven 
female Vietnamese victims were repatriated to Vietnam, bringing the 
total number of repatriations to Vietnam to 104 since the initiation 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  014 OF 019 
 
 
of this project in June 1999. 
 
Foreign trafficking victims are provided temporary residence in 
shelters while awaiting repatriation.  A number of NGO shelters 
offer legal, education, and counseling services. 
 
¶E.  Access to Long-Term Shelter and Resources 
 
As with victim assistance services such as legal, medical, 
psychological, and shorter-term shelter services, because of 
inadequate resources, the Cambodian government relies on foreign and 
domestic NGOs to provide services to victims of trafficking. 
 
¶F.  RGC Referral Process for TIP Victims 
 
In many cases of coordinated raid operations, provincial Department 
of Social Affairs (DOSAVY) workers accompany police on raids to take 
immediate custody of potential victims.  If a DOSAVY worker is not 
part of the process when law enforcement encounters potential 
victims, police typically conduct a screening interview before 
referring potential victims to DOSAVY for identification and 
assistance.  However, local police sometimes directly refer victims 
to NGOs without going through social services officials. 
 
MOSAVY reported that local police referred 408 victims of sex 
trafficking to provincial DOSAVY offices during the reporting 
period.  DOSAVY offices, in turn, generally referred the victims to 
short- or long-term NGO shelters for further care depending on their 
needs.  In most cases, the overall referral process was quick, with 
victims receiving placements in NGO shelters within a few hours of 
being taken into protective custody. 
 
¶G.  Identification of TIP Victims 
 
There are no centralized statistics available on the total number of 
trafficking victims identified and assisted during the reporting 
period.  Both social services and law enforcement authorities can 
refer victims directly to NGOs. A small minority of victims may also 
approach NGOs directly, and thus be completely outside RGC 
monitoring. 
 
During the reporting period in Phnom Penh, the MOSAVY-run and 
-funded SKK received 408 TIP victims and referred them to 
appropriate NGOs.  MOSAVY continues to reinforce SKK's role as the 
primary clearinghouse for victims, instructing law enforcement 
officials to contact SKK officials for assistance in locating NGO 
placements. 
 
In close cooperation with MOSAVY, World Hope International operated 
a short-term assessment center in Phnom Penh for referral of TIP 
victims to longer-term care facilities to augment the services 
provided by SKK.  During the reporting period, the center assisted 
65 trafficking victims. 
 
The Healthcare Center for Children (HCC) reported that its shelter 
in Koh Kong provided services to 65 victims of labor trafficking and 
16 victims of sex trafficking in 2009.  Victims were referred to HCC 
by police and some other NGOs. 
 
¶H.  Proactive Identification System 
 
Although there is now no formal, nationwide system to identify 
victims proactively among high-risk groups, the government is 
working on creating these methods.  Building on technical assistance 
from IOM, MOSAVY officials in 2009 began to interview persons 
repatriated from Vietnam using a questionnaire designed to help 
identify TIP victims among the returnees.  MOSAVY reported 
identifying 143 victims of labor trafficking based on this 
questionnaire.  With RGC cooperation, UNIAP is piloting similar 
systems in a few provinces bordering Thailand. 
 
In general, law enforcement authorities conduct an initial screening 
for victims of trafficking before referring them to the provincial 
and municipal Departments of Social Affairs, where they will again 
be interviewed for victim determination. 
 
¶I.  Respect for Victims' Rights 
 
When trafficking victims are identified, their rights are respected 
in practice, and they are not treated as criminals.  Victims of 
trafficking in persons crimes are not detained, jailed, fined, or 
deported. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  015 OF 019 
 
 
 
In September 2009, the RGC released a Policy and National Minimum 
Standards on the Protection of the Rights of Victims of Human 
Trafficking.  The new policy and minimum standards define 11 rights 
guaranteed to victims of human trafficking, including the right to 
safety and protection, the right to privacy and confidentiality, the 
right to dignity, the right to services, and the right to freedom 
of 
movement.  The minimum standards also set out expectations of case 
management.  The minimum standards require that service providers 
(including police) ensure a safe place for conducting interviews, 
ensure separation of victims from perpetrators, and conduct 
interviews using an approach that is mindful of the trauma victims 
may have experienced. 
 
¶J.  Victims' Participation in Legal Cases 
 
Victims may file civil suits and seek legal action against 
traffickers, and a number of NGOs in the legal, human rights, and 
social services areas encourage victims to do so; the NGOs provide 
or refer victims to legal services. 
 
Cambodia's weak and corrupt legal system and lengthy legal process 
sometimes impeded access to legal redress.  NGOs reported that many 
victims would prefer an out-of-court settlement to a court 
proceeding as the fastest way to obtain monetary compensation.  The 
Law on Suppression of Human Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation 
allows a victim to claim restitution for damage done by the 
trafficking perpetrator.  If the court process is successful, 
however, the victim is expected to wait until a perpetrator finishes 
a jail sentence before obtaining compensation.  Credible fears of 
retaliation from traffickers also pose impediments to witness 
testimony. 
 
¶K.  Training for RGC Officials on Victim Identification 
 
The RGC engaged in numerous training efforts during the reporting 
period, many of the sessions designed to assist authorities in 
identifying and providing assistance to TIP victims (see section 
4F).  Training for judges and social workers in specialized needs 
of trafficked children was a key component of that training effort. 
The National Committee launched a victim assistance training video 
and related program in June 2009.  The RGC distributed copies of the 
training video and program to police and other government officials, 
and to NGOs providing victim assistance services.  The training 
program is a direct government response to the need for screening 
for TIP victims among persons rescued during police operations, and 
to reports of human rights abuses associated with implementation of 
the 2008 TIP Law. 
 
The Ministry of Women's Affairs maintains a few programs designed to 
prevent the trafficking of children to Vietnam for begging.  The RGC 
now operates the program in Svay Rieng Province that provides 
vocational skills and community sewing opportunities as an 
alternative to labor migration. 
 
MOSAVY's Anti-Trafficking and Reintegration Office (ATRO) continued 
to work closely with UNICEF to improve victim services.  With 
technical assistance through the LEASEC program, MOSAVY directed and 
delivered training to nearly 700 social workers nationwide. 
Building on an inter-ministerial MOU on victim assistance, ATRO 
conducted joint monitoring of shelters during the reporting period, 
together with NGO partners.  In cooperation with UNICEF Thailand, 
support has been provided to enhance MOSAVY's cooperation with Thai 
authorities on the repatriation of vulnerable migrants. 
 
Embassies and consulates in foreign countries do not receive 
training specifically related to trafficking and victim assistance. 
However, Cambodian officials overseas facilitate assistance with 
NGOs to help Cambodian victims outside the country.  For example, 
officials from the Cambodian Embassy in Jakarta are working with the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in East Timor, and IOM in Dili and Phnom 
Penh, to facilitate the repatriation of five Cambodian TIP victims 
who fled the Thai-owned fishing boat where they were forced to work 
and were rescued by Timorese fishermen. 
 
¶L.  Assistance for Repatriated Cambodian TIP Victims 
 
MOSAVY is mandated to provide care and protection to the most 
vulnerable population in the country, especially women and children. 
 As detailed in Section 4B, the RGC operates both the Poipet Transit 
Center and a child protection services agency in Phnom Penh that 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  016 OF 019 
 
 
provide shelter and assistance to trafficking victims, including 
referrals to NGO partners for more extensive care.  The government 
also relies heavily on international organizations, foreign and 
domestic NGOs, and other countries to provide medical aid and 
shelter to its repatriated nationals who are the victims of 
trafficking. 
 
¶M.  International Organizations and NGOs 
 
With the strong cooperation of the Royal Government of Cambodia, an 
estimated 90 NGOs work predominantly on trafficking issues, and of 
those, roughly 40 NGOs provide some form of service to trafficking 
victims.  The services include shelter (which usually includes food, 
sleeping accommodations, basic health care, counseling, literacy, 
and sometimes vocational training), legal assistance, drop-in 
centers, and re-integration assistance.  The RGC cooperated 
extensively with these NGOs on prosecution, protection, and 
prevention; under the National Committee structure, the RGC began 
soliciting voluntary donor coordination of activities, in order to 
direct resources to priority areas identified by the RGC. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) PREVENTION 
-------------------- 
 
¶A.  RGC Public Awareness and Education Efforts 
 
Public awareness and education campaigns typically target potential 
victims or the general public.  In the largest event of the 
reporting period, the Ministry of Women's Affairs coordinated and 
executed "Anti-Human Trafficking Day" on December 12, 2009 in Phnom 
Penh.  More than 1,500 participants attended a program presided over 
by Deputy Prime Minister Men Sam An and attended by Minister of 
Women's Affairs Ing Kantha Phavi; members of parliament; 
representatives of government ministries, foreign embassies, the UN, 
NGOs, the Phnom Penh municipality; and teachers and students.  The 
emotional event included testimonials from TIP victims, some of them 
children, and featured calls by senior officials to increase the 
fight against human trafficking. 
 
Cambodia's nine domestic television stations carried coverage of the 
event over the following days, reaching an estimated 3-4 million TV 
viewers with the anti-trafficking message. 
 
Also on December 12, the government conducted anti-human trafficking 
campaigns in Poipet and Siem Reap.  In Poipet, the RGC collaborated 
with NGOs and the Department of Social Development and Human 
Security of Thailand to host an event strengthening the network for 
combating human trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation along 
Cambodian-Thai border.  In Siem Reap, the RGC celebrated "Anti-Human 
Trafficking Day" with the support from CWCC, in an event focusing on 
prevention of child trafficking. 
 
The RGC cooperated with UNIAP in producing fifteen one-hour radio 
talk shows on human trafficking.  A wide range of topics were 
discussed during the shows including the new TIP law, trafficking 
onto fishing boats, trafficking through marriage, trafficking for 
sexual and labor exploitation, child safe tourism, safe migration 
and victim assistance. 
 
The Ministry of Women's Affairs Department of Information, with the 
support from IOM, conducted a national radio campaign to share 
information about the 2008 TIP Law and the prevention of human 
trafficking.  The National Committee disseminated an 
anti-trafficking film, with technical assistance from TAF, to 450 
university students in Siem Reap, Phnom Penh, and Svay Rieng.  The 
Ministry of Tourism conducted a number of workshops on child safe 
tourism in Phnom Penh, Preah Sihanouk, Siem Reap, Preah Vihear, 
Battambang and Prey Veng provinces, reaching 550 participants from 
the tourism sector, and government agencies.  The Ministry of 
Tourism also trained fifty peer educators in Phnom Penh on Child 
Safe Tourism. 
 
¶B.  RGC Monitoring of Migration Patterns 
 
The Cambodian government's capacity to monitor land borders with 
Vietnam, Laos and Thailand, as well as its coastline, is marginal. 
Because of its limited resources, the government does not have the 
ability to screen for potential trafficking along the borders. 
 
In February 2008, the Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training 
(MOLVT) launched the Labor Migration Information System (LMIS) to 
record the numbers of migrant workers departing Cambodia.  However, 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  017 OF 019 
 
 
the system has limited efficacy, as the system only tracks legal 
migration and only 10 licensed labor recruiting companies provided 
migration statistics for the system. 
 
The U.S. and Australian governments have helped Cambodia set up 
computerized immigration systems in its national airports in Phnom 
Penh and Siem Reap as well as the overland border crossings of 
Poipet and Koh Kong.  The British government funded a border 
security project which provided training to Cambodian immigration 
authorities. 
 
5C.  RGC Interagency Coordination and Communication 
 
On September 25, 2009, the Prime Minister signed the sub-decree 
establishing the new National Committee on the Suppression of Human 
Trafficking, Smuggling, and Labor and Sexual Exploitation (see 
section 3A). 
 
As part of the UN's Interagency Project on Human Trafficking in in 
the Greater Mekong Sub-Region (Cambodia, China, Laos, Burma, 
Thailand, and Vietnam), the Ministry of Women's Affairs chairs the 
project's Coordination Committee in Cambodia. 
 
¶D.  RGC National Plan of Action 
 
The National Committee is revising and updating a new National Plan 
of Action to cover the period for 2010-2013, expected to be 
completed in June 2010. 
 
The six working groups under the National Committee Secretariat are 
tasked with developing annual action plans for their area of 
responsibility.  Since the sub-decree launching the National 
Committee was signed in September 2009, each of the working groups 
developed its 2010 action plan based on the draft National Plan of 
Action for 2010-2013. 
 
¶E.  RGC Efforts to Reduce Demand for Commercial Sex 
 
The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) approved and coordinated in the 
production of a number of billboards, magazine advertisements, signs 
on public transportation, and hand-outs targeted toward potential 
consumers of commercial sex acts.  The MOT seal was prominently 
displayed on many of these public notices.  The MOT also held 
workshops on child-safe tourism in Phnom Penh, Preah Sihanouk, Siem 
Reap, Preah Vihear, Battambang and Prey Veng provinces, reaching 550 
participants from the tourism sector, and government agencies.  The 
Ministry of Tourism also trained fifty peer educators in Phnom Penh 
on Child-Safe Tourism. 
 
The Women's Media Center (WMC) has produced television spots and 
drama focusing on Trafficking in Persons, violence against women and 
children and the court system in Cambodia.  Six 30-minute episodes 
of TV spots were broadcast on three prominent TV stations in 
Cambodia.  The government has been supportive of these programs, 
especially the Ministry of Women's Affairs which provided full 
cooperation to WMC and other NGOs working on trafficking in persons. 
 
 
¶F.  Reducing Cambodian Participation in Sex Tourism 
 
There are no reports of Cambodian nationals participating in child 
sex tourism in other countries. 
 
5G.  Reducing Peacekeeping Troops' Participation in TIP 
 
During the reporting period, 139 deminers from the Royal Cambodian 
Armed Forces deployed to UN peacekeeping missions in foreign 
countries.  De-mining troops were the only troops that Cambodia sent 
on peacekeeping or similar missions abroad during the reporting 
period.  The National Committee designated trainers from the 
Anti-Human Trafficking and Juvenile Protection Department of 
Cambodian National Police to conduct the anti-TIP training for 
deminers, which covered topics such as definitions of various types 
of TIP, an overview of Cambodia's anti-TIP and sexual exploitation 
law, and information about the RGC's commitment to combating TIP. 
During the reporting period, the National Committee reported that 
592 deminers received training. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) PARTNERSHIPS 
---------------------- 
 
¶A.  RGC Engagement with Other Governments and Civil Society 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  018 OF 019 
 
 
 
The RGC engaged extensively with other governments to focus 
attention on combating human trafficking, particularly with its 
neighboring countries through the COMMIT process and through 
bilateral engagement.  In addition to instances cited in prior 
sections, the RGC hosted an Inter-Country Consultative Dialogue on 
TIP in Phnom Penh in July 2009.  Representatives from the RGC, 
Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia, and South Korea participated in two 
days of workshops focusing on results of programs in each country 
and improving cooperation on difficult cross-border cases. 
 
RGC engagement with civil society on TIP is also extremely high and 
is devoted to the active marshalling of resources to reduce 
causative "push" factors, mitigate "pull" factors, and combat 
traffickers while protecting victims.  There are over 2,000 NGOs 
operating in Cambodia, and in some sectors these relationships are 
characterized by mistrust.  However, in the anti-trafficking sector, 
RGC officials remain willing to engage with civil society.  In 
addition to numerous examples cited in prior sections, Cambodia's 
National Committee Secretariat created an Advisory Group of 
international organizations and donors who are highly active in 
helping the RGC meet its anti-trafficking goals.  The Advisory Group 
meets quarterly to provide input on the National Committee 
Secretariat work plan, and feedback on actions recommended by the 
National Committee or its working groups.  In each working group, a 
permanent 
vice-chair seat is assigned to an NGO representative active in that 
group's area of responsibility, to ensure inclusion and dialogue 
between the RGC and the TIP NGO community. 
 
¶B.  RGC Provision of International Assistance 
 
Due to lack of funding, the RGC is not able to provide financial 
assistance to other countries to address TIP.  The RGC does share 
willingly its ideas and practices in combating TIP.  The 
Inter-Country Consultative Dialogue mentioned in Section 6A is one 
such example.  Another example has been MOSAVY's willingness to 
share its Policy and National Minimum Standards for the Protection 
of the Rights of Victims of Human Trafficking with other interested 
governments.  At the COMMIT annual meeting in December 2009, 
Cambodia was acknowledged as the first country in the region to 
develop such policies and practices.  The governments of Vietnam and 
the Philippines have reportedly inquired about the development of 
these standards, and the RGC has shared information with both 
governments. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) RESULTS-ORIENTED PRACTICES 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶A.  In September 2009, the RGC released a Policy and National 
Minimum Standards for the Protection of the Rights of Victims of 
Human Trafficking (see section 5I). 
 
MOSAVY took a leading role in developing and disseminating these 
National Minimum Standards, with technical assistance from The Asia 
Foundation.  The standards have attracted interest from multiple 
other governments in the region, and showcased Cambodia's ability to 
pioneer new ideas.  The standards establish a true victim-centered 
approach for Cambodian officials to follow in combating TIP, whether 
those officials focus on prosecution, protection, or prevention. 
They also provide the foundation for the development of further 
tools, such as nationwide victim identification procedures, which 
the National Committee has identified as its next priority in the 
Protection category. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) STAFF TIME 
-------------------- 
 
¶A.  Political Officers Jenae Johnson and Greg Lawless drafted and 
edited this submission and estimated that the drafting of this 
report required 80 hours by one FSN-9 political assistant, 44 hours 
by one FS-04 officer, 8 hours by one FS-01 officer, and 4 hours by 
one FE-OC officer.  Embassy POC for this cable is Political/Economic 
Chief Gregory Lawless (T. 855-023-728-125). 
 
¶10.  (U) ABBREVIATIONS 
---------------------- 
 
¶A.  Following are abbreviations used in this report: 
 
ADHOC: Association de Defense des Droit de l'Homme (Human Rights 
Defense Association) 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000138  019 OF 019 
 
 
AFESIP: Agir pour les Femmes en Situation Precaire 
APLE: Action Pour Les Enfants 
CDP: Cambodian Defender's Project 
CNCC: Cambodian National Council for Children 
CNCW: Cambodian National Council for Women 
COMMIT: Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against 
Trafficking 
CWCC: Cambodian Women's Crisis Center 
CWDA: Cambodian Women Development Agency 
DOSAVY:  Department of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation (local jurisdiction of MOSAVY) 
IJM: International Justice Mission 
ILEA: International Law Enforcement Academy 
ILO-IPEC: International Labor Organization-International 
Program on the Elimination of Child Labor 
IOM: International Organization for Migration 
LEASEC: Ministry of Interior Law Enforcement Against Sexual 
Exploitation of Children Project 
LSCW: Legal Support for Children and Women 
MOI: Ministry of Interior 
MOJ: Ministry of Justice 
MOSAVY: Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation 
MOLVT: Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training 
MOT: Ministry of Tourism 
MOWA: Ministry of Women's Affairs 
RAJP: Royal Academy of Judges and Prosecutors 
RGC: Royal Government of Cambodia 
SKK: Seva Kahpia Komar (Service for Protection of Children) 
UNOHCHR: United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights 
UNDP: United Nations Development Program 
UNIAP: United Nations Inter-Agency Project Against 
Trafficking of Women and Children in the Mekong Sub-Region 
UNICEF: United Nations Children's Fund 
UNTAC: United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia 
USAID: United States Agency for International Development 
WMC: Women's Media Center 
 
 
RODLEY