02AMMAN5510
AMMAN CENTER FOR PEACE AND DEVELOPMENT SEEKS U.S.
Tue Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 005510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/RA (SUTPHIN/HANDON-DAVIDSON), NEA/ARN 
(ZIADEH) AND NEA/IPA (RATNEY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS JO MEPP
SUBJECT: AMMAN CENTER FOR PEACE AND DEVELOPMENT SEEKS U.S. 
FUNDING FOR TRACK II PROJECT: THE SECURITY DIMENSION OF THE 
ARAB INITIATIVE 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) On September 19, poloff met with Dr. Muhammad Kheir 
Mustafa, Director of the Amman Center for Peace and 
Development (ACPD) to discuss a proposed ACPD project "to 
develop an operational definition to the security aspect of 
the Arab Initiative."  The ACPD, one of the few remaining 
active pro-peace organizations in Jordan, has organized 
meetings over the past two years between retired Jordanian 
and Israeli military officers, and has participated in other 
Track II activities during that time as well.  The new 
project would include a series of workshops on three separate 
but interrelated tracks, seeking both Arab and Israeli 
perspectives on elements needed for realizable security 
guarantees.  The ACPD has approached a number of possible 
donors to support this project, including Canada and the NGO 
Search for Common Ground.  Dr. Mustafa said the ACPD would 
welcome U.S. support for their endeavor.  Details follow. 
End Summary. 
 
-------- 
The ACPD 
-------- 
 
¶2. (U) The ACPD is a small but active organization that has 
sought to keep lines of communication open between Israelis 
and Jordanians in the face of spiraling regional tensions and 
current widespread popular opposition to "normalization" with 
Israel throughout Jordanian society.  The ACPD has convened 
five meetings in 2001-2002 between retired Jordanian and 
Israeli military officers to discuss security and political 
issues of relevance to both sides (Note: the most recent 
meeting took place in Amman on August 2-3, 2002).  The ACPD 
has often collaborated with Dr. Yair Hirschfeld and the 
Israeli Economic Cooperation Foundation (ECF) on joint 
projects. 
 
----------- 
The Concept 
----------- 
 
¶3. (U) Dr. Mustafa told poloff that the ACPD, in its current 
proposal, seeks to move the Arab Initiative forward by 
providing a non-governmental forum where Arabs and Israelis 
could discuss security aspects associated with the 
initiative.  Mustafa told us that "because prospective 
participants would be outside of government, we could be more 
creative and forthcoming about discussing the envisioned 
requirements of all sides."  An informal paper outlining the 
proposal states "the purpose of this project is to develop an 
operational definition to the security aspect of the Arab 
Initiative" and "encourage inter-Arab and Israeli-Arab 
dialogue on issues of security.  The Arab Initiative is the 
clearest message yet for peaceful coexistence and normal 
relations between Arab States and Israel . . . Israel's 
security concerns are addressed specifically.  It is the 
purpose of this project to offer detailed operational meaning 
to that (offer) of Arab security guarantees." 
 
¶4. (U) The proposal notes the work that had been done under 
the auspices of the long-suspended ACRS Working Group.  The 
new project would not seek to cover the same ground that ACRS 
had, but rather look at "other possibilities" including: 
 
--  security agreements which might address specific issues, 
including 'non-aggression' declarations, alliances, 
cooperation between intelligence agencies concerning radical 
groups and individuals. 
 
--  setting up a security forum similar to that of the OSCE 
 
--  possible Arab contributions to an international 
peacekeeping force in the region 
 
--  Drafting a legally binding Arab declaration which might 
address Israeli security concerns related both to existential 
threats and those of radical organizations. 
 
-------------------- 
The Proposed Project 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) According to Dr. Mustafa, the project would be 
centered on a series of nine workshops organized in three 
interrelated tracks taking place over the course of one year: 
 (1) three Jordanian-Israeli meetings on Israeli perspectives 
of Arab security guarantees; (2) three Inter-Arab Security 
Experts meetings on Arab perspectives of Arab security 
guarantees; and (3) three Arab-Israeli security experts 
meetings to bridge gaps between the 1 and 2.  Meetings would 
be held in Amman, Tel Aviv, Cairo, Muscat, Nicosia, and 
perhaps other locations.  The project would cover the costs 
of participant travel to each meeting, hotel expenses, and 
related conference costs.  Each track would produce a report 
of conclusions from the meetings. 
 
----------------- 
Costs and Funding 
----------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Dr. Mustafa said that the ACPD is seeking support for 
this project from a number of potential donors.  The Canadian 
Embassy here told us that Ottawa (which has funded ACPD 
activities previously) believes the current proposal is a 
worthwhile project, and is looking at possible sources of GOC 
funding.  The ACPD also has been in contact with the NGO 
"Search for Common Ground" regarding funding.  The ACPD would 
welcome USG funding for this project and believes it would 
give the endeavor added weight. 
 
¶7. (U) The ACPD estimates that the costs of hosting, 
accommodating and paying travel expenses for participants in 
the nine workshops envisioned would amount to roughly USD 
132,000. 
 
-------------------------- 
Comment and Action Request 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) The ACPD is a small but dedicated organization that 
has kept lines of communication with Israelis open under 
difficult circumstances.  The project they have put forth 
seems to us a worthwhile endeavor that could help focus 
thinking on practical aspects of the Arab-Israeli dialogue. 
Post seeks the Department's assessment of the ACPD's proposed 
project, the possibility of USG funding, and the types of 
additional information, if any, that might be needed. 
GNEHM