02ANKARA9052
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 009052 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 19, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Deep Assassination - Hurriyet 
An academic assassinated in Ankara - Sabah 
Deep Murder - Milliyet 
Ankara concerned about Mosul and Kirkuk - Milliyet 
Foreign Ministry: EU's Cyprus decision unacceptable - 
Milliyet 
 
 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Bloody plot in Ankara - Cumhuriyet 
Security bargaining in Northern Iraq - Yeni Safak 
Denktas urged to seek solution - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Assassination:  All papers report on the assassination of an 
academic outside his house in Ankara.  Necip Hablemitoglu, 
an associate professor at Ankara university known for his 
investigations about Fethullah Gulen and foreign 
foundations, reportedly had been receiving death threats for 
some time, but had not requested protection.  "Sabah" 
implies that the murder was reminiscent of political 
killings in the recent past. 
 
 
Iraq: "Milliyet" reports that Turkey is concerned about the 
future of Mosul and Kirkuk, and is afraid that after the 
deployment of US and British troops in Northern Iraq, 
foreign troops could control the Mosul-Kirkuk region.  "Yeni 
Safak" reports that there has been a great deal of 
bargaining over Northern Iraq.  Turkey reportedly wants to 
send its own troops into Northern Iraq, and is against the 
deployment of British troops in the region.  However, the US 
has rejected the Turkish proposal.  The sensationalist 
"Star" newspaper also covers the issue on its front page. 
"Star claims that `in order to stop the refugee influx, 
Turkey wants to enter Northern Iraq.  But the US will 
prevent this move because it has promised the Pehmerges to 
invade Northern Iraq and establish a Kurdish State there. 
"Hurriyet" reports that the Turkish General Staff has denied 
press reports that the Turkish army is deploying extra 
troops to the border, and that foreign troops had crossed 
Turkish territory on their way to Northern Iraq.  The TGS 
stressed that only routine preparations for a possible 
operation were taking place. 
 
 
Cyprus:  All papers report that the Foreign Ministry has 
released a harsh statement to the EU yesterday on the Cyprus 
issue.  "Milliyet" reports that the Foreign Ministry has 
accused the EU of violating international agreements and 
making unilateral decisions about the future of the island. 
All papers report that during the summit at the Presidential 
Palace yesterday, TRNC president Denktas was urged by 
Turkish officials to continue the negotiations and to seek a 
settlement on Cyprus. 
Turkey-Armenia:  "Cumhuriyet" reports a gesture from Turkey 
to Armenia.  Turkey has been imposing sanctions to Armenia 
by not allowing its airspace to be used for civilian 
flights, and preventing Armenia from becoming a member of 
Eurocontrol.  The veto on the Eurocontrol membership was 
lifted, even though Azerbaijan had not yet joined the 
organization. 
Kurdish Broadcasting: The new regulation which allows 
broadcasts in languages other than Turkish, including 
broadcasts in Kurdish, was issued in the Official Gazette. 
TRT will begin limited broadcasts in Kurdish on both 
television and radio. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
a) Iraq 
b) Cyprus 
 
 
"Wrong move and Baghdad" 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamic-intellectual Yeni Safak (12/19): 
"There is a paradox on the Iraq issue.  The more reasons 
there are to make an operation illegitimate, the more the 
chances for a US operation increase.  Despite the lack of 
convincing evidence about an Iraqi link with terrorism as 
well as Iraq's possession of weapons of mass destruction, 
Washington has not changed its policy.  The determination to 
strike Iraq at all costs continues. . One has to be blind to 
not see this fact: The US plan for Afghanistan in the post- 
September 11 period will be implemented in Iraq as well. 
Following the Iraq operation, the US will militarily expand 
toward a vast geography, from the Philippines to Georgia 
under the pretext of an Al-Qaeda link.  . In the absence of 
a second UN resolution, the AKP government cannot support a 
US military operation against Iraq.  Washington should not 
take Ankara's support for granted.  Instead, efforts for a 
peaceful solution should be pushed even harder." 
 
 
"Last tango in Cyprus" 
Sami Kohen emphasized in mass appeal Milliyet (12/19): "It 
appears impossible that the two leaders of Cyprus will not 
come to the negotiating table.  There is simply no option 
for them in the midst of an immense push from the EU and the 
UN. . For the Greek Cypriot side, there is a deadline for a 
settlement by February 28.  The EU does not want to see a 
divided island, and the Greek Cypriot administration cannot 
ignore a settlement just because it has been assured of EU 
membership. . As for the Turkish Cypriots, there are some 
factors which work in favor of a solution as well.  The 
Turkish Cypriots are fed up with the `unsettled' Cyprus 
issue.  In the case of a continuation of no-settlement 
situation, we might see some migration from the Turkish side 
to the Greek side.  If that happens, the Turkish Republic of 
Northern Cyprus will continue to be isolated and alienated 
from the international community, not to mention the 
challenges that Ankara will have to face vis--vis the EU, 
the UN, and the US. . A long-lasting and good solution can 
be found as long as the two leaders of Cyprus act with 
common sense.  Both Denktas and Clerides are senior figures, 
and the current process is probably their last chance for 
peace." 
 
 
PEARSON