02ANKARA8991
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 008991 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 16, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
US Administration Wants Urgent Response - Hurriyet 
Turkey is Against the Deployment of US Troops - Milliyet 
Iraq heats up - Turkiye 
The Secret of the last-minute Gesture: Turkey promises to 
solve the Cyprus issue by February 28 - Hurriyet 
One-Person Victory, Agar is the new DYP chairman - Hurriyet 
(12/15) 
Russian Secret Service: Turkish tarikat works for the CIA - 
Hurriyet 
Greek-Cypriot Administration to offer Greek Passports to 
Turkish-Cypriots - Milliyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Government Feels the Breath of Iraq War-Cumhuriyet 
US Distributes Dollars in Northern Iraq - Yeni Safak 
FM Yakis: Compromise in Cyprus is likely before February 28 
- Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING: 
 
 
Iraq:  Weekend papers and TV Channels reported that 50 
trucks carrying US military equipment from Incirlik have 
passed into Northern Iraq through the Habur border gate. 
"Cumhuriyet" reports that the equipment will be distributed 
to Peshmerges by the 500 US intelligence officials already 
positioned in Iraq.  "Milliyet" reports that the US 
Administration expects to hear Turkish response to its 
military demands this week.  The deployment of thousands of 
troops in Turkey, and the use of Turkish Air bases and ports 
are among those demands.  "Milliyet" notes that the Turkish 
government will decide on the issue after consulting with 
the parliament, the NSC, and the General Staff.  The 
Military is positive about coordination and cooperation with 
the US, but is against the deployment of US troops on 
Turkish territory.  The US Administration is reportedly 
expected to send a delegation from the Pentagon to Turkey in 
order to examine the military bases for possible upgrades. 
 
 
EU/Cyprus: Citing the German paper "Welt am Sontag", 
"Hurriyet" reports that in the Copenhagen declaration, a 
sentence was added saying that the entry talks with Turkey 
should begin without delay following the EU criteria review 
in December 2004.  In exchange for this sentence, Turkey had 
to promise to resolve the Cyprus issue by February 28. 
"Radikal" reports Turkish Foreign Minister Yakis's comments 
that `a settlement in Cyprus is inevitable.' Without a 
settlement, Yakis warned, the Greek Cypriots will enter the 
EU on their own, making the Turkish armed forces an 
`occupier' of EU territory.  The FM added that a settlement 
on the island will be reached with the participation of the 
parliament, the public, NGOs, and the TRNC administration. 
"Cumhuriyet" reports that Erdogan and Gul were rather pushy 
in their lobbying for EU support in Copenhagen.  In the end, 
the EU was tired of the Turkish pressure.  The Turkish 
government was wrong to publish some cheap advertisements in 
the papers, to hide behind US support, and to threaten the 
EU with the proposal to enter NAFTA.  "Cumhuriyet" notes 
that Erdogan's unrealistic threats undermined his 
credibility at the summit. 
 
 
DYP: All papers report that parliamentary deputy Mehmet Agar 
was elected as the new chairman of DYP at a party congress 
on Saturday.  Sunday's "Milliyet" reports that Agar has made 
his career in politics despite his controversial role in the 
Susurluk scandal, which uncovered a web of state-mafia 
links. 
 
 
CIA-Turkish Tarikat connection: "Hurriyet" reports that the 
Russian Secret Service has charged Fethullah Gulen's 
Nurcular Tarikat with espionage, and linked the group to the 
CIA through various foundations and private businesses. 
 
 
¶C. EDITORIAL OPINION: US-Turkey 
 
 
"A new alliance between US and AKP" 
Washington correspondent of mass appeal "Milliyet" Yasemin 
Congar wrote (12/16): "The way the AKP government tried to 
sell the Copenhagen decision to the Turkish public and the 
fact that it did not hesitate to continue the reforms 
brought optimism to the US administration.  Washington is 
pleased to see that the AKP prefers determination on the EU 
goal as opposed to cheap populism and nationalism. . The 
Bush administration, on the other hand, believes that with 
the Copenhagen decision of December 12, not only the EU but 
also Turkey and the Turkish Cypriots have missed a chance. 
The US was expecting a breakthrough on Cyprus as a result of 
the Annan plan, and had hoped to see an agreement reached by 
December 12. . Now Washington's deadline for Cyprus is 
February 28, and it very much believes that a settlement of 
the Cyprus issue will pave the way for important 
opportunities before the AKP government. .  Iraq was another 
key issue during Erdogan's meetings in the US. Erdogan has 
made no commitments, but US officials believe that they have 
ensured a `common understanding.' 
With the help of Erdogan's visit, the AKP and the US laid 
the groundwork for a new alliance. Previous Turkish leaders 
had to strive for months and years to establish a warm 
relationship with the US, but Erdogan managed to do this 
even before the expiration of his political ban.  . 
Washington wants to trust Turkey in its efforts to resolve 
the Cyprus issue, and to enlist Turkey's cooperation in the 
fight against Saddam Hussein. 
February 28 stands as an important date for a Cyprus 
settlement.  But in fact the strike against Iraq might take 
place before that." 
 
 
"Behind the scenes" 
Washington reporter Asli Aydintasbas wrote in mass appeal 
Sabah (12/16): "It remains to be seen whether Ankara will 
manage to achieve its economic demands from the US now that 
Washington is caught up in a `pre-war' atmosphere. . Turkey 
has not given a clear response to the US demands for 
military cooperation presented by the Pentagon and Deputy 
Secretary Wolfowitz.  Ankara still waits to what kind of 
 
SIPDIS 
economic assistance package it can get from Washington. . 
Ankara should not make colossal demands to the US, because 
they are simply not realistic.  A realistic portrayal of a 
Turkey compensation plan is required.  Let's take Pakistan 
for example.  Pakistan asked the US to see customs tariffs 
lowered and quotas lifted on textiles in exchange of its 
support for the Afghan operation.  It simply did not happen 
the way Pakistan desired.  Turkey is not Pakistan, but there 
are certain things which might not be realistic for Turkey 
either, including the lifting of textile quotas and the 
expansion of the QIZ structure." 
 
 
PEARSON