02ANKARA8935
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Dec 12 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 008935 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Condoleezza Rice to Erdogan: We'll launch an operation 
against Iraq with or without your support - Vatan 
Erdogan might go to referandum about a war against Iraq - 
Milliyet 
The Last Supper - Hurriyet 
Turkish Day in Copenhagen - Sabah 
Erdogan to Denktas: Do not stay away from talks - Hurriyet 
Democratization package passed by Parliament-Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkey's Longest 48 hours - Radikal 
Cyprus is the key to accession talks in 2003 - Cumhuriyet 
Denktas won't be able to attend Copenhagen summit - Zaman 
Denktas: We cannot sign the UN agreement - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: "Milliyet" reports that after his meeting with 
President Bush, AKP leader Erdogan said that the chance of 
an operation against Iraq was high, and that the Turkish 
government may consider a public referendum as part of it's 
decision-making process.  Erdogan drew attention to Turkey's 
economic losses after the Gulf War, and stressed that a new 
operation's impact on Turkey would be severe.  Erdogan said 
that in his meetings with US officials, he was offered the 
`comical' sum of $1-2 billion for Turkey's potential losses 
in a military operation. 
 
 
EU Summit: All papers give extensive coverage to the EU 
summit that begins today in Copenhagen.  "Hurriyet" reports 
that the summit will formally begin this evening with a 
dinner of EU leaders, and questions whether it will be a 
`christians only' supper like `the last Supper' of Jesus, or 
whether there will be a muslim at the table!  Turkey and the 
EU will drift apart if Turkey is not given a date for 
accession talks in the near future.  "Turkiye" claims that 
the summit will be a test for EU sincerity and goodwill. 
All papers agree that Turkey's goal will be to start the 
accession talks in 2003, and note that the German and French 
formula for 2005 is not acceptable.  Meanwhile, papers 
report that the US has intensified its efforts in support of 
Turkey.  President Bush has called several EU leaders, 
including Danish Prime Minister Rasmussen and French 
President Chirac, following his meeting with Erdogan. 
"Radikal" columnist Murat Yetkin cites Secretary Powell's 
interview with  French TV-2, in which Powell urges that an 
accession date be given to Turkey at the Copenhagen summit'. 
Cyprus: "Sabah" reports that the outcome of the EU summit 
depends on TRNC president Denktas.  Denktas' refusal of 
discussions will benefit the Greek Cypriots.  Despite many 
objections by some Greek Cypriots, Clerides has already gone 
to Copenhagen to sign the UN agreement.  Due to medical 
problems, however, Denktas will be coming to Ankara for 
treatment.  Erdogan reportedly convinced Denktas to send his 
Foreign Minister to Copenhagen, but Denktas insists that the 
Minister will attend the summit as an `observer' with no 
authority to sign the UN plan.  "Vatan" reports that the 
TRNC will negotiate the Annan plan if Turkey is given a date 
for EU accession. 
 
 
Constitutional Reforms: All papers report that the first 
harmonization package, which removes some restrictions in 
the political party and election laws and extends freedoms, 
was approved yesterday in parliament.  However, the second 
harmonization package, which included articles on re-trial 
and disciplinary pardons, was postponed to a date after the 
Copenhagen summit. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
"The Washington Visit" 
Cengiz Candar, one of the travelling press with Erdogan, 
wrote in Islamic-intellectual Yeni Safak (12/12): "The 
agenda for the Bush-Erdogan meeting was predominantly Iraq. 
Bush clearly asked Erdogan for Turkey's acceptance of US 
demands presented earlier by Wolfowitz.  The nature of some 
of these demands is preventing Turkey from giving a quick 
response, particularly the stationing of around 100,000 US 
troops in Turkey. . It seems that Erdogan did not make any 
binding commitments for Turkey during his discussion with 
President Bush.  This is because Erdogan himself finds it 
difficult to characterize Turkey's possible role and stance. 
He also finds difficult to say `no' to the US.  He 
appreciates the importance of Turkish-US relations, and 
values the treatment given him at the White House. . Erdogan 
cannot pronounce a clear-cut `no' to the US demands, even in 
a lowered voice.  Yet he feels it very hard to explain and 
justify possible Turkish-American collaboration against Iraq 
to the Turkish public.  Therefore, the current picture 
presents a deadlock in Erdogan's view. In fact, he hopes to 
overcome it by taking his time to respond to the US." 
 
 
"US shows the stick, and gives no carrot" 
Zeynep Gurcanli wrote from Washington in tabloid Star 
(12/12): "Following the meetings in Washington, Erdogan and 
his party believe that a war in Iraq is inevitable, and is 
just a matter of time. . The US message to Erdogan and his 
party was clear enough: `Iraq's weapons of mass destruction 
pose a serious threat, and are more of a threat to Turkey 
than to the US.  Thus, we expect Turkey to support us.'  . 
The threat factor, or the `stick' if you will, worked fine. 
Erdogan seemed convinced about the seriousness of Iraqi 
threat.  However, he was also expecting to see a `carrot' 
along with the stick.  . Erdogan described the huge losses 
that Turkey suffered during the Gulf War, mentioning the 
figure of 100 billion dollars.  However, the figure given in 
return by American officials to compensate Turkey's losses 
in the case of a new war was simply annoying.  Erdogan 
confirmed his disappointment later, saying that `comical 
amounts' such as 1 or 2 billion dollars had been discussed. 
. Because of this approach, Erdogan is now trying to 
establish some new obstacles vis--vis a military operation 
against Iraq.  Now he talks about the need for `convincing 
the public,' and calls for an Arab coalition to include 
Egypt, Syria and Saudi Arabia being drawn into the game." 
 
 
DEUTSCH, ACTING