02ANKARA9068
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 009068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, DECEMBER 20, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Powell: Iraq's Arms Declaration is anything but accurate, 
full or complete-Milliyet 
Washington Post: Bush will push the button for war at the 
end of January - Sabah 
Sezer Vetoes Reforms, Parliament to send package back to 
Sezer - Sabah 
Sezer Vetoes reforms favoring Erdogan - Milliyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara Gives Nod to Site Surveys - Radikal 
The US Wants Joint Action with Turkey in Northern Iraq - 
Cumhuriyet 
Annan: Get ready for negotiations - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: "Radikal" columnist Murat Yetkin says that Ankara was 
approached by the US three times for permission to examine 
the suitability of air bases to be used in a possible 
operation against Iraq.  Following many visits and meetings 
between the two sides, the US has finally been given 
permission to carry out site surveys at Turkish air bases. 
[for a detailed summary of this article please refer to the 
Editorial Opinion section]  "Milliyet," "Sabah," "Radikal," 
and "Cumhuriyet" carry a western diplomat's comments on the 
US desire to act jointly with Turkey in Northern Iraq in 
order to achieve more efficient operation and more stable 
results. (Note: Ambassador Pearson discussed this subject on 
background with a number of Turkish journalists this week). 
Citing the US press, "Hurriyet" reports that President Bush 
will make his final decision about Iraq at the end of 
January in light of reports by UN weapons' inspectors.  Last 
night, TV channels reported on the US response to Iraq's 
arms declaration.  SecState Powell held a press conference 
at the State Department and told reporters that ` the 
declaration is anything but accurate, full and complete.' 
 
 
President Sezer Vetoes Constitutional Reforms: All papers 
and TV channels give extensive coverage to President Sezer's 
decision to veto constitutional reforms which would have 
lifted the obstacles to Erdogan's becoming prime minister. 
"Sabah" reports that AKP leader Erdogan has responded to the 
veto by challenging the president. AKP will send the reforms 
back to the president without changes.  In this case, the 
president will be compelled to sign the draft, but has the 
right to apply to the Constitutional Court to have the 
changes annulled. 
Cyprus: "Radikal" reports that UN Secretary General Kofi 
Annan has sent letters to TRNC president Denktas and Greek 
Cypriot President Glafcos Clerides announcing that the UN 
Cyprus envoy will go to Cyprus on January 8.  Annan urged 
the two leaders to prepare for negotiations.  The UN has 
criticized Denktas for his hard-line stance.  Denktas, for 
his part, has criticized the attitudes of the EU and UN in 
pressuring for a deal by February 28.  However, "Radikal" 
adds that Turkish officials adopted a new strategy at 
Wednesday's `summit' to urge Denktas to return to the table 
for discussions aimed at achieving a settlement. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq 
 
 
"The Iraq impasse of the AKP government" 
Sedat Ergin wrote in mass appeal Hurriyet (12/20): "The 
pending list of US military demands on Iraq remains as a 
major source of worry for the AKP government. The US, on the 
other hand, feels uneasy because the AKP's initial 
encouraging messages have turned into more mixed signals. 
The US would like to shape and finalize its military plans 
about Iraq, and wants to see Turkey's role clearly defined. 
. Giving an answer to the US demands seems to be one of the 
most difficult decisions in Turkish history.  The government 
has to make two critical decisions.  First, the US wants to 
open a northern front from Turkey. For this purpose, the 
Pentagon wants to send 90,000 US troops from Turkey into 
Northern Iraq.  By giving the nod to this request, Turkey 
will automatically become part of the war. The government is 
clearly unenthusiastic about this demand. . The second 
decision is about use of Turkish airports and harbors by the 
US.  The Pentagon notes the need for a comprehensive 
modernization of Turkish airbases and ports, and wants to 
conduct site surveys as urgently as possible.  Washington is 
annoyed by the fact that Turkish officials, who gave 
encouraging responses to Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul 
Wolfowitz, have so far declined to grant official permission 
for the US requests.  The decision taken during the foreign 
policy `summit' at the presidential palace on Wednesday 
indicates that Turkey will delay permission for the site 
inspections for some time.  . The main reason for Ankara's 
reluctance is concern over Turkish economic losses.  Ankara 
will suffer economically whether or not it gets involved in 
the US operation, yet the degree of Turkey's compensation by 
the US is unclear.  . Given these facts, the upcoming visit 
of PM Gul to Washington becomes even more important.  Ankara- 
Washington bargain should be finalized prior to the visit, 
and Turkey should have a clearly-defined stance by then." 
 
 
"Turkey approves US in-country site surveys" 
Murat Yetkin informed in liberal-intellectual Radikal 
(12/20): "Turkey has finally approved US request for 
conducting site surveys at Turkish military bases and ports. 
Following a series of demarches, including a Rumsfeld- 
Logoglu meeting in Washington and Wolfowitz's contacts in 
Ankara, Foreign Minister Yakis notified Washington about 
Turkey's decision to accept the surveys on December 18, just 
prior to the foreign policy `summit' on Iraq and Cyprus at 
the presidential palace.  . Early next week, US military 
teams already in Turkey will begin the site surveys.  Their 
survey list includes ports in Antalya and Mersin, and 
airports in Diyarbakir, Gaziantep, and Malatya.  The purpose 
of the surveys is to find out whether the airports are 
suitable for landing and take-off of heavy transport planes, 
and if the ports are suitable for military loading 
operations.  . Turkish officials note that granting 
permission for the site surveys does not mean a decision for 
Turkey to participate in a possible operation against Iraq. 
Turkey will exert efforts for a peaceful settlement, but at 
the same time will undertake measures for coping with its 
various options." 
PEARSON