02HARARE1784
MEDIA REPORT FOOD CRISIS IN ZIM AND GMO FOOD;
Mon Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 001784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PD, AF/S, INR/R/MR, AF/RA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR EAID EAGR SENV KPAO ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REPORT FOOD CRISIS IN ZIM AND GMO FOOD; 
HARARE 
 
 
  ¶1.   Under headline "We'd rather starve: Importing of 
      genetically modified food risky" the 
      government-controlled daily "The Herald" (08/05) 
      carried the following op-ed by Isheunesu Magwaza: 
 
  ¶2.   ". . .Let me point out clearly that genetically 
      modified (GMO) food has a long smoldering scientific 
      controversy over risks and benefits.  To date there has not 
      been any detailed analysis of the risks associated with GMO 
      foods.  GMO imports are restricted in European countries 
      and elsewhere because of environmental and health concerns. 
      The importation of GMOs would render much maize grown in 
      Zimbabwe unmarketable to other countries.  It is a known 
      fact that maize shipment from the U.S. is a mixture of 
      conventional varieties and high tech kernels bearing 
      bacterial genes to protect against insect pests.  These 
      bacterial genes are a threat to human health and 
      environment. 
 
      ". . .If the U. S. has genuine need to alleviate our 
      country's food shortage, it has to bring in milled 
      GMO maize thus avoiding pollen drift.  It is 
      inconsiderate for the U. S. to refuse milling the 
      GMO maize before its importation into Zimbabwe.  The 
      stance by the U. S. food agencies to refuse to cover 
      the milling expenses raises more questions than 
      answers.  Milling expenses are estimated $1,000 per 
      metric ton which is not an expense at all for the 
      giant nation, considering how much it costs to drop 
      one bomb in Afghanistan.  Fellow Zimbabweans 
      remember when India balked a humanitarian shipment 
      of genetically modified food, one U. S. official was 
      quoted as saying `beggars cannot be choosers.'  Yes, 
      beggars cannot be choosers, not of a doomed future! 
      Fellow Zimbabweans we cannot loose our morals, 
      dignity, resources and identity for a few GMO maize 
      grains.  It's good to be hungry with a free soul and 
      clear conscience than to have a full stomach with 
      contaminated and colonized soul and mind.  The 
      government was right in refusing GMO maize.  Food 
      for thought not death." 
 
WHITEHEAD