02HARARE2022
MEDIA REACTION WSSD; HARARE
Wed Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 002022 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PD, AF/S, AF/RA 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION WSSD; HARARE 
 
 
  ¶1.   Following are excerpts of editorials carried in 
      the September 4 editions of the independent daily "The 
      Daily News" and the government-controlled daily "The 
      Herald" on Robert Mugabe's speech to the WSSD: 
 
  ¶2.   Under headline "As millions face starvation, 
      Mugabe scolds Tony Blair," the "Daily News" (09/04) 
      comments: 
 
      "Zimbabweans will have reacted differently to 
      President Mugabe's emotional address to the WSSD 
      in Johannesburg on Monday.  Some will praise it 
      for its blunt warning to the British Prime 
      Minister, Tony Blair, to stop what Mugabe 
      believes is his interference in Zimbabwean 
      politics. . .  Others will rank it as a rather 
      unfortunate speech which did not address the 
      nitty-gritty issue of the summit's agenda - 
      sustainable development.  They will regret 
      Mugabe's preoccupation with Tony Blair to the 
      exclusion of the number one subject among the 
      people today - starvation. . .  So, while it may 
      be possible that there are those who feel the 
      President's speech to the Earth Summit hit the 
      right note, there may be others who feel 
      strongly that by taking his brawl with Tony 
      Blair to such a world forum, Mugabe did not 
      enhance his international reputation one whit. 
      Certainly, they would not feel that the speech 
      would do much to help the six million people 
      threatened with starvation.  They would counsel 
      against the confrontational stance of the 
      government, while the country is in such dire 
      need of food aid." 
 
  ¶3.   Under headline "President's speech should 
      invigorate us" the government-controlled daily "The 
      Herald" (09/04) comments: 
 
      "President Mugabe's speech at the WSSD on Monday 
      has been hailed by most well-meaning people 
      throughout the world for speaking on behalf of 
      the poor.  The thunderous applause he got during 
      and after his address said it all.  This was 
      probably his finest moment in history as he 
      hogged international limelight on all major 
      television networks, newspapers, radio talk 
      shows and news agency reports.  In just 10 
      minutes he had devastated the entire Western 
      coalition against Zimbabwe and given the Third 
      World a new voice to speak with boldness against 
      neo-colonialism being brought in the name of 
      globalization and democracy. . . Although he did 
      not insult anyone, British Prime Minister Tony 
      Blair particularly felt the sting of his candid 
      speech. . .  What the speech has achieved more 
      than anything else is the message that firstly, 
      Zimbabwe is a truly free country and will die 
      protecting its sovereignty.  Secondly, the land 
      reform program is here to stay.  This is the 
      message the world needed to hear. . . 
      Zimbabweans should find new vigor and strength 
      from the President's boldness and forthrightness 
      to push on the land agenda and support this 
      courage by making the agrarian reforms a 
      success. . . ." 
 
SULLIVAN