03ADANA178
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Tue Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0178 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          JUL 04-05-06, 2003 
 
 
¶1.  This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for July 04-05-06, 2003.  Please note that 
Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Bolge / A strategic research center has 
been opened in Adana by some academicians 
and historians.  Cezmi Yurtsever, a 
historian, announced that this center is to 
protect the proud history of the Turkish 
Nation. 
 
 
¶3. Milli Gazete / Half of the population of 
(60 families) Kadirusagi Village, in 
Malatya live in US. It started with one 
family going to US as immigrants and the 
rest followed after that.  Most families 
have dual citizenships and don't think 
about returning to Turkey. 
 
 
¶4. Milli Gazete / The shopkeepers of Incirlik 
village in Adana complain about the slow 
down in their businesses. About 1000 
American soldiers leaving the base affected 
the 500 shops in the village economically. 
 
 
¶5. Sabah, Evrensel, Tercuman / About 500 
people in Diyarbakir made a "peace chain" 
by holding their hands around the 
historical castle and asked for a general 
amnesty.  The gathering was organized by 
Diyarbakir DEHAP (The Democratic People's 
Party). 
 
 
¶6. Evrensel / Government officials declared 
that the electricity bills are going to be 
higher in the East and Southeast. "This is 
discrimination," announced the spokesperson 
of the Electrical Engineers Association. 
 
 
¶7. Evrensel / Adana NO-WAR Platform held a 
meeting in a park on June 4 and protested 
the US. The secretary of the Human Rights 
Organization in Adana blamed the US for 
wars and colonization and called all 
nations for a fight against the US. 
 
 
¶8. Evrensel / A pregnant woman in Hakkari 
claimed that a soldier kicked her during an 
argument about a smuggled cow and she lost 
her unborn baby after the incident.  The 
woman sued the soldier in Semdinli. 
HART