03ADANA229
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Tue Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0229 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          SEPTEMBER 01, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for September 01, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Sabah/Milliyet: A group of alleged PKK/KADEK 
militants attacking the Security Directorate in 
Silvan, Diyarbakir province, last night killed 
one policeman and wounded two others. The 
provincial Security Director of Diyarbakir went 
to Silvan immediately after the attack, and the 
security forces launched an operation in the 
region to arrest the assailants. 
 
 
¶3. Milliyet/Evrensel: Over ten thousand people 
attended the"Peace and Democratic Solution 
Meeting" organized by DEHAP (Democratic 
People's Party), EMEP (Labor Party), SDP 
(Socialist Democratic Party, and Free Society 
Party in Mersin. Despite warning by police, a 
group of demonstrators shouted pro-Ocalan 
slogans, such as: "Biji Serok Apo (Long Live 
Leader Apo), "Ocalan, Ocalan Greetings to 
Imrali." Police tried to scatter the group and 
detained eight persons. DEHAP's Deputy 
Chairman, Naci Kutlay claimed that the 
Reintegration Law had turned into denouncing, 
and he was often interrupted with pro-Ocalan 
slogans. The groups threw stones at police when 
they tried to intervene. The crowd dispersed 
peacefully after the police withdrew. 
 
 
¶4. Turkiye: Mehmet Can Cicek, 15, was killed as 
the explosive he found while grazing his live 
stocks in rural Solhan, Bingol province, 
exploded. 
 
 
¶5. DEHAP's Youth Organization is going to deliver 
letters to three hundred thousand youths under 
its "You should do something for peace, too" 
campaign on September 1 World Peace Day. 
DEHAP's members will hand deliver the letters 
in thirty five provinces in the Thrace, Aegean, 
Mediterranean, and Central regions of Turkey 
and ask the youth in those regions to be more 
sensitive to social issues and do more for 
protecting internal peace. 
 
 
ECONOMIC 
 
 
¶6. Bolge/Tercuman/Zaman: Kamu-Sen's (Public 
Employees Union) representative for Adana, 
Ismail Koncuk, said the government "showed the 
group the streets" regarding their demand for a 
salary increase. Koncuk added that Kamu-Sen's 
five thousand administrators would go on a 
hunger-strike nationwide and one hundred people 
would participate in a hunger strike in Adana. 
Collective bargaining with the government 
commenced on August 15 and concluded with 
disagreement on August 30. 
 
 
¶7. Turkiye: The carcass of a cow was found in the 
yard of Social Security Hospital and Provincial 
Health Department Lodgings in Bingol, causing 
panic in town. The tests by the Provincial 
Agricultural Department revealed that the cow 
had contracted anthrax. The carcass of the cow 
was buried in a lime-lined ditch by municipal 
officials. 
 
 
TOURISM and CULTURE 
 
 
¶8. Hurriyet: Excavations and restoration work at 
the Zeugma site in Gaziantep restarted with 
funds made available by Special Administration 
Directorate of Gaziantep. Three more mosaics, a 
wine storage, and a fountain were discovered. 
REID