03ADANA169
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Wed Jul 02 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0169 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          JULY 01, 2003 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for July 01, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Evrensel, /  "The Story of a Day in the 
Village", a Kurdish documentary, received a 
second place award in a competition 
organized by Van Yuzuncu Yil University. 
The Assistant Governor scolded and fired 
the organizer of the competition and said 
he should have questioned the head of the 
department who allowed the Kurdish 
documentary in the competition. 
 
 
¶3. Evrensel, Cumhuriyet, / Human Rights 
Organization, Diyarbakir Law Bar Women's 
Rights Section, and Women's Support Center 
in Diyarbakir protested the publishing 
policy of Vatan and Hurriyet papers for the 
tabloid type presentation of the news about 
the 13-year-old girl who was regularly 
raped by people including some government 
officials in a period of seven months. They 
said since a 13 year-old-girl is involved, 
the news coverage should be restricted 
until the end of the case. 
 
 
¶4. Milli Gazete, Turkiye / Adana State 
Security Court found Eser Yangin, Serdar 
Tanrikulu, and Cigdem Micogullari, three 
members of the Marxist Leninist Communist 
Party, guilty of planning a bombing attack 
during the Prime Minister's visit in 
Adana[Editor's Note: June 30, 2003].  The 
other six members of the group were 
released. 
 
 
¶5. Milliyet, / Chief of the AKP Kozan Branch 
made a list of 20 teachers who he wants to 
be appointed to several schools in Kozan. 
The media also discovered the list, which 
was sent to AK Party government members in 
Ankara. (Editors Comment: Normally the 
teachers are appointed by the government 
according to the points they have. They 
cannot choose where they are going to work. 
By asking that these teachers work in 
Kozan, he's trying to have teachers who 
have the same political ideas in his region 
and discriminating against others.) 
HOLTZ