03ANKARA7100
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Erdogan Plans `Friendship Message' in Greek Cyprus - 
Hurriyet 
Investigation of Four Former Ministers - Hurriyet 
Biometrics introduced for US Visa - Hurriyet 
First Step into South Cyprus - Milliyet 
Italians Mourn their Dead - Turkiye 
Afghan Model for Iraq - Turkiye 
Italy's September 11 - Aksam 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
TRNC Celebrates 20th Anniversary - Cumhuriyet 
Washington Changes Its Iraq Plans - Yeni Safak 
PKK in Search of A New Name - Yeni Safak 
Chaos in Iraq Scares Off Japan - Zaman 
Reuters Poll: Turkey Will not be Admitted to EU Before 2014 
- Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Erdogan's Cyprus Visit:  "Hurriyet" reports that in during 
his visit to Cyprus tomorrow, PM Erdogan wants to go cross 
into Greek Cyprus to deliver a `message of goodwill.' 
Turkish Foreign Ministry officials are holding contacts with 
both Greece and the Greek Cypriots to arrange the visit. 
During his meetings with Denktas and opposition parties, 
Erdogan will stress that the Annan plan can be used as a 
basis for discussion toward a solution in Cyprus. 
"Cumhuriyet" reports that CHP leader Deniz Baykal and many 
deputies and diplomats will go to TRNC to mark the entity's 
20th anniversary.   "Turkiye" says that Foreign Minister Gul 
has developed a new Turkish plan to resolve the Cyprus 
issue.  According to the plan, Turkey will offer concessions 
to settle the Maras issue and agree to reduce the Turkish 
military presence on the island. 
 
 
Ambassador Edelman Rejects Allegations for PKK-US Hostage 
Exchange:  "Hurriyet" and "Zaman" report that US Ambassador 
Eric Edelman met with Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Ugur 
Ziyal yesterday at the request of Turkey.  Reportedly, Amb. 
Edelman gave details on the clash between PKK/KADEK 
militants and US forces with Kurdish peshmerge.  Edelman 
reportedly said that the clash was not the result of a 
planned operation, and added that the US had not exchanged 
any prisoners with the PKK/KADEK. 
 
 
Italian Reaction to Nasiriye Attack:  Italy is mourning the 
loss of 18 Italian soldiers killed in Wednesday's bomb 
attack in the Southern Iraqi city of Nasiriye.  The Italian 
press describes the attack as `Italy's September 11.'  After 
the attack, Italian opposition parties have demanded that 
their troops be withdrawn from Iraq.  "Zaman" reports that 
the attack has frightened Japan, and a Japanese government 
spokesman announced the government's decision to postpone a 
possible Japanese troop deployment in Iraq. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq 
 
 
"Saddam Takes Revenge" 
Sami Kohen observed in mass appeal Milliyet (11/14): "The 
situation in Iraq increasingly makes clear that Saddam 
Hussein has started to take his revenge on the US.  The 
magnitude and style of the attacks against the occupation 
forces indicate an organized guerilla war, if not a popular 
resistance. . Following these developments, the US 
administration felt the need to reevaluate its Iraq policy. 
According to Washington-based reports, the Bush 
administration has now decided to transfer authority from 
Americans to Iraqis as quickly as possible.  If that is 
really the case, it indicates a complete U-turn in  US 
policy for Iraq.  The Bush administration has pursued a 
policy based on the belief that it has all the capabilities 
to finish the job alone.  This miscalculation has come at a 
high cost.  Things would have been different had the US 
acted along with an international peacekeeping force and 
under UN authority." 
 
 
"American Puzzle" 
Hasan Bulent Kahraman opined in the liberal-intellectual 
Radikal (11/14): "It seems that the US policy for Iraq as 
well as its theories about Iraq's future have totally 
collapsed.  It is unlikely that the Bush administration can 
overcome the consequences in the foreseeable future.  Yet 
there is an unanswered question that remains in the air: 
Will President Bush be re-elected after all of these 
failures?  Not only it is early to talk about the election, 
but it is also difficult to draw a conclusion based on the 
current situation.  The opposition has not yet presented a 
strong case for itself in the upcoming campaign.  Moreover, 
Democrats are not suggesting any new policy guidance for 
Iraq - they have limited themselves to criticizing the 
administration.  Let's not forget the impact of patriotic 
feelings, which helped the Bush administration gain needed 
support from the Congress, including support from Democrats. 
. The gist of the issue is probably not about Republicans 
and Democrats, who are saying almost the same thing.  The 
real issue is about the lack of US creativity in coming up 
with new ideas.  The situation is like a complex American 
puzzle for which even the US doesn't have the answer." 
 
 
EDELMAN