03ANKARA5954
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005954 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Gen. Myers: Muslim troops will be good for Iraq - Milliyet 
Ambassador Edelman: We've got tasks in Iraq [other than the 
PKK] - Hurriyet 
Edelman says U.S. pressured EU re KADEK - Aksam 
Bush clears Saddam on involvement in 9/11 - Posta 
Gul: GOT will take the final decision on Iraq - DB-Tercuman 
U.S. troops fire at AP car in Iraq - DB-Tercuman 
Arafat urges Ankara to continue support - Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
GOT believes UN condition not necessary for troop deployment 
in Iraq - Radikal 
Bush admits Saddam not connected to 9/11 - Cumhuriyet 
Edelman is asked about KADEK - Yeni Safak 
Edelman: U.S. will handle the PKK in due time - Zaman 
KADEK not on EU terror list - Yeni Safak 
Arafat: I'm ready to become a martyr - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
NSC to discuss Iraq: All dailies expect today's National 
Security Council (NSC) meeting to decide whether Turkey 
needs a parliamentary motion to deploy peacekeepers in Iraq. 
However, papers do not expect the NSC to adopt a concrete 
decision on the issue.  Since the U.S. has not given a 
written guarantee for elimination of the PKK, the NSC will 
not announce a decision on Iraq, writes "Hurriyet."  Foreign 
Minister Gul said a UN decision envisaging an international 
peacekeeping mandate in Iraq would be helpful, but that the 
final decision would be made by the GOT.  "Zaman" expects 
the government to clear its position after the meeting on 
Friday even if the NSC remains silent on troop deployment. 
"Radikal" says that President Sezer and Prime Minister 
Erdogan do not agree on whether UN approval is needed before 
Turkey sends peacekeeping troops to Iraq.  Both are expected 
to express their differences at the NSC meeting today. 
 
 
Military awaiting government decision for Iraq: The TGS has 
completed military preparations on September 14 for 
deploying peacekeepers in Iraq, and is waiting for a 
decision by the government, according to "Milliyet." 
 
 
Ambassador Edelman meets DYP leadership: All papers and TVs 
report U.S. Ambassador to Ankara, Eric Edelman's courtesy 
visit to the True Path Party (DYP) on Thursday.  Responding 
to press questions after meeting with the DYP leadership, 
Ambassador Edelman said the U.S. had always extended strong 
support to Turkey regarding the PKK problem, and reminded 
that Turkey had carried out the operation for capturing the 
PKK leader Ocalan in cooperation with the U.S.  Edelman 
noted that KADEK had been put on the U.S. terror list within 
months after its founding, and added that Washington was now 
putting pressure on EU countries to do the same.  He also 
said that President Bush had voiced open commitment for 
ending terror in Iraq.  Nevertheless, U.S. troops cannot 
accomplish several goals at the same time, Edelman pointed 
out.  Talks between the U.S. and Turkey will continue 
regarding the PKK presence in Northern Iraq, he stressed. 
`I'm sure that progress is possible as long as the parties 
demonstrate good will,' Edelman said. 
 
 
Americans disappointed by Turks' PKK condition: U.S. has 
given Turkey the message that it wanted to see the results 
of the partial amnesty declared by Ankara for terror 
organization defectors, writes "Hurriyet."  The U.S. is 
hoping to see a decrease in the number of PKK/KADEK 
militants in the region by encouraging them to apply for 
amnesty, according to Hurriyet.  The Americans are annoyed 
that the GOT was demanding the elimination of PKK before 
deploying troops in Iraq, the paper comments.  Americans 
believe that operations against the PKK would be easier once 
security is established throughout Iraq, and they stress 
that Turkish troops were needed for security in Iraq, says 
Hurriyet. 
Ankara shelves Customs Union agreement with TRNC: A Customs 
Union agreement that was signed between Turkey and the 
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) will not be 
submitted to the parliament for approval, Foreign Minister 
Gul told the EU countries, reports "Hurriyet."  Ankara had 
to step back in the face of strong opposition from EU 
members, according to Hurriyet.  The agreement was signed 
early August in an effort to help the TRNC overcome 
international economic sanctions. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"Confusion over Iraq" 
Taha Akyol observed in the mass appeal Milliyet (9/19): 
"Turkish troops have accomplished social successes in 
Bosnia, Kosovo, and Afghanistan. .  Those who wish Iraq to 
become another Vietnam are dreaming.  Iraq's geography and 
demography do not provide a suitable ground for it.  Ethnic 
and religious civil wars might erupt in Iraq, which will 
mean catastrophe for all including Turkey.  Such a 
catastrophe would bring a politically costlier bill for the 
U.S. than the Vietnam war.  Turkey could play a significant 
role in bringing stability to Iraq, but such a contribution 
depends on an American assurance to eliminate the PKK 
presence in the region." 
 
 
"Turkey going into Iraq to guard Turkish currency" 
Mehmet Ali Birand commented in the mass appeal Posta (9/19): 
"No matter how much Turkey will protest it, a sovereign 
Kurdish state in Northern Iraq will come into existence if 
Washington and Tel Aviv one day agree on it. .  Our troops 
to be deployed in Iraq can neither fight against Kurds to 
block their independence, nor launch any operation against 
the will of the U.S. forces in the region.  In the same 
sense, Turkey cannot carry out plans such as supporting the 
Turkomen or eliminating the PKK militants.  All the Turkish 
troops might accomplish could be gaining prestige and 
throwing its weight around .  A negative development like 
drawing the anger of the Bush Administration will be enough 
to disrupt the already fragile Turkish economy. .  Interest 
rates will rise, and inflation will soar again.  However, a 
Turkey ready to deploy troops in Iraq will easily find 
support to recover its economy.  A Turkey ready to deploy 
troops in Iraq will make Washington regard the PKK issue 
from a different viewpoint.  To sum up, Turkish troops will 
be going into Iraq to protect Turkish currency." 
 
 
EDELMAN