03ANKARA2376
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002376 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, APRIL 11, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Looting in Kirkuk-Sabah 
Iraqis Switch to the Side of Power-Sabah 
FM Gul to Powell: If you can not Control Peshmerges, Let us 
Intervene-Hurriyet 
US Troops are in Mosul-Hurriyet 
"Get Ready" Orders from TGS-Milliyet 
Powell: We Shall Remove Peshmerges from Kirkuk-Milliyet 
Planned Looting in Kirkuk-Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Diplomatic Intervention Against Kirkuk Occupation-Zaman 
Chaos in Baghdad-Cumhuriyet 
Kirkuk Discussions With US- Radikal 
Government Prepares Broad Package of Reforms for EU entry- 
Radikal 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Toward the New Oil Century-Dunya 
Kirkuk Jolts the Markets-Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: All papers and TV channels extensively cover the 
invasion of Kirkuk by Kurdish militias.  Turkey launched a 
diplomatic effort after the Peshmerge incursion and 
incidents of looting being reported from Kirkuk.  Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul called US Secretary of State Colin 
Powell and told him that Turkey was ready to help if the US 
was not able to cope with the turmoil.  However, Secretary 
Powell rejected the offer and assured Turkey that the United 
States would take the situation under control within a very 
short period of time.  Prior to FM Gul's phone call, Foreign 
Ministry Deputy Undersecretary Ali Tuygan called US 
Ambassador Pearson twice to share Turkish concerns and to 
reiterate the conditions of the Ankara declaration signed by 
US envoy Zalmay Khalilzad.  "Radikal" reports that TGS Chief 
General Ozkok also called his counterpart, General Richard 
Myers, to highlight Turkey's concerns.  "Milliyet" reports 
that after the harsh reactions from the Turkish side, 
Peshmerge militants started to leave Kirkuk in the evening, 
and US troops penetrated Kirkuk and began to assert control. 
"Hurriyet", "Zaman", and "Sabah" report that Turkish 
military observers will go to Northern Iraq to monitor 
developments. 
 
 
EU Reform Package: "Radikal" reports that the government is 
undertaking new measures to meet EU accession criteria. 
Within this framework, a new package of reforms has been 
prepared by the Government which covers the expansion of 
language freedom, amendments to Radio and TV broadcast laws, 
and changes in housing and development regulations. 
According to Justice Minister Cemil Cicek, the new package 
would permit political propaganda to be made in Kurdish and 
eliminate the ban on Kurdish-language private television and 
radio stations.  It would also sharply reduce the scope of 
Article 8 of Turkey's anti-terror law, which penalizes 
certain `speech' and `thought' crimes. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"Why did the U.S. let them?" 
Sedat Ergin commented in mass appeal Hurriyet (4/11): "It's 
no secret that the Iraqi Kurds see Kirkuk as their capital, 
and consider the town as the `Jerusalem of Kurdistan.' 
Encouraged by Barzani and Talabani, they've attempted to get 
recognition as `Kirkuk's liberators.'  It's no coincidence 
that they first targeted the deed office in town. .  It's 
significant that the U.S., having managed to deter Kurds 
from Kirkuk thus far, has suddenly removed this pressure. . 
It is clear that U.S. has not even attempted to block Kurds' 
access to Kirkuk, because the U.S. Administration believes 
that after Baghdad, the fall of Kirkuk will bring a faster 
victory.  This attitude will intensify the doubts prevailing 
among Turkish decision-makers and the people about the U.S., 
and will further shake bilateral relations.  By silently 
winking at the Kurds, the U.S. has carried them to an 
advantageous position regarding Kurdish claims on Kirkuk. 
In this way, the loyalty of the Northern Iraqi Kurdish 
groups is being rewarded." 
 
 
"Kirkuk and the Kurds' Korea" 
Cengiz Candar opined in mass appeal Tercuman (4/11): "The 
Kurds have established a close solidarity with the U.S. in 
Northern Iraq, a relationship comparable to the cooperation 
that was established between the U.S. and Turkey in Korea in 
¶1952. .  By denying access to the 4th Infantry, Turkey has 
made its ally America's job more difficult in Iraq, 
increasing both the human and material costs.  What is more, 
Turkey is seeking a rapprochement with Iran and Syria, 
countries which, as Secretary Powell put it, create 
`uneasiness' for the U.S.  Whether through ongoing confusion 
or a deliberate attempt by this government to undermine 
Turkey's relations with the West, Turkey appears to be 
seeking a place in the Third World. .  Turkey has blocked 
the Northern Front, and the war was carried out only from 
the South, resulting in the fall of Baghdad and Kirkuk 
without fighting.  Are you still dreaming that the U.S. will 
fight against the Kurds just to please Turkey?  Do you think 
Turkey will enter Northern Iraq even though the U.S., just 
like Turkey, has drawn some `red lines' in the region? . 
After having fought, with American support, in its Southeast 
for 15 years, do you think Turkey, at odds with the U.S., 
should venture a conflict with an unpredictable ending in 
Northern Iraq?" 
 
 
PEARSON