03ANKARA1035
Turkish Officials to Suspend New Quarantine Regs
Thu Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, EB/EPD, AND EB/TPP/ABT 
DEPT PLEASE PASS USTR FOR NOVELLI, DBIRDSEY 
USDA FOR FAS FOR ITP/BERTSCH, MACKE, MEYER, THORBURN; 
CMP FOR ALL COMMODITY DIVISIONS 
EMO/FREEDAN 
USDA FOR APHIS/ACKERMAN, PATEL 
USDA FOR GIPSA/FGIS REILLY 
USDOC FOR DEFALCO 
VIENNA FOR APHIS/VINCINANZA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR KPAO TU USTR
SUBJECT: Turkish Officials to Suspend New Quarantine Regs 
 
 
Ref:  (A) 2002 Ankara 9192   (B) 2003 Ankara 441 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Not for Internet Distribution. 
 
 
This is an action message.  See para   . 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Turkish officials announced that the 
temporary suspension of new phytosanitary regulations 
implemented on January 3, 2003 that have impacted 
agricultural trade with Turkey.  Post expects official 
announcement shortly.  Pressure from Turkish poultry and 
feed representatives, trading companies and foreign 
governments played a major role in this decision.  At 
subsequent meetings between USDA and Turkish officials 
agreement was reached on a number of technical issues which, 
if implemented, will ensure continued access to the Turkish 
market for U.S. commodities and plant products.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
------------------------------- 
Suspension of Phyto Regulations 
------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU)  On February 6, Vedat Uzunlu, Turkey's Deputy 
Under Secretary for Agriculture and Rural Affairs told USDA 
officials that Turkey's new phytosanitary regulations 
implemented on January 3 (Ref A) would be suspended until 
July.   The announcement was made during a meeting with USDA 
officials including representatives from Animal and Plant 
Health and Inspection Service (APHIS) and Federal Grain 
Inspection Service (FGIS).  APHIS and FGIS officials were in 
Ankara to discuss U.S. concerns about the new regulations 
with Turkish officials.  Dr. Uzunlu noted that the Turkish 
government would be reviewing the regulations over the next 
several months with industry and foreign governments in the 
hope that new regulations could be announced in July that 
would not impact trade.  Uzunlu welcomed any help USDA could 
provide in furthering these discussions. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  It appears that pressure from industry groups as 
well as foreign governments persuaded Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) officials to take 
action to rescind these regulations.  Since they were 
implemented in early January, the regulations had severely 
impacted agricultural trade and in turn Turkey's domestic 
agriculture industries.  At a meeting with the Turkish 
poultry producers association, MARA officials were informed 
that the poultry industry would soon run out of feed unless 
the regulations were lifted.  U.S. exports of corn were 
completely halted as a result of the regulations which left 
Turkey's feed and poultry industries without any raw 
materials.  According to traders, corn prices had increased 
by close to $40 a ton during the month the regulations were 
in place. 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
Confirmation from Other Sources 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Post was contacted by industry officials as well 
as representatives from the Hungarian and EU delegations in 
Turkey who had received the same information about the 
suspension.  According to DUS/Uzunlu the suspension would be 
announced shortly in the Official Gazete which is the 
equivalent to the U.S. Federal Register.  Post is monitoring 
this publication for this announcement and will inform 
Washington immediately. Unfortunately, due to the Muslim 
holiday, publication may be delayed until the week of 
February 17th. 
 
 
-------------------------- 
USDA Technical Discussions 
-------------------------- 
¶5.  (SBU)  On February 6, the USDA delegation met with 
Protection and Control officials to discuss their concerns 
with the new regulations.  USDA officials stressed the 
importance of greater more communication between U.S. and 
Turkish technical staffs as a way of exchanging information 
and avoiding any misunderstandings in the future. 
¶6.  (SBU) Technical concerns in grains, seeds, wood 
products, oilseeds and vegetables were discussed.  In each 
case, the Turkish officials agreed in principal to change 
the regulations after a further review.  However, until 
these changes are officially announced, it is not certain 
that they will actually be accepted and implemented.  Post 
will work with APHIS officials on a follow-up letter to 
confirm these changes. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
ACTION REQUEST: TIRF Proposal 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) During the technical discussions in Ankara, it 
became clear that current Turkish quarantine and research 
officials had little understanding of the U.S. grain 
inspection system and the U.S. approach to phytosanitary 
issues.  APHIS/FGIS/FAS delegation suggests that a 
delegation of Turkish technical officials would greatly 
benefit from visits to grain inspection and testing 
facilities. FAS/ITP along with APHIS officials will prepare 
a proposal under the Technical Issues Resolution Fund (TIRF) 
with the hope of sending a Turkish team to the United States 
in April.  Post supports this proposal as a first step in 
improving communications between U.S. and Turkish Officials. 
 
 
------------------------------ 
Comment:  Timing is Everything 
------------------------------ 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The combination of immediate pressure from 
Turkey's domestic industries along with foreign governments 
played a major role in the suspension of the phytosanitary 
regulations.  In addition, the lack of feed in Turkey and 
the absence of alternative corn imports also helped Turkish 
officials to respond positively on these issues.  The timely 
visit of the APHIS/FGIX team to Ankara added additional 
weight and legitimacy to these concerns.  By responding to 
the situation quickly the team was able to maximize these 
factors. The new Turkish Ministry of Agriculture officials 
appears to be more open to discussions, at least initially. 
(Septel) It is essential that the meetings between USDA and 
Turkish agriculture officials this past week only be the 
first step in order to ensure continued cooperation and 
access to this market. 
 
 
MARCIEL