03ANKARA7611
DECEMBER 1-2 VISIT TO TURKEY OF UKRAINIAN PM
Thu Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 007611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD PREL SENV TU UP
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 1-2 VISIT TO TURKEY OF UKRAINIAN PM 
YANUKOVYCH 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified. 
 
 
¶1.  (U) The December 1-2 visit to Turkey of Ukrainian PM 
Yanukovych focused mainly on bilateral economic relations. 
In the first-ever visit of the PM of an independent Ukraine 
to Turkey, the two nations discussed bilateral trade and 
signed environmental and cultural agreements.  At the end of 
the visit, Yanukovych invited PM Erdogan to visit Ukraine in 
the spring. 
 
 
¶2.  (U) According to Ukrainian Embassy and Turkish MFA 
officials, the visit focused mainly on bilateral economic 
relations.  Ukrainian Embassy officials said Turkey is 
Ukraine's fourth leading trade partner.  According to 
Ukrainian figures, total bilateral trade was USD 1.4 billion 
in 2002, consisting mostly of Ukrainian exports to Turkey. 
Both sides pledged to double trade volume in 2004 and promote 
more investment. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) The two sides also signed an environmental agreement. 
 Although they have not released the text, Ukrainian Embassy 
officials said the agreement essentially repeated a dormant 
agreement the two countries signed five years ago. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Turkish officials raised concerns about increased 
Black Sea oil tanker traffic through the Bosphorous, but did 
not raise specific objections to the decision to reverse the 
flow of the Odessa-Brody pipeline.  Yanukovych avoided 
discussion of the reversal decision but explained that 
Ukraine had agreed with Poland to build an extension from 
Brody to Plock in central Poland.  The two sides agreed to 
encourage Turkish firms to participate in the construction. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The two sides discussed Ukraine's bid to join NATO. 
 PM Yanukovic requested GOT support for Ukraine's membership 
action plan (MAP).  The GOT, while generally supportive, told 
the Ukrainians they needed to continue force upgrades.  The 
two side also agreed to continue regional counter-terrorism 
and anti-crime cooperation. 
EDELMAN