03ANKARA2542
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002542 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, APRIL 18, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Housing Minister Ergezen: US shed blood, killed children in 
Iraq-Hurriyet 
Hans Blix: There are no WMD in Iraq-Hurriyet 
Grossman: There is business in Iraq for Turkish companies- 
Hurriyet 
Powell on EU: Never without Turkey-Sabah 
US asked for Turkish troops in Iraq-Sabah 
Denktas: EU made a big mistake-Sabah 
To avoid hurting Turkey, EU did not use the word `occupier'- 
Milliyet 
Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul: Turkey should take part in 
Iraq's reconstruction-Milliyet 
Gul to Denktash: AKP government's position on Cyprus is 
different - Milliyet 
US sends missionaries to Iraq to spread Christianity-Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Barzani:We won't bargain over Kirkuk-Yeni Safak 
Barzani Provokes Again-Cumhuriyet 
Greek Cypriots' membership stirred Turkish side-Cumhuriyet 
An island divided by the EU-Radikal 
Neighboring Countries discuss Iraq in Riyadh - Zaman 
Papadopulos: Turkish Cypriots will benefit from EU 
opportunities-Zaman 
Powell plans to go to Damascus-Zaman 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
US: UN embargo on Iraq should be lifted-Finansal Forum 
Private Sector prepares a Rapid Action Plan for Iraq-Dunya 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Iraq: Todays's papers report on conflicting statements from 
Turkish officials yesterday regarding a US request for 
Turkish troops in Iraq.  "Sabah" carries Defense Minister 
Gonul's statement saying that the US had asked Turkey for 
troops and technical staff to be sent to Iraq.  However, 
"Hurriyet" reports that FM Gul denied Gonul's statement by 
saying that Turkey had not received any requests from the 
US.  "Hurriyet" reports that the MFA issued a statement last 
evening saying that `on March 26, the US asked coalition 
countries to give details on possible contributions they 
could make to the reconstruction of Iraq.  Turkey closely 
follows developments regarding the reconstruction and 
stabilization of Iraq, and will exert every effort to meet 
its responsibilities.'  All papers report that Iraq's six 
neighboring countries will meet in Riyadh today to debate 
the future of Iraq.  Turkish FM Gul will attend the meeting. 
"Hurriyet" reports that A/S Grossman, responding Hurriyet's 
questions in Washington, said that `Kurdish leaders should 
be careful about their stance against Turkey. They should be 
conscious of their words and behavior.  Turkey is Iraq's 
neighbor. Therefore, Iraqi Kurds should be transparent 
regarding the issue of PKK-KADEK terrorism.'  Grossman added 
that there are no obstacles to the $1 billion aid package, 
and that it is only natural that Turkey will have a role in 
Iraq's reconstruction.  "Radikal" reports that Secretary of 
State Colin Powell is planning a trip to Syria to learn the 
truth about allegations that Syria is sheltering Iraqi 
leaders and to ask for their extradition. 
 
 
Cyprus: "Sabah" reports on Powell's comments that the EU 
should begin accession negotiations with Turkey in 2004 if 
Turkey meets the Copenhagen Criteria.  Speaking at a 
reception at the Greek Embassy in Washington, Powell 
welcomed the EU expansion and said the US will exert every 
effort for a solution of the Cyprus issue.  "Sabah" also 
reports on EU diplomats' comments at the EU summit in Athens 
that the accession negotiations could begin before 2004, 
depending on Turkey's efforts to meet the criteria. 
"Milliyet" reports that the EU was extra careful not to 
upset Turkey by using the word "occupier," instead referring 
to Northern Cyprus as an `uncontrolled-zone.' "Radikal" 
notes that the signing of the treaty with the Greek Cypriot 
side has divided the island, triggering happiness and 
excitement in the south and disappointment and chaos in the 
north. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"Pride, dignity, reason" 
Yagmur Atsiz noted in mass appeal HO-Tercuman (4/18): "By 
pursuing an idiotic and awkward policy during the Iraq 
campaign, Ankara has managed to degrade Turkey from the 
position of `regional superpower and strategic partner' to 
`potential adversary.'  The White House will never forget 
it, and will not hesitate a moment to dupe Turkey when the 
time becomes ripe for revenge.  Contrary to claims by some 
incautious anti-Americans, Ankara has not carried out an 
honorable policy, but totally upset American plans and 
wasted the opportunity to become a real player in Northern 
Iraq, then by assisting the war indirectly, has drawn the 
fury of the Arabs. .  Washington has not closed the Turkey 
chapter, because Americans need Turkey for Syria and Iran, 
Central Asia and the Caucasus.  However, this is merely a 
`geographical' need.  The conflict has  shown the `quality' 
of our politicians, that they are not a `team,' but rather a 
bunch of opportunists lying in wait to annihilate each 
other. .  The U.S. does not want a Kurdish state, not in 
deference to Turkish interests, but simply to avoid Kurds 
massacring each other when they are given independence.  It 
is unlikely that Turkey's Kurds would prefer to integrate 
with the Iraqi Kurds.  Would Turks want to join 
Turkmenistan?" 
 
 
"AKP renounces a Cyprus solution" 
Metin Munir observed in mass appeal Sabah (4/18): "The AKP 
leadership is very afraid of Denktas and is not willing to 
get into a fight with the military on Cyprus.  Furthermore, 
the AKP believes the EU won't admit Turkey even if the 
Cyprus problem is resolved. .  If two rightist parties fully 
supportive of Denktas emerge as winners from the general 
election in Northern Cyprus this year, current policies will 
continue unchanged.  The situation might change if the 
Republican Turkish Party (CTP) wins the elections.  They 
have declared their intention to sack Denktas as negotiator, 
and to re-start talks within the framework of the UN plan 
for Cyprus. .  However, even if it took power in the Turkish 
sector, the CTP will see that Ankara has the last word. 
Moreover, Turkey cannot, as before, depend on U.S. support 
on Cyprus.  The AKP has alienated Turkey in the 
international arena." 
 
 
"Irony of war" 
Etyen Mahcupyan defends in Islamic/intellectual Zaman 
(4/18): "A realistic point of view shows that Turkey is not 
actually powerful enough, that nobody trusted Turkey, that 
our troops are not welcome in Northern Iraq, and that the 
Northern Iraqi (Kurdish) administration has a more 
legitimate position than we do. .  Being too dependent on 
the U.S. might bring tension for the Kurds in relation to 
the Shiites.  It will be problematic to produce `autonomy' 
from a war that was viewed as illegitimate around the world. 
The Kurds are stuck between their national dreams and the 
legitimacy of making this dream a reality.  Maybe this war 
was the final irony for the illusion of a Kurdish `nation- 
state.' 
 
 
PEARSON