03ANKARA4318
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004318 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 9, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Make-up visit by General Jones - Milliyet 
General Jones rushed to Ankara - Sabah 
Washington sees Turkey as a problem - Hurriyet 
CHP: U.S. should apologize - Hurriyet 
Bush admits Iraqi uranium story a lie - Turkiye 
U.S. admits Iraq had no uranium - Aksam 
General Franks replaced by `Crazy Arab' - Aksam 
Blair fully backs war decision against Iraq - Vatan 
Israel's dream: Turkey a bridge between Israel, Arabs - 
Milliyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
U.S. sends NATO commander to make Ankara happy - Zaman 
Bush did not apologize for slavery on Africa tour - 
Cumhuriyet 
General Franks retires - Yeni Safak 
Sezer: Turkey ready to support Mideast peace - Radikal 
Turmoil in Palestine, Abbas might resign - Zaman 
Katzav: Turkey should mediate in Middle East - 
Cumhuriyet 
Armenian genocide crisis at doorstep - Yeni Safak 
Tension high in Tehran - Radikal 
Mullahs get richer, people poorer in Iran - Cumhuriyet 
Saddam takes stage on Lebanese TV - Radikal 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Detention crisis: Foreign Minister Gul said the 
detention of Turkish troops in Suleymaniye last weekend 
would stir instability in the region.  Gul said that it 
would not be in the U.S. interest to provoke anti- 
American sentiment in an ally like Turkey.  He added 
that Turkey would keep its troops in Northern Iraq 
until security conditions improve.  U.S. Ambassador 
Robert Pearson told the semi-official Anatolian Press 
agency that preliminary information had been given to 
the Turkish side regarding the detentions in 
Suleymaniye.  Pearson added that any dialogue with the 
PKK/KADEK would take place in coordination with the 
Turkish government.  EUCOM General James Jones arrived 
in Ankara on Tuesday to defuse tensions between the two 
NATO allies.  During his call on the TGS, General Jones 
was given the message that Turkish troops in Northern 
Iraq would retaliate to new attacks.  The TGS told the 
American side that Turkish troops had the right to stay 
in Northern Iraq in order to eliminate threats from 
terrorist groups based in the region.  General Jones 
and the Turks agreed to discuss the matter in Ankara on 
Wednesday at a joint commission with officials from 
both sides. 
 
 
"Hurriyet" says the U.S. Administration has no 
intention to apologize over the Suleymaniye incident. 
U.S. officials are complaining about unacceptable 
activities by Turkish troops in Northern Iraq, and 
demanding the withdrawal of soldiers from the region. 
Papers believe that the GOT, alarmed by the incident in 
Northern Iraq and the Armenian genocide bill, will 
review Turkey's strategic cooperation with the U.S. at 
the National Security Council (NSC) meeting later this 
month. 
 
 
Armenian genocide draft: Dailies believe that the 
Armenian genocide bill submitted to the Senate for 
approval could contribute to a further souring of ties 
between the U.S. and Turkey.  Vice President Cheney has 
been working to ensure a rejection of the bill. 
Justice Minister and government spokesman Cemil Cicek 
reportedly said that the genocide issue was an 
opportunity for the U.S. to repair the strain in its 
ties with Turkey. 
 
 
Israeli President in Turkey: Visiting Israeli President 
Katzav said after meeting with his Turkish counterpart 
Sezer and Prime Minister Erdogan on Tuesday that Turkey 
could mediate to help improve Israel's ties with the 
Arabs.  Katzav also responded warmly to Erdogan's offer 
to host a summit meeting between Israel and Palestine 
in Turkey.  Katzav stressed the significance of the 
U.S.-Israeli-Turkish strategic partnership for peace in 
the region, and asked for Ankara's support against 
Iranian nuclear programs targeting Israel. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: US-Turkish Relations/N. Iraq 
 
 
"Strategic Tuning" 
Sami Kohen wrote in mass appeal Milliyet (7/9): "The 
incident in northern Iraq is clearly the end of the 
strategic partnership between the two countries.  The 
detention of Turkish soldiers is like `putting the nail 
in the coffin' of the partnership.  The concept of 
strategic partnership was created in the post-cold war 
era and developed over the course of time.  However, 
the Iraq crisis has put an end to this concept, which 
actually means that the ties were never at the level of 
a genuine partnership. . The Turkish military presence 
in northern Iraq is designed to address three goals: 
the elimination of the PKK/KADEK; the monitoring of 
political and military activities of the Kurds; and 
providing assistance to the Turkomen. . Rhetorically, 
the US does not have a different position from Turkey's 
in any of these three areas.  Yet in practice we see 
some differences stemming from skepticism or mistrust. 
These differences can be eliminated as long as Ankara 
and Washington agree on the fundamental parameters. 
Both countries are in need of strategic fine-tuning." 
 
 
"What the US is doing?" 
Yilmaz Oztuna wrote in mass appeal-conservative Turkiye 
(7/9): "It seems credible that the US is actually 
trying to give a clear warning to Turkey in order to 
get Ankara on its side in upcoming operations against 
Iran and Syria.  The US wants Ankara to realize that 
there is no room for neutrality in this game. 
Washington has been issuing indirect or verbal 
warnings, yet Ankara did not take them seriously to 
this point.  In a possible operation against Iran, it 
is very likely that the US will ask Turkey to join. 
There is one more possibility which is also credible: 
The US may be trying to eliminate the Turks in the area 
and weaken the Turkomans and Arabs in order to pave the 
way for an autonomy for its loyal allies Barzani and 
Talabani. . The incident in northern Iraq is 
unacceptable and incompatible with the spirit of the 
NATO alliance.  This incident is only turning the US 
into a loser.  The US captured Iraq very quickly, but 
what comes next is unknown even to the US.  Such 
policies will make it even harder for the US to retain 
its hegemony in the region." 
 
 
PEARSON