03ANKARA6994
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006994 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
February 28 Messages from US Embassy - Hurriyet 
US Gives Up Plans for Turkish Troop Deployment - Hurriyet 
US Plans to Deploy 100,000 Additional Troops in Iraq - 
Milliyet 
The Times: "Europe Should Recognize the Value of Turkey" - 
Milliyet 
Kurdish Minority `Gaffe' From Norwegian Prime Minister - 
Milliyet 
No Place for Turkey in US' 6-Month Iraq Plan - Turkiye 
EU Starts Blackmailing: "No Membership without Cyprus" - 
Turkiye 
Erdogan to Visit Cyprus November 15 - Turkiye 
38 People Injured in Protests Against YOK in Ankara -Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
 
Ankara at a Critical Threshold - Cumhuriyet 
9 New Air Corridors in the Aegean - Cumhuriyet 
Investigation Against Headscarf at Kayseri Military 
Reception- Cumhuriyet 
Headscarf Not Accepted in the Courtroom - Radikal 
Thank-You Letter from Powell to Gul - Radikal 
Erdogan: "Cyprus is not a Part of EU Criteria" - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Reactions to EU Report:  "Milliyet" draws attention to 
comments in the western press concerning the EU progress 
report on Turkey.  Most western papers criticized the EU for 
being shortsighted, for presenting Turkey with new 
obstacles, and for treating Turkey differently from other EU 
candidate countries.  "Turkiye" writes that the EU is trying 
to `blackmail' Turkey on the Cyprus issue.  "Milliyet" 
reports that Prime Minister Erdogan said yesterday that 
Cyprus is not part of EU accession criteria.  "Turkiye" 
reports that Erdogan will go to Cyprus November 15 to stress 
the importance of a democratic election process. 
 
 
Turkish Troop Deployment in Iraq:  "Hurriyet" says that the 
Pentagon has released US plans for upcoming troop 
deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Reportedly, the US is 
planning to send 43,000 new troops to Iraq in January 2004 
and to withdraw one division and one brigade.  "Hurriyet" 
notes that Turkish troops had not been included in the US 
plans for Iraq.  The paper speculates that the US has 
abandoned the idea to send Turkish troops to Iraq. 
 
 
Aegean Air Corridors:  "Radikal" reports that Turkey and 
Greece have reached an agreement on the Aegean air corridor. 
With the agreement, the number of air corridors will 
increase to 11 from 2.  Paper notes that the agreement will 
result in considerable economic advantages for Turkey in the 
form of overflight revenues. 
 
 
Headscarf Issue:  "Radikal" reports that a suspect wearing a 
headscarf was asked by the presiding judge to leave the 
courtroom of the Court of Appeals in Ankara.  Papers note 
that this incident launches a new chapter in the headscarf 
debate.  Defense lawyers complained that the ruling could 
lead to significant numbers of defendants being left without 
the means to defend themselves in Turkish courts.  "Vatan" 
reports that the Turkish General Staff has started an 
investigation into the claim that two guests at the Republic 
Day reception at a Kayseri military club attended the event 
wearing headscarves. 
Higher Education Board(YOK) Protests:  Students clashed with 
police yesterday during protests against the Higher 
Education Board (YOK).  Demonstrators called for the 
abolishment of YOK and attacked police trying to stop the 
demonstration.  Fierce clashes between police and the 
demonstrators resulted in injury to 30 demonstrators and 10 
police.  10 people were detained for their role in the 
demonstration. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
"From now on." 
Sami Kohen commented in the mass appeal Milliyet (11/7): 
"Nothing much will change even if the opposition wins the 
elections in the Turkish Cypriot sector in December, because 
a solution without Denktas will not be possible.  Therefore, 
Ankara must act now to do whatever is necessary for a 
solution. .  It is time for the Turkish side to launch a 
diplomatic attack.  The Turkish initiative must go beyond 
confidence-building measures and must include a new 
negotiation process and the presentation of creative and 
realistic proposals. .  Turkey should not be expected to 
launch an initiative contrary to the interests of the 
Turkish Cypriots just to rid itself of the Cyprus problem. 
A solution is necessary because the Turkish side, too, will 
benefit from such a settlement." 
 
 
"Cyprus an obstacle on Turkey's path" 
Mehmet Ali Birand observed in the mass appeal Posta (11/7): 
"The EU Commission for the first time openly said that 
Turkey will be blocked on its way to EU accession unless the 
Cyprus problem is resolved. .  We will have nothing to say 
if Turkey addresses the deficiencies that are highlighted in 
the EU Commission report, the Belgian Prime Minister.  The 
message is clear: If Turkey really wants to get a date for 
membership negotiations, it must do whatever is necessary. . 
Turkey has taken significant steps forward.  However, the EU 
Commission refrained from further encouraging Ankara, 
because the Europeans do not want to tip their hand 
regarding the November 2004 progress report.  The real fight 
will be in 2004." 
 
 
EDELMAN