03ANKARA3748
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Jun 10 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003748 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, JUNE 10, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
----------------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Incirlik air base to become history - Sabah 
Turkey not included in new U.S. `airbase strategy' - Vatan 
U.S. shifts to new bases for swifter action - Aksam 
Perle to Ankara: Don't be myopic - Hurriyet 
Threat-like warning from Perle - Turkiye 
17 House members denounce Wolfowitz - Turkiye 
Abbas says dialogue with radical groups will continue - 
Milliyet 
Gul: EU must remove sanctions on TRNC - Milliyet 
Al-Qaida denies allegation of cooperation with Iraq - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
U.S. to close bases in Turkey - Cumhuriyet 
U.S. wants a global network of smaller, flexible bases - 
Radikal 
Perle: Catastrophe if Turkey doesn't support U.S. against 
Iran, Syria - Zaman 
EU Cyprus envoy: Annan plan sole opportunity for Cyprus - 
Cumhuriyet 
Gul: EU adjustment package will be enacted before July - 
Radikal 
TGS gives green light to EU reform package - Zaman 
Sharon freezes road map, declares victory - Yeni Safak 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Central Bank intervenes for third time, buys dollars - Dunya 
Boeing's eye on Turkish Airlines privatization - Finansal 
Forum 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
U.S. wants `smaller' bases: Pentagon is planning to use 
smaller bases in the Gulf countries instead of those in 
Saudi Arabia, and will shift its bases in Turkey and Germany 
to Poland, Romania and Bulgaria for future overseas 
operations, "Milliyet" reports.  The paper expects Incirlik 
air base to lose its importance. 
 
 
CFR's Ankara meetings: The Council on Foreign Relations 
(CFR) paid a `meaningful' visit to Turkey to examine the 
`fault line' in U.S.-Turkey relations.  The CFR delegation 
is particularly interested in the `new' direction of Turkish 
foreign policy following the war in Iraq, according to 
"Aksam."  The CFR wants to `understand' Turkey's view of 
Iran and Syria, and wants to evaluate Turkish-Israeli ties 
as well. 
 
 
Ambassador Pearson on U.S.-Turkey relations: U.S. Ambassador 
Robert Pearson told "Hurriyet" that the U.S. and Turkey, 
having cooperated for 50 years, should now make a new 
beginning.  `I have never lost hope in Turkey,' Pearson 
said, adding that bilateral ties have survived even greater 
problems, which were not disclosed.  Pearson advised Ankara 
to be open and balanced in relations with the U.S. 
 
 
Perle on Turkey: Pentagon advisor Richard Perle warned 
Turkey that bilateral relations with the U.S. would suffer a 
serious crisis if Ankara refuses to support American policy 
regarding Iran and Syria.  Speaking at an American 
Enterprise Institute (AEI) conference, Perle stressed that 
bilateral ties are still strong despite the parliament's 
refusal of the March 1 motion on foreign troop deployment in 
Turkey.  Perle also said that Turkey's participation in the 
international peacekeeping force in Iraq would contribute to 
regional stability and help U.S.-Turkish cooperation as 
well.  "Hurriyet" notes that Perle's warning comes on the 
eve of Undersecretary Ziyal's trip to Washington on Sunday. 
ANCA rejects Turkish call for dialog: The American National 
Council of Armenians (ANCA) rejected the Turkish 
government's call for a direct dialogue, saying that Ankara 
must first recognize the Armenian genocide. 
 
 
Gul, military on EU reforms package: Foreign Minister Gul 
called on TGS Chief General Ozkok on Monday to discuss the 
EU reform package, dailies report.  Papers believe that the 
government and TGS have worked out a compromise on the 
package which Gul said will be submitted to parliament on 
Tuesday for approval without waiting for the monthly NSC 
meeting on June 26.  `The EU adjustment package will prove 
that Muslim countries can also apply democracy, pluralism, 
modernity, and transparency," Gul said. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:   Iraq and US-Turkey 
 
 
"The US-Turkey Route" 
Fatih Cekirge observed in the tabloid Star (6/10): "Ankara 
is paying the consequences of its misguided policies. 
Despite warnings from the US, Turkey signed trade agreements 
with Saddam before the war, and today all of these deals 
have tied Ankara's hands.  The Kurdish leaders Barzani and 
Talabani are no longer taking messages from Turkey 
seriously.  .By keeping its distance from the US, Ankara 
indirectly encouraged Washington and the northern Iraqi 
leaders to enhance their cooperation.  This cooperation is 
now strong enough to lead to the formation of a federal 
Kurdish state. . Given these facts, Ankara is trying to make 
things up with Washington.  Yet it does not seem likely that 
bilateral visits will be able to normalize the relationship. 
The US seems unable to forget about its disappointment with 
respect to Ankara.  Turkey should be prepared for some 
diplomatic and economic pain due to the ongoing tension on 
the Ankara-Washington route." 
 
 
"In Washington the wounds are still open" 
Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in mass appeal-sensational Posta 
(6/10): "Has the AKP government managed to draw up its basic 
itinerary?  What kind of route will that be? Islamist or pro- 
third world?  Or a route that would be similar to that of 
Washington?  In Washington too, these questions are being 
asked.  Washington is looking forward to the messages MFA 
Undersecretary Ugur Ziyal will be bringing when he arrives 
next week.  Ziyal has a difficult task.  He will be in the 
limelight.  When a trip takes place in the limelight amid 
great expectations, the danger that it will lead to 
disappointment is enhanced.  There are certain words the US 
administration wants to hear in the short run.   Pentagon 
officials say that the ball is in Ankara's court.  The Turks 
will play by telling the US where they want to go and how 
they will get there." 
 
 
PEARSON