03HARARE1092
MEDIA REACTION MASS ACTION IN ZIM; HARARE
Mon Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PDPA FOR DALTON, MITCHELL AND SIMS 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION MASS ACTION IN ZIM; HARARE 
 
  ¶1.   While editorials in the independent newspapers are in 
      favor of the proposed week-long mass protests that are 
      expected to begin in Zimbabwe today (June 2), called by the 
      opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) to force 
      Robert Mugabe to enter into a serious and genuine dialogue 
      with the MDC to break the political and economic impasse 
      gripping the country, the government-controlled print and 
      electronic media is devoting acres of editorial space and 
      airtime to calling for the arrest of the entire MDC 
      leadership, and discouraging the people of Zimbabwe from 
      participating in the marches and demonstrations.  Editorial 
      excerpts follow: 
 
  ¶2.   Under headline "The price of inertia" the independent 
      daily "The Daily News" (06/02) comments: 
 
      "Today the MDC party begins a week of mass 
      demonstrations. . .MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai and 
      his party may or may not succeed in this onerous 
      task they have set themselves.  But that the 
      Zimbabwe crisis must now be resolved in the streets 
      and possibly with innocent blood being shed in the 
      process is a sad indictment against those to whom 
      ordinary Zimbabweans and indeed millions of ordinary 
      Africans look up to for leadership.  It would be an 
      indictment against Mugabe personally if Zimbabwe 
      burns in the days ahead. . .We can only hope that 
      the events of this week will be clear enough to 
      Mbeki, Obasanjo and Muluzi that they should stop 
      shielding Mugabe.  And that instead they should 
      convey the message that Zimbabweans by coming out 
      into the streets are trying to put across to him and 
      that is: for all the good he may have done for this 
      country in the past he must step down in order to 
      give this country a chance to start afresh and move 
      forward." 
 
  ¶3.   Under headline "Tsvangirai must pay for his sins" the 
      government-controlled daily "The Herald" (06/02) comments: 
 
      "The time has now come for opposition MDC leader, 
      Morgan Tsvangirai, to pay the price for his sins 
      against the people of Zimbabwe and to show him that, 
      like everyone else, he is not above the law. . .His 
      unprecedented backing by the United States, Britain, 
      some members of the European Union and the white 
      Commonwealth has made him feel invincible and that 
      no one can touch him no matter how many laws he 
      breaks and how much suffering he has brought to bear 
      on the people of Zimbabwe. . .Until his case is 
      finalized, the MDC leader must be put into 
      protective custody so that he does not further 
      endanger the lives of innocent people who might be 
      caught up in the crossfire of his reckless 
      actions. . .It is now time to act and reassure 
      Zimbabweans that everyone is equal before the law. . 
      . ." 
 
  ¶4.   Under headline "Enough is enough" a front-page 
      editorial in the government-controlled "Chronicle" 
      (06/02) comments: 
 
      "The High Court on Saturday outlawed MDC's planned 
      mass action to oust President Mugabe's 
      democratically elected government from power. . .If 
      Tsvangirai and his thugs dare defy this lawful 
      order, then they should face the full wrath of the 
      law. . .We demand that police should move with speed 
      and arrest the confused opposition leader and his 
      cronies and throw the keys into the sea.   Enough is 
      enough. . .We cannot tolerate lawlessness in the 
      country because the perpetrator is backed by some 
      foreign power that will condemn us for doing what is 
      right.  Let the British and the Americans who have 
      openly supported Tsvangirai's illegal statement and 
      actions say whatever they want.  We cannot be 
      bullied into allowing lawlessness because we are 
      afraid of cowboys and gay gangsters. . .We demand 
      that any and all that dare soil our streets with 
      misguided marches must be thrown behind bars.  And 
      we urge the courts to throw the full book at any one 
      who will be arrested. . .We urge members of the 
      public to show charlatans like Tsvangirai that they 
      cherish the peace and tranquility by going about 
      their business normally this entire week. . . ." 
 
  ¶5.   Under headline "Road map for Zimbabwe" the independent 
      weekly "The Daily News on Sunday" (06/02) comments: 
 
      ". . .The government would be well-advised to let 
      the march proceeds uninterrupted, unless there is 
      clear evidence of violence.  Interfering with such a 
      road map could lead to a political dead-end for the 
      country." 
 
  ¶6.   In a front-page editorial under headline "Do or Die" 
      the independent weekly "The Standard" (06/01) 
      comments: 
 
      "The week we have just begun could mark a turning 
      point in the 23-year history of independent Zimbabwe 
      as ordinary citizens make the choice between the 
      status quo and a new political dispensation.  It is 
      a sad indictment those who have enjoyed the 
      privilege of leading this country over the past 23 
      years that today, a once prosperous beacon of hope 
      in Africa, has been reduced to another basket case 
      in a much maligned continent. . .As Zimbabweans 
      either march in their cities and towns or simply 
      stay at home, it will not necessarily be about the 
      removing the de facto President and the government 
      from power but to say `Enough is Enough.'  The tide 
      of feeling about the tragedy that has gripped the 
      country is running very high and this could be the 
      opportunity for Zimbabweans to shake off a label now 
      being bandied around - that we are a docile 
      people. . . ." 
 
  ¶7.   Under headline "The fire this time" a second editorial 
      published on page 8 in the same edition comments: 
 
      ". . .This week's demonstrations are not the sort 
      that split society and families.  Zimbabweans of all 
      races and creeds fully support these peaceful 
      marches and want to be fully involved in them and if 
      uniformed forces try to mow down the marchers, they 
      will be forgiven.  Be that as it may, Zimbabweans 
      this week will prove equal to the challenge.  The 
      demonstrations this time appear to usher a new 
      Zimbabwe." 
 
  ¶8.   Under headline "Defining moment for Zimbabweans" the 
      government-controlled weekly "The Sunday Mail" 
      (06/01) comments: 
 
      "We are praying and hoping that reason will prevail 
      and Zimbabweans will not be mislead into backing the 
      maneuvers by the opposition MDC to attempt to remove 
      a constitutionally elected President by force.  This 
      is a defining moment, not in the sense in which the 
      opposition would want it to be, but in the sense 
      that Zimbabweans have an opportunity to demonstrate 
      their political maturity, and uphold the rule of 
      law. . .Taking matters into their own hands would be 
      foolish, as it would at best achieve nothing and at 
      worst set the country up in flames.  While many 
      would have views about how the political question 
      should be resolved, we believe they should give the 
      African mediators an opportunity to find common 
      grounds around which national dialogue and hopefully 
      national consensus could be built. . . ." 
 
SULLIVAN