03HARARE1422
MEDIA REACTION PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO AFRICA;
Mon Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 001422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PDPA FOR DALTON, MITCHELL AND SIMS 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO AFRICA; 
HARARE 
 
  ¶1.   Under headline "Bush visit sees welcome consensus on 
      Zim" the independent weekly "The Zimbabwe 
      Independent" dedicated its July 11 editorial to 
      hailing President Bush's trip to Africa, saying: "By 
      reaching out to Africa. . .Bush has indicated that 
      post-Iraq America may be turning a new leaf." 
      Excerpts: 
 
  ¶2.   "President George W. Bush leaves Africa this weekend 
      hopefully better informed about the myriad problems 
      the continent faces.  He cannot be accused of 
      lacking enthusiasm.  He has committed his government 
      to billions of U. S. dollars in aid and trade that 
      far exceeds anything the Clinton administration 
      attempted.  And as well as promoting a now-familiar 
      agenda on governance, he listened to what other 
      leaders had to say.  In particular he built on ties 
      already forged at past meetings with South African 
      President Thabo Mbeki.   Of interest to us was of 
      course their talks on Zimbabwe. . .While Mbeki 
      appears to have given Bush the same questionable 
      assurances on Zimbabwe that he has been giving other 
      heads of government. . .there does appear to be an 
      identity of views on the need to make progress in 
      resolving the spiraling crisis here that has 
      consequences for the region and NEPAD. . .But for 
      things to give, Mbeki will have to move beyond the 
      facile argument that `the principal responsibility 
      for the resolution of this problem rests with the 
      people of Zimbabwe.'  If the people of Zimbabwe lie 
      bound and gagged, how then are they supposed to free 
      themselves?  If Bush missed the opportunity to ask 
      that question. . .he will have missed a gaping hole 
      in Mbeki's rhetoric armor. . .We trust Bush is not 
      intent upon ignoring these problems in the interests 
      of diplomacy. . .Bush has faced considerable 
      hostility from civil society during his visit to 
      South Africa.  His record on the environment, 
      including abandonment of the Kyoto consensus, 
      breaches of long-held liberties in the interment of 
      individuals suspected of links to Al-Qaeda, the 
      promotion of security legislation that infringes on 
      basic freedoms and encourages other states to do the 
      same, and the frontal assault on the post-1945 
      international dispensation which the end of 
      multilateralism portends, have all combined to 
      create the impression of a brash gun slinging regime 
      in Washington that disregards the concerns of 
      friends and foes alike.  But bullheaded diplomacy 
      and confrontation with critics do not. . .provide a 
      basis for sound relations with the international 
      community.  By reaching out to Africa, addressing 
      its concerns and doing some uncustomary listening, 
      Bush has indicated that post-Iraq America may be 
      turning a new leaf; that there is more to U. S. 
      power than twisting arms. . . . " 
 
SULLIVAN