03KUWAIT1121
TFIZ01:  DART ASSESSMENT - UMM QASR
Fri Mar 28 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 001121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO PASS USAID/W 
STATE FOR PRM/ANE, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, IO AND SA/PAB 
NSC FOR EABRAMS, SMCCORMICK, STAHIR-KHELI, JDWORKEN 
USAID FOR USAID/A, DCHA/AA, DCHA/RMT, DCHA/FFP 
USAID FOR DCHA/OTI, DCHA/DG, ANE/AA 
USAID FOR USAID/AA:NATSIOS 
USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA:WGARVELINK, BMCCONNELL, KFARNSWORTH 
USAID FOR ANE/AA:WCHAMBERLIN 
ROME FOR FODAG 
GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH 
DOHA FOR MSHIRLEY 
ANKARA FOR AMB WRPEARSON, ECON AJSIROTIC AND DART 
AMMAN FOR USAID AND DART 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF IZ WFP
SUBJECT:  TFIZ01:  DART ASSESSMENT - UMM QASR 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  On 26 March, five members of the USAID/DART drove from 
Kuwait City to Umm Qasr, Iraq to assess the prevailing 
security and to examine the damage to port infrastructure. 
Umm Qasr has an estimated population of 40,000 people and 
two port areas.  Currently, there is no electricity or 
running water in Umm Qasr and fuel is scarce.  Electricity 
and potable water are provided from Basra, Iraq's second- 
largest city.  The focus of the DART assessment was the old 
port area since the new port area is still considered 
insecure.  This is the first assessment in Iraq conducted by 
a U.S. Government agency other than the U.S. military.  End 
Summary. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2.  Umm Qasr is Iraq's southernmost port community, home to 
more than 40,000 Iraqis.  The port was one of the conduits 
for the Oil for Food Program and has the capacity to receive 
sea freight bulk grain shipments.  The port is divided into 
a new port and old port with the capacity to receive ships 
of 9.5 meter draft.  The purpose of this assessment trip was 
to determine if military forces were able to protect unarmed 
humanitarian workers bringing food and supplies to alleviate 
critical needs within Iraq. 
 
--------------- 
PORT FACILITIES 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  The DART assessment team found that very little of the 
old port infrastructure had been damaged or destroyed. 
Ample warehouses, vacuum systems, vacuators, silos, silo 
chutes, and some cranes appeared to be in good condition, 
but the operational status of mechanical components was not 
assessed due to a lack of electrical power.  No bulk carrier 
ships remained in the old port area and most likely departed 
immediately prior to the start of the conflict.  Off-loading 
of ships will be less problematic once electricity and fuel 
are available, however, no heavy trucks for transport were 
seen in the port area. 
 
¶4.  The Port Authority building is in completely serviceable 
condition with limited, superficial damage.  The 
Harbormaster's office was ransacked, however, and no 
important logs or papers were found by the DART. 
The warehouses along the port are made of corrugated metal 
and labeled in both English and Arabic. 
¶5.  The warehouses are empty, except for 200 bags of sugar 
and salt, which have not yet been tested to determine 
suitability for consumption.  There are also a substantial 
number of trucking containers stored in the port.  Some 
looting occurred within the eight grain silos but the silos 
were not destroyed. 
 
¶6.  The railroads that lead to the dockyards do not seem to 
be used.  There are three train engines located at the port, 
and two of those are shunting engines, which appear new. 
However, despite local reports that all the engines work, 
the thick dust covering them, as well as the rust and dirt 
covering the rails, indicate the engines have not moved for 
some time. 
 
¶7.  There is a dredger in the water, which appears to be new 
and in working order.  There are also two tugboats in 
similar condition as well as pilot vessels.  None of the 
vessels have yet been inspected. 
 
¶8.  There has been a positive response from local workers in 
regard to employment at the port, and former workers have 
been requested to return with lists of the critical skills, 
components, and individuals necessary to reconstitute the 
port.  The response has been forthcoming and accurate to 
date. 
 
¶9.  The DART counted five vacuators.  One was clearly 
damaged; an air tank had been punctured, and a large hole 
was visible on the side.  The other four units appeared to 
have been recently used.  The engine cabinets were 
padlocked, which would suggest that the motors may not have 
been sabotaged, but the location of the keys is unknown. 
The motors have not been inspected for improved explosive 
devices. 
 
¶10.  Potable water and electricity were listed as the 
immediate concerns by the local population, both of which 
come from Basra.  Until power and water are restored, the 
port will not be able to operate at full capacity. 
As an immediate solution, there is a plan to lay a pipeline 
extending from Kuwait over the Iraqi border to provide 
potable water for treatment within Iraq. 
 
¶11.  The British vessel, the Sir Galahad, is due in Umm Qasr 
on 27 March, and the U.K. forces are looking for twenty port 
workers to assist in offloading the humanitarian supplies. 
The port is projected to receive 90 truckloads of 
humanitarian aid in the next two to three days, and there 
are plans for receiving 780 pallets of food and water.  The 
U.K. forces have some trucks to move the commodities into 
one of the warehouses at the port.  A list of commodities is 
available at the HOC. 
 
----------------------------------- 
UMM QASR HOSPITAL AND LOCAL SCHOOLS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  The DART was unable to assess the Umm Qasr hospital 
because it remains in an insecure area.  However, the 
hospital reportedly has a three-month supply of medicine and 
an English-speaking doctor but no running water.  Iraqi 
water tankers were observed on the road but the DART was not 
able to immediately determine how this water was being used 
or where it was being taken.  Although there are between 20- 
30 local schools in the Umm Qasr area, none have reopened 
since the conflict began on 20 March. 
 
JONES