04AMMAN2450
TRAVEL TO JORDAN OF DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY
Tue Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002450 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS JO OVIP HADLEY STEPHEN EDRC
SUBJECT: TRAVEL TO JORDAN OF DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY 
ADVISOR STEVE HADLEY 
 
REF: WHITE HOUSE 300020Z MAR 04 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please handle accordingly. 
 
¶1.  Embassy Amman warmly welcomes and grants country 
clearance to Deputy National Security Advisor Steve Hadley 
and his party for travel to Jordan March 31.  Control 
officer, Embassy expediter, vehicles, and Embassy baggage 
handlers will meet the party on arrival. 
 
¶2.  Control Officer for the visit is Political Counselor Doug 
Silliman.   Mr. Silliman's contact information is as follows: 
 
 
962-6-590-6880 - office-direct line; 
962-6-590-6591 - office secretary (Marcia Romero); 
962-79-560-8993 - cell; 
962-6-592-9849 - home; 
sillimanda@state.gov - office e-mail; 
sillimandams@state.sgov.gov - classified SIPRNET e-mail; 
sillimans@index.com.jo - personal e-mail. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The following is the group's tentative schedule in 
Amman. 
 
March 31, 2004 
 
0055  Arrive at Queen Alia Airport.  Met by Control officer 
and expediter in VIP lounge.  Transfer to Marriott Hotel. 
 
0800  Depart Marriott for Embassy 
 
0815  Briefing with Amb. Gnehm. 
 
0915  Meeting with Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher 
 
1130  (TBC) Meeting with GID Director Saad Kheir 
 
1220  Meeting with King Abdullah (not/not a lunch as 
originally planned) 
 
1300  Depart meeting with King Abdullah, return to 
Embassy/Hotel 
 
1345  Depart for airport 
 
1430  Wheels up for Sharm al-Sheikh (delayed to 1430 by crew 
rest issues) 
 
¶4.  Embassy has made reservations for the party at the Amman 
Marriott Hotel, a 20-minute ride from the Embassy.   Phone: 
962-6-560-7607; Fax: 962-6-567-0100.  The hotel is within the 
per diem allowance and accepts Visa, Master 
Card and Amex. 
 
¶5.  Valid visas are required for entry into Jordan.  Visas 
may be obtained at Queen Alia airport; however, 
Embassy suggests visitors obtain their visas prior to 
arrival, as there can be long lines for visa issuance 
at the airport. Money can be exchanged at Queen Alia airport. 
 
¶6. Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must have 
fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit. 
Each agency, organization or visiting delegation will be 
charged for the actual costs attributed to the visit.  Direct 
charge costs include, but are not limited to: American and 
LES overtime (for such services as airport expediting, 
cashier accommodation exchange, control room staffing, 
representational event support), travel and per diem costs 
incurred by post personnel in support of visitor's field 
travel, rental of vehicles and other equipment, long distance 
telephone calls, office supplies, gasoline and other vehicle 
maintenance costs, departure tax and other airport fees. 
 
¶7. Threat assessment: 
 
While anti-West sentiment has been less pronounced since the 
end of the Gulf War, political issues 
involving post war Iraq and the ongoing Israeli/Palestinian 
situation continue to fuel resentment toward U.S. policy. 
Warden messages disseminated in January and March 2004, 
alerted Americans to potential terrorist targeting of U.S. 
interests in Jordan, including hotels.  Recent incidents in 
Jordan remind us of the ability of 
transnational terrorist groups, as well as less sophisticated 
local elements, to target Americans and Western interests in 
Jordan.  In September 2003, 13 individuals were arrested for 
plotting attacks against U.S. and Jordanian targets, 
including the U.S. Embassy in Amman.  In May 2003, three 
individuals connected to the Zarqawi network were arrested 
for planning attacks against foreigners and tourist 
locations.  The October 28, 2002 assassination of a U.S. 
diplomat in Amman outside his residence was ultimately linked 
to al-Qaeda.  Jordanian authorities arrested the assassins in 
December 2002.  In October 2002, Americans in Jordan were 
informed of a potential kidnapping plot by al-Qaeda. In 
December 1999, a group affiliated with al-Qaeda was arrested 
in Jordan.  This group was in the late planning stages of 
attacks against western hotels and tourist sites. The most 
recent published terrorist alerts have stated that extremist 
groups continue to plan terrorist attacks against U.S. 
interests worldwide. 
Crime is generally not a serious problem for travelers in 
Jordan, although petty theft is somewhat common in the 
downtown Amman Hashimiyah Square area and near the Roman 
amphitheater.  In the narrow streets of the old city and at 
some of the more popular tourist sites, crowded conditions 
invite pickpockets/purse snatchers and other petty criminals. 
 Travelers should be more guarded in these areas and not 
present easy opportunities to criminals. 
 
¶8. Travel guidelines: 
 
American citizens and official visitors traveling in Jordan 
should exercise caution, be alert and stay informed of 
regional and local events that could quickly impact the 
security environment in the country.  Travelers should avoid 
large crowds and demonstrations and take measures to avoid 
areas where they are most likely to occur (city centers, 
universities, refugee camps), particularly during periods of 
increased tension.  It is also recommended to maintain a low 
profile and not establish predictable patterns of movement, 
even if only visiting for a short period.  Recent worldwide 
announcements continue to alert American travelers that 
terrorists do not distinguish 
between official and civilian targets.  Therefore facilities 
where Americans or foreigners are likely to congregate such 
as hotels, nightspots, and restaurants should be considered 
as potential targets.  Travelers should remain in a higher 
state of alert when attendance at such locations is 
necessary.  Taxis are the only form of public transportation 
that is recommended. 
 
As Jordan is an Islamic country, cultural sensitivities 
should be observed.  Female travelers should dress 
conservatively and not travel alone, particularly in areas 
not as accustomed to western visitors. Incidents of sexual 
harassment, assault and unwelcome advances of a sexual nature 
against western visitors and residents, although not 
frequent, have been reported.  These incidents, while 
troubling, have not been pervasive. 
 
¶9. Other: 
 
For further information, see the State Department's Consular 
Information Sheet for Jordan at 
http://travel.state.gov/jordan.html and link from that site 
to the most recent Public Announcement on Travel 
in the Middle East and South Asia and the most recent 
Worldwide Caution. 
GNEHM