04AMMAN5281
UNAMI HUMANITARIAN SITUATION UPDATE IN IRAQ
Mon Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281244Z Jun 04UNCLAS AMMAN 005281 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM IZ JO
SUBJECT: UNAMI HUMANITARIAN SITUATION UPDATE IN IRAQ 
 
 
 ¶1. SUMMARY:  United Nations Assistance Mission to Iraq 
(UNAMI) reps warned of a looming humanitarian crisis this 
summer in southern Iraq in a June 24 humanitarian situation 
update.  These warnings tempered the announcement of the 
United Nations Development Group's (UNDG) approval of 17 
infrastructure and humanitarian projects worth 232 million 
USD.  In preparation for the June 30 transfer of sovereignty 
to the Iraq Interim Government (IIG), UNAMI and humanitarian 
partners are engaging in contingency planning to assess the 
abilities of various UN agencies and NGOs to respond to 
sudden humanitarian emergencies.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
DETERIORATING SITUATION IN BASRA 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. UNAMI rep Wojtek Wilk warned of a deteriorating 
humanitarian situation in Basra this summer.  Shortages of 
electricity, water, and fuel would be the principal causes of 
the perceived looming crisis, he said.  UNAMI expects that 
the availability of electricity will decrease further this 
summer due to the increased usage of air conditioners and 
refrigerators.  This would further strain the electricity 
system in the south.  Furthermore, UNAMI predicts a severe 
water shortage in southern Iraq.  According to UNAMI, the 
shortage is expected to worsen throughout the summer due to a 
reduction in the potable water supply and lack of back-up 
generators to operate purification and pumping plants.  Wilk 
cited as additional problems the low output of the sweetwater 
canal in southern Iraq and increasing salinity levels in the 
Shatt al-Arab.  UNAMI fears that as the water situation in 
the south worsens, Iraqis will turn to contaminated 
underground water.  Overall, according to UNAMI, the water 
and electricity shortages during the summer would affect 4.5 
million residents in the southern governates, with Basra 
suffering the worst.  UNAMI estimates that Basra's water 
output will not reach pre-war levels until, at least, the end 
of 2004. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
UNDG INFRASTRUCTURE AND HUMANITARIAN PROJECTS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  UNAMI's perceptions of a looming humanitarian crisis 
tempered UNDG rep Tetsuo Kondo's announcement during the 
meeting of UNDG's approval of 17 infrastructure and 
humanitarian assistance projects in Iraq, totalling 232 
million USD.  The bulk of the projects are devoted to 
infrastructure and housing, agriculture, water resources and 
the environment.  Four projects focus on education and 
culture.  All 17 projects have been cleared with the Iraq 
Ministry of Planning (MOP) in Iraq with the understanding 
that U.N. international staff would not be on the ground. 
Kondo also stressed the need to maximize the use of Iraqi 
expertise in implementing the projects and to develop better 
mechanisms to coordinate efforts with the MOP. 
 
-------------------------------- 
POST JUNE 30 CONTINGENCY PLANNING 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. According to Wilk, the UN, led by UNAMI, and humanitarian 
partners are engaged in contingency planning exercises to 
prepare for the June 30 transfer of soveregnty to the IIG. 
The exercises are aimed at assessing the ability of various 
UN agencies to respond to sudden humanitarian emergencies, 
with a particular focus on the transport of potable water, 
food provided by the Public Distribution System (PDS), and 
medical supplies. 
 
¶5.  Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified website at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page 
GNEHM