04ANKARA6805
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 006805 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Russia, Turkey lay groundwork for `strategic partnership' - 
Aksam 
Putin promises to work for removal of `TRNC' sanctions - 
Milliyet 
EU sets Fall 2005 for accession talks with Turkey - Aksam 
Al-Yawar says Americans will leave Iraq soon, US says two 
more years - Aksam 
Terrorists raid US consulate in Jeddah - Hurriyet 
Saudis suspect Al-Qaeda in Jeddah attacks - Hurriyet 
ETA terror in Spain - Aksam 
Egyptians angered by prisoner swap with Israel - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara, Moscow agree on `effective' cooperation against 
terror - Radikal 
Sezer calls for Putin to support north Cyprus - Radikal 
Putin makes Ankara Cyprus `gesture' - Yeni Safak 
Putin eyes Turkish military contracts - Radikal 
Russia approves `gas for goods' - Zaman 
Al-Qaeda attack on US consulate in Jeddah - Cumhuriyet 
Bush admits Iraqi elections cannot be 100 percent secure - 
Cumhuriyet 
IIG determined to hold elections on time - Zaman 
Three million pray for world peace in Bangladesh - Yeni 
Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
EU draft summit declaration on Turkey:  Turkish papers 
describe a second draft of the European Union summit 
declaration circulated on Monday to be more negative than 
the first draft.  The new draft reportedly includes a 
reference to settling the Aegean dispute with Greece through 
the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in the Hague. 
Turkey will also be required to prove its track record in 
implementing EU law, not just adopting it, to make progress 
in membership talks.  The draft mentions no start date for 
accession talks.  Turkey will pose a serious challenge to 
the EU with regard to monitoring the implementation of EU 
rules.  The new text assumes that Turkey will effectively 
recognize Cyprus by amending its Customs Union (CU) 
agreement with the EU to cover the 10 new member states, 
despite Ankara's criticism of that suggestion last week. 
The draft noted that a long transition period and permanent 
safeguards may be `considered'  regarding the free movement 
of Turkish labor.  The draft stipulates tha a suspension of 
entry talks with Ankara would be possible at the request of 
any EU member states if Turkey backslides on democratic 
reforms, human rights, or the rule of law.  The new EU draft 
makes no mention of a `privileged partnership' as an 
alternative to full EU membership for Turkey. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Putin visits Ankara:  During his visit to Ankara, Russian 
President Vladimir Putin presented an investment package 
covering 12 proposals worth $20 billion.  `We are determined 
to develop our cooperation with Turkey in every area,' Putin 
told a gathering of officials, journalists and businessmen 
after signing a series of joint agreements in Ankara Monday. 
The two sides agreed that Russia will receive $1 billion 
worth of Turkish goods in exchange for the natural gas it 
provides to Turkey.  Turkey attracts over a million Russian 
tourists every year, and is also a major customer for 
Russian oil and gas.  Russia is Turkey's biggest trading 
partner after Germany.  PM Tayyip Erdogan told a business 
meeting attended by Putin that annual bilateral trade could 
reach $15 billion in the near future.  Officials say two-way 
trade will total nearly $10 billion in 2004.  Erdogan said 
that Turkish investments in Russia now amount to $2 billion, 
and he urged the Russians to invest more in Turkey, 
including in Turkish defense industry contracts for tanks 
and helicopters.  Putin thanked `the Turkish nation and 
government' for their moral support for Russia's fight 
against Chechen separatists.  Turkey is home to a large 
Chechen community.  Some Turkish NGOs and solidarity groups 
have supported Chechens in their fight against Russian rule. 
Shortly before Putin's arrival on Sunday, Turkish police 
detained several suspected Chechen militants in Istanbul. 
Papers claim that Putin promised the Turks Russian support 
at the UN Security Council for removing the international 
isolation of Turkish Cypriots.  "Hurriyet," Turkey's leading 
circulation daily, reported that the Putin visit was a step 
toward a `strategic partnership' between Turkey and Russia, 
while left-leaning "Cumhuriyet" ran the banner headline 
"Eurasian Partnership" to describe the visit.  Most Turkish 
commentators argued that the positive visit by Putin would 
strengthen Turkey's hand in dealing with Europe and the 
United States.  Some commentators viewed the visit as 
presenting Turkey with an alternative' to EU membership and 
a close alliance with the US.  Sedat Ergin of "Hurriyet" 
wrote of the visit: `sometimes it's just nice to feel that 
you're not alone.' 
 
Moscow announces to strike at terror `everywhere':  Three 
days after threatening to strike at terrorists' strongholds 
outside of Russia, Moscow announced it would equip Russian 
warplanes with long-range conventional missiles, "Radikal" 
reports.  Moscow has adopted a `preventive strike' doctrine 
following the school killings by terrorists in Beslan, north 
Osetia. 
 
Papers criticize tight security in Fallujah:  All papers 
report about the`extraordinary' security measures applied by 
US forces in Fallujah in an effort to prevent insurgents 
from returning to the city.  Fallujans are subjected to DNA 
tests and retina scans, and are given special ID cards, 
according to Turkish papers.  Fearing car bomb attacks, 
Americans have also prohibited local people from using their 
cars.  The commander of US forces in Fallujah is trying to 
allow displaced Fallujans return to their homes before the 
upcoming Iraqi elections.  "Cumhuriyet" likens US security 
proceedings in Fallujah to `concentration camp' techniques 
used by the Nazis.  Citing international wire reports, the 
paper claims that returning Fallujans are facing `police 
state' methods rather than that `democracy' that had been 
promised for Iraq.  Islamist-oriented "Yeni Safak" slams the 
Iraqi interim government for attempting to prevent 
journalists from reporting about incidents in Iraq through a 
new, `authoritarian' press law that will be approved soon. 
 
TGS chief orders investigation of former force commander: 
The head of the Turkish military, General Hilmi Ozkok, 
ordered an investigation into a former naval forces 
commander, retired admiral Ilhami Erdil, on charges of 
corruption and illegal acquisition of goods, "Hurriyet" 
reports on its front page.  In a statement on Monday, the 
General Staff announced that retired admiral Erdil will be 
tried in a military court for graft, dereliction of duty, 
and embezzlement on December 21.  The prosecutor may request 
up to an 18-year prison sentence for Erdil.  Erdil will be 
the first force commander in Turkey to be tried on 
corruption charges. 
 
Parliament passes key amendment to penal code:  The Turkish 
parliament passed a 333-article Penal Procedural Law (CMUK) 
over the weekend.  The measure is among the bills the 
European Union had urged Ankara to pass before the December 
17 EU summit.  The new CMUK includes significant changes to 
the penal code that will be made official upon the approval 
of President Sezer.  Opposition CHP lawmakers criticized the 
bill, claiming that some provisions in the draft would turn 
prisons into `slave camps.' 
 
Government spokesman defends `presidential system' for 
Turkey:  Government Spokesman and Justice Minister Cemil 
Cicek said that if Turkey wants to achieve sustained 
political and economic stability, it would have to shift to 
a presidential system.  Cicek cited the example of the 
United States to support his contention that a presidential 
system is more conducive to stable regimes. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
"Strategic Visit" 
Sami Kohen observed in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (12/7): 
"Putin's visit to Turkey has some very important aspects, 
but the most important thing is that the visit has a 
strategic dimension.  The meetings held at the highest level 
in Ankara carried the relations between Turkey and Russia to 
the level of a `multi-dimensional partnership.'  Both sides 
have recently come to the realization that they need each 
other and, within this framework, have moved closer to each 
other.  Although Russia has improved its relations with the 
US and the EU, the Russians are well aware that they have 
been boxed in by these countries.  Moscow is in search of 
new partners in regions close to its border.   Considering 
recent developments in Turkey's foreign policy, Ruissia has 
noted the possibility of establishing a strategic 
relationship with Turkey.  Close relations with Russia carry 
many benefits for Turkey as well.  However, Turkey should 
consider the new partnership with Russia as `added value' in 
its effort to diversify and enrich its foreign relations. 
Of course, this should not come at the expense of Turkey's 
existing relationship and must not be seen as an alternative 
to the West." 
 
"The Situation 8 Before 12" 
Yilmaz Oztuna commented in the conservative-mass appeal 
"Turkiye" (12/7):  "In 8 days, the world media will publish 
in their headlines the conditions that will be given to 
Turkey for accession to the EU.  Our expectation is for a 
definite date without any conditions, just as the other 
candidate countries were given.  No matter how innocent they 
may seem, any conditions given to Turkey, a NATO member and 
participant in the EU Customs Union, will not be welcome. 
In that case, Turkey can reject the negotiations.  After 
that, it will be a problem for the EU, because Turkey has a 
`B Plan,' a `C Plan,' and a `D plan.'  If the EU's 
conditions are unacceptable, the reforms will continue. 
Turkey will not go back to worn-out regimes just because it 
is angry with the EU.  In our `B plan,' Turkey's strategic 
relations with the US will get stronger.  Our relations with 
Russia will improve as well.  However, we will not join with 
Russia and China to defend Iran and Syria against the US. 
That is not possible in the real world.  We have fulfilled 
the Copenhagen Criteria.  If we can start negotiations 
unconditionally, Turkey will break its own record by 
carrying out all necessary reforms for EU accession 
speedily.  We have the potential to do that." 
EDELMAN