04ANKARA1717
SOUTHEAST TURKEY SITUATION REPORT:  IMPROVING
Tue Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001717 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
ANKARA PASS IZMIR 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM ECON TU SY IZ
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY SITUATION REPORT:  IMPROVING 
CONDITIONS ARE NOT SET IN A SOLID FOUNDATION 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1646 
     ¶B. ANKARA 1624 
     ¶C. ANKARA 1423 
     ¶D. ADANA 022 
 
 
THIS CABLE IS FROM AMCONSUL ADANA. 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  From February 22-27, consulate personnel traveled 
the eastern part of the consular district, including the 
cities of Diyarbakir, Batman, Mardin, Nusaybin and Sanliurfa. 
 The primary issues that emerged in meetings with 
academicians, medical and legal professionals, politicians, 
local administrators, civil right activists and business 
leaders were civil rights, local elections, security and the 
economy.  While there are positive trends in all of these 
areas, the recent clashes over the border in Syria between 
Kurds and Arabs (REF A) illustrate how easily external events 
might affect a fragile stability.  As Newroz and the local 
elections approach, the combination of emotions and large 
seasonal gatherings could be influenced by a negative turn of 
events in Northern Iraq. 
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
NEW AMENDMENTS CREATE DIFFICULTIES FOR WORSHIPPERS 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) In Diyarbakir, a nondenominational Protestant 
congregation of about 50-60 worshippers is experiencing 
difficulty since new amendments on religious buildings were 
passed in December 2003.  The amendments, which allow the 
word &mosque8 to be replaced by &place of worship,8 
appear at first glance, to be an improvement.  The 
congregation up until December 2003 was in compliance with 
all procedures.  However, the new amendment requires an 
application filed with local administration, approval by the 
municipality and final certification by the governor,s 
office for a need for the prospective place of worship. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The congregation diligently pursued meeting the new 
requirements but failed to receive the required approvals. 
Subsequently, the Security Directorate brought charges 
against Pastor Ahmet Guvener for opening an unauthorized 
church and disobeying official orders.  On March 18, 
consulate personnel confirmed that there will be a court 
hearing on May 12. 
 
 
KURDISH LANGUAGE SCHOOLS OPEN*FINALLY 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) After waiting periods of 18 months to two years, 
several Kurdish schools in southeast Turkey are finally 
opening their doors.  Consulate personnel visited the new 
schools in Batman and Urfa. The consulate personnel who 
visited the facilities agreed that these were probably among 
the most up-to-building code facilities they had ever 
visited. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Turkish Education Ministry (YOK) placed some 
limitations on what could be taught at the schools.  In 
Batman, the school is permitted to teach only conversational 
Kurdish and no grammar.  The Batman school was printing 
textbooks and working on a dictionary. Teachers told 
consulate personnel that it was possible to buy Kurdish books 
in local stores in both Batman and Urfa.  Right now, the 
registered students are 18 years of age or older, but there 
are plans at both schools to teach younger students. 
Qualified instructors will continue to be a problem because 
there is no formal higher education in the Kurdish language 
in Turkey. When consulate personnel asked the rector of a 
prominent university, he stated that there was no need for 
Kurdish in their language department. 
 
 
SERIOUS ABUSE DECLINING*DEMOCRATIZATION ON EVERYBODY,S MIND 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) In Sanliurfa, human rights activists told us that 
reports of physical torture have significantly decreased, but 
that the Security Directorate continued to impede their 
efforts to assemble for meetings or presentations.  According 
to one Sanliurfa NGO leader, the Security Directorate 
frequently refused to allow NGOs to hire halls or get permits 
for gatherings.  A prominent Diyarbakir lawyer also stated 
that the overall civil rights situation was improving.  The 
lawyer was pleased with the passage of EU reforms but stated 
that the implementation wasn,t taking place at the local 
administration level.  For example, it might be legal now to 
give a child a Kurdish name, but it was still possible to 
encounter a local official who would refuse to register it. 
He noted that people living in southeast Turkey could be 
expected to oppose decentralization reform because of 
difficulties experienced with local officials. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) A prominent Diyarbakir business leader emphasized 
the importance of a solution in Cyprus to the democratization 
process in Turkey.  The businessman stated that many in 
southeast Turkey believe that a Cyprus solution will speed up 
the EU accession process and lead to more democratic reforms. 
 He added that with reform the parliament,s power would 
increase and &other organizations8 within the GOT would 
come under civil control.  He emphasized (as consulate 
personnel heard in most meetings) his belief that the USG had 
the ability to strongly influence the GOT. 
 
 
SE LOCAL ELECTIONS 
 
 
DEHAP,S ONLY SERIOUS OPPOSITION IS DEHAP 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) In Nusaybin, a local administration official told 
consulate personnel that the only serious opposition to DEHAP 
in southeast Turkey was DEHAP itself.  He stated that there 
was an internal fault line separating the moderates from the 
more radical elements in the party (REF B).  In Diyarbakir, a 
mayoral candidate related that the southeast was the one 
place where the AK Party and the military were getting along 
well. According to the candidate, AK Party and the military 
shared the common goal of seeing DEHAP factionalized and 
defeated. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Many DEHAP supporters were clearly frustrated that 
KONGRA-GEL had been named a terrorist organization by the 
USG.  In Mardin, DEHAP officials strongly supported a general 
amnesty to encourage militants to disarm and like most DEHAP 
officials and party supporters that spoke with consulate 
personnel, believed that the USG could strongly influence the 
GOT on this point. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) The effect KONGRA-GEL exerts on DEHAP was not clear 
from the meetings with local elected DEHAP officials, legal 
professionals, and human rights activists.  In Batman, an 
elected DEHAP official stated that &if KONGRA-GEL orders 
everyone not to vote for DEHAP, not one vote will go to 
DEHAP8.  On the other hand, a prominent civil rights lawyer 
in the same city noted DEHAP factionalization was being 
exacerbated by some DEHAP members, resistance to KONGRA-GEL 
pronouncements.  In Nusaybin, for example, a local 
administration official related that KONGRA-GEL recently 
called for the closure of shops in the city as a protest, but 
few people responded. 
 
 
AK PARTY*PLAN OF ACTION FAILED IN BATMAN AND MARDIN 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) There were signs that AK Party is making serious 
efforts to win voters in southeast Turkey.  Common AK Party 
themes in Diyarbakir, Batman and Mardin were transparency and 
candidates native to the area with no record of corruption. 
The Diyarbakir AK Party Vice Chairman emphasized the 
importance the AK National Headquarters places on Diyarbakir; 
for example, PM Erdogan visited the city on March 14.  In 
Batman, the AK Party Vice Chairman noted that the government 
had already sent 2000 tons of asphalt to Batman (even though 
they had a DEHAP mayor) and that the PM had promised that 
natural gas would be available by 2005. The Batman Vice 
Chairman described an impressive plan of action for the city. 
 However, AK Party candidates in both Batman and Mardin were 
disqualified for not getting their applications submitted in 
time. 
 
 
¶11. (SBU)  The Diyarbakir CHP Chairman stated that 
personality is more important than the party affiliation in 
these elections, and that &people were only interested in 
the AK Party because the ruling party gets them more 
services8.  This reminded consulate personnel of the Adana 
mayoralty race (REF C).  Incumbent Aytac Durak (now 
officially the AK Party candidate) stated publicly that he 
only wanted to belong to a &stronger8 party.  However, most 
Diyarbakir contacts with whom consulate personnel met, of 
whom some were rank and file voters and others party 
officials, showed strong ideological views as opposed to 
choosing based on personality as is more common in Adana or 
Mersin. 
¶12. (SBU) During the course of this trip, contacts did not 
express any fears about casting their votes safely during the 
election process, but showed some concern that there would be 
irregularities.  In Batman, one elected official suggested 
that there should be election observers sent to Southeast 
Turkey. 
 
 
SECURITY*CALM BUT POTENTIAL FOR INSTABILITY REMAINS 
 
 
¶13. (SBU) Without exception, all contacts expressed their 
unease at the situation in Northern Iraq and stressed that 
any action taken by the USG there could threaten the 
stability in southeast Turkey.  Recent events in northern 
Syria illustrate the volatility of the Kurdish issue (REF A). 
 In Mardin, DEHAP officials told consulate personnel that 
DEHAP only represents Kurds in Turkey; KONGRA-GEL represents 
all Kurds, opening up the possibility that some unspecified 
action might be taken there by KONGRA-GEL. The situation 
remains calm near the Syrian border on the Turkish side, but 
this, and the situation in Northern Iraq, pose potential 
problems for stability, especially with Newroz and local 
elections approaching. 
 
 
¶14. (SBU) There were some positive signs in local 
administration in Batman and Nusaybin.  In Batman, SHP/DEHAP 
coalition party officials reported constructive dialogue with 
the security director and blamed the occasional arrest during 
demonstrations on a few racist police officers.  One official 
stated that Batman was &more democratic than Diyarbakir or 
Siirt8.  In contrast, on March 9, near Batman (on a road 
traveled by consulate vehicle on February 25) two jandarma 
were killed when a remotely controlled land mine was 
exploded, reportedly by PKK militants. 
 
 
¶15. (SBU) In, Nusaybin, local administration showed genuine 
efforts to embrace diversity and promote conflict prevention. 
 The subgovernor stated that in the recent year, residents 
had become more likely to declare themselves Turkish 
citizens, no matter what their ethnic background.  Nusaybin 
is a diverse community of Christians, Muslims, Kurds and 
Arabs.  Sociologists from Dokuz Eylul University had been 
invited to study the area to improve the cooperation of the 
various groups.  The subgovernor had also made contacts in 
Europe with groups of Christian and Jewish former residents 
to encourage them to return to Nusaybin.  Overall, the 
atmosphere remains calm in Nusaybin, however, on February 13, 
there was a clash between security forces and the militant 
group, People,s Defense Force (HPG).  One militant was 
reported killed.  The Nusaybin subgovernor,s office 
confirmed the report. 
 
 
INCENTIVE LAW, IRAQ TRADE SEEN AS UNLIKELY TO HELP ECONOMY 
 
 
¶16. (SBU)  Diyarbakir Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCI) 
President Kutbettin Arzu praised the new tax incentive law, 
but stated that the inclusion of western cities as 
beneficiaries would negate any positive effect for the cities 
in the southeast (REF D).   Mardin CCI President Faruk 
Ugurgel reported that the used industrial capacity in Mardin 
increased from 10-50% in the last year, but that there will 
be no new job creation until it reaches 100%.  Some trade is 
being done with Iraq, according to Ugurgel, but profit 
margins on general goods such as foodstuffs and water, are 
being impacted by the $100-300/truck levy being collected on 
the Iraqi side of the Habur gate. 
 
 
¶17. (SBU) Ugurgel confirmed that the operation of the gate 
was seriously degraded from prewar throughput.  According to 
Ugurgel, prewar rate was 5000 trucks/day, now down to 1500 
trucks/day, with an average wait of 10 days to clear the 
gate.  Chamber members, he stated, would like to see a second 
gate at Nusaybin handling trucks to Iraq through Syria. 
Ugurgel explained that it would speed things up, and of 
course, a Nusaybin gate would be close to Mardin (also the 
closest free zone to Syria).  The Mardin CCI President 
believed that this would facilitate trade with Iraq and 
Syria.  When consulate personnel met with CCI officials in 
Diyarbakir, Mardin and Sanliurfa, all complained of a general 
lack of information on doing business with the CPA or in 
Iraq.  The CCI officials didn,t expect to profit from trade 
with Iraq when they couldn,t understand the contracting 
process. 
 
 
¶18. (SBU)  Consulate personnel met with Diyarbakir Grameen 
Microcredit Project Director Abdul Matin.  Matin reported no 
problems with managing or funding the project.  He expected 
further funding to be forthcoming from the Soros Foundation 
in the near future.  The project consists of groups of 8-10 
recipients, each of whom receives a small loan (about 500 
million Turkish lira) and is required to pay it back in a 
specified time.  Matin reported a 99% repayment success. 
Mostly the beneficiaries are buying and selling small market 
goods, but some have formed cooperatives and made larger 
investments, such as a washing machine.  The only negative 
feedback that consulate personnel received was from a NGO 
director, who expressed concern over the project,s political 
support from an AK party parliamentarian. 
 
 
¶19. (SBU) The most visible signs of economic prosperity were 
in Batman and Sanliurfa.  In Batman, consulate personnel 
noted an unusual number of Ankara (6) and Istanbul (34) 
plates.  It is common for the elite of a southeastern city to 
register their cars in Ankara or Istanbul and maintain 
residences there as well.  To have an Istanbul or Ankara 
license plate is considered a status symbol.  Incumbent DEHAP 
Mayor Huseyin Kalkan reported the unemployment at 17%.  The 
mayor described a 39 million Euro loan from a German bank for 
infrastructure improvements.  Of the 39 million Euro total, 
20 million was to be a grant and 19 million a long term loan. 
 Kalkan complained the Treasury Department was delaying the 
project by refusing to cosign on the loan. 
 
 
¶20. (SBU) In Sanliurfa, the CCI office was extremely 
well-appointed and the CCI President asserted that in 
southeast Turkey, Sanliurfa was probably one of the most 
successful cities.  CCI President Ismail Demirkol noted the 
superhighway planned from Gaziantep to Sanliurfa and road 
widening from Mardin to Urfa.  Demirkol also stated that the 
Sanliurfa cargo airport is 70% complete. 
 
 
¶21. (U) However, the current road from Mardin to Gaziantep is 
easily the worst major highway consulate personnel travel on 
in the region, used by a large number of heavily loaded 
vehicles, most of them on the way to Habur Gate.  There are 
overturned fuel trucks every few kilometers and the ditches 
along the highway are filled with spilled petroleum products 
not water. 
EDELMAN