04ANKARA6792
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

061504Z Dec 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Putin makes landmark visit to Turkey - Sabah 
Putin, Ankara to discuss terror, Straits issue - Hurriyet 
12/5 
Bush-style protection for Putin - Milliyet 
FM Gul: Turkey ready for December 17 summit, EU is not - 
Milliyet 
Erdogan says Ankara will not yield to EU pressure on Cyprus 
- Milliyet 12/5 
Greek Cypriot lawmaker admits atrocities against Turks in 
1964-65 - Aksam 
US loses its allure; foreign students flee country - 
Milliyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara at work with its `new partner' Russia - Radikal 
Putin seems determined to improve ties with Turkey - Zaman 
Ankara urges Putin to press for united Cyprus - Yeni Safak 
Russia offers nuclear cooperation in talks with Turkey - 
Zaman 
Edelman may become Rice's `best man' - Radikal 
Papadopoluos pushes Turkey on recognition of Nicosia - 
Cumhuriyet 
Turkmen targeted again in US operation in Tal Afar - 
Cumhuriyet 
New torture photos in Iraq put US in difficult position - 
Zaman 12/5 
Resistance shifts to north of Iraq - Yeni Safak 
`Hawkish' Rumsfeld keeps post - Zaman 12/5 
Egypt, Israel swap prisoners - Cumhuriyet 
Iran criticizes Europe over human rights violations - Yeni 
Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Putin in Turkey:  Russian President Vladimir Putin arrived 
in Turkey Sunday for a landmark visit, during which the two 
sides will look at ways to increase cooperation in the fight 
against terrorism and to boost trade.  Putin attended a 
dinner given by President Sezer later Sunday in advance of 
official talks on Monday, during which the two sides will 
sign six agreements and a joint declaration on deepening 
multilateral cooperation.  The joint declaration will also 
include a call for a greater UN role in international 
disputes, a development characterized by "Cumhuriyet" as a 
`significant message' to the Bush Administration.  Bilateral 
trade between the two countries is expected to rise to $10 
billion by the end of 2004, and could reach to as much as 
$25 billion in a few years' time, Turkish officials say.  On 
Sunday, Putin said he hopes to see a `united Cyprus,' and 
Turkey expects him to take an active role in resolving the 
30-year-old problem.  Ankara is expected to seek Russian 
backing for new oil pipelines to ease heavy tanker 
congestion in the Bosphorus.  The Russians complain that 
Turkey is deliberately restricting tanker traffic through 
the Bosphorus at a time when a US-backed pipeline to carry 
Azeri oil via Turkey is nearing completion.  Moscow has long 
accused Ankara of turning a blind eye to the activities of 
Chechen separatists, who enjoy popular support in Turkey. 
Russia has repeatedly asked Turkey to prevent Turkish 
citizens from joining Chechen rebel groups and to block 
efforts by non-governmental organizations to send financial 
aid to the rebels.  More than 3,000 policemen have been 
mobilized to ensure Putin's safety during his stay.  Police 
in Istanbul detained 12 suspects -- nine Chechens and three 
Turkish nationals of Chechen descent - with alleged ties to 
`religious terrorist organizations' in advance of the Putin 
visit.  Several CDs and video cassettes seized along with 
the suspects contained images of Osama bin Laden and attacks 
carried out by Al-Qaeda militants.  On Saturday, some number 
of Chechen groups in Turkey protested against the visit 
because of Moscow's policies in Chechnya.  The Chechens 
urged the Turkish government to help end the occupation in 
Chechnya and disarm the region. 
 
AKP letters to US cause strain:  AK Party lawmaker Cemal 
Yilmaz Demir sent a letter to President Bush on November 25 
in an individual act of protest condemning the US military 
operation against Fallujah, Monday's "Sabah" reports. 
Another AKP lawmaker, Atilla Basoglu, collected about 140 
signatures in parliament for a letter denouncing the US 
Ambassador to Ankara for using the title `Ecumenical' for 
Archbishop Bartholomew I.  According to "Sabah," MFA 
bureaucrats were involved in drafting the letter on the 
Patriarchate issue and helped to soften some of its wording. 
 
US increases pressure for reopening of Halki Seminary:  In a 
meeting with deputy PM Mehmet Ali Sahin in Washington last 
week, State Department U/S Marc Grossman said that the 
reopening of Halki Seminary would facilitate EU entry talks 
for Turkey.  Sahin confirmed that Washington had urged 
Ankara to accept a number of requests put forth by the 
Patriarchate in Istanbul.  Sahin also said he had expressed 
his displeasure with the fact that the Halki Seminiary issue 
was being linked to Turkey's EU accession process. 
 
US operation in TalAfar:  200 Turkmen have been detained by 
US and Iraqi forces in a new US military action in Tal Afar, 
"Cumhuriyet" and "Yeni Safak" report.  The articles claim 
that 130 of the detained Turkmen were subsequently released. 
"Cumhuriyet" cited international wire services for its 
report that Turkmen buildings, including offices of the 
Turkmen Front, were raided during the operation. 
 
Erdogan opens `Armenian Friendship Museum':  On Sunday, PM 
Erdogan applauded Turkish Armenians for their contribution 
to the nation at the opening ceremony of the `Armenian 
Friendship Museum' in Istanbul.  Erdogan warned the EU 
against submitting minority demands to Turkey just before 
the EU summit later this month. 
 
Turkey to launch discussions on presidential system:  The 
government will take up the debate about the introduction of 
a presidential-type system in Turkey following the EU summit 
on December 17, Monday's "Sabah" reports.  Justice Minister 
Cemil Cicek said that a presidential system would ensure 
political stability as Turkey makes the reforms that will be 
necessary to join the European bloc. 
 
European Parliament Speaker in Diyarbakir:  Visiting 
European parliament Speaker Josep Borrell called on the 
governor and mayor of Diyarbakir on Sunday, and met with a 
number of local NGOs.  Diyarbakir Mayor Osman Baydemir said 
that `20 million Kurds' will also join the EU when Turkey is 
admitted into the European bloc.  On Saturday, former DEP 
lawmaker Leyla Zana hosted a luncheon in honor of Borrell in 
Istanbul.  Weekend papers report that Borrell pressed the 
Turkish government to recognize Cyprus before the EU summit 
in December.  Sunday's "Sabah" speculates that if given a 
date for accession talks at the EU summit, Ankara would sign 
an additional protocol to its Customs Union (CU) agreement 
with EU.  Such an action would effectively recognize the 
Greek Cypriot administration. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
"Putin's Visit" 
Rahim Er  wrote in the conservative-mass appeal "Turkiye" 
(12/6):  "The President of the Russian Federation is in 
Ankara today.  He came to Turkey at the invitation of 
President Sezer.  That means he will be hosted in Turkey at 
the highest level.  Putin's Foreign, Defense, and Energy 
Ministers, as well as the autonomous Presidents from 
Tatarstan and Ingushetia, are accompanying him.  Turkey has 
a 500-year history with Russia.  Our relations have always 
been very dramatic.  Turkey and Russia have frequently 
fought with each other.  Our first friendly relations began 
during Turkey's War of Independence.  We used Russia against 
the occupying West.  After that, however, the policies of 
Stalin caused a complete break in relations.  In order to 
defend against communism, Turkey established its alliance 
with the west.  But now, conditions are completely 
different.  There are thousands of Turkish businessmen in 
Russia and vice versa.  There is an increase in exports to 
Russia.  Economics ties have deepened.  The bilateral 
meetings today will focus on energy, alternative routes for 
oil tankers, terrorism, and many other issues.  Relations 
between the two countries have never been this close, 
sincere, and based on mutual benefit.  It should be 
remembered that the Russian Federation also has a very large 
Muslim population.   Russia is a `B plan' for Turkey.  As 
the EU continues to hesitate in giving Turkey a date for 
accession talks and the US treats Ankara lightly, Turkey is 
pushing ahead with its `B plan.'  This proves once again 
that in foreign policy, there are no eternal hostilities, 
and no everlasting friendships." 
 
"Tyrants, Imperialists and Others" 
Asli Aydintasbas commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" 
(12/6):  "The Islamist Saadet Party has recently stepped up 
its protests against the United States.  The AKP is 
following these protests closely.  The reason is not that 
AKP fears losing votes to Saadet, but rather because these 
demonstrations reflect the AKP's basic reflex as well.  The 
feelings expressed in these demonstrations are no different 
from what is expressed in AKP circles.  Islamists are 
interpreting the Fallujah and Patriarch issues as cruel acts 
carried out by Christians against Muslims.  Many members of 
the government share this belief.  A source close to PM 
Erdogan said that `if we (the AKP government) had not 
criticized the US on Fallujah and about the Patriarch issue, 
the reaction in the street would be much more serious -- 
hundreds of thousands would have protested against the US.' 
Other than the Saadet Party protests, public protests in 
Turkey have been limited.  It is true that protests in 
Turkey against the US have been more extreme than those seen 
in Arab countries.  The reason is that none of the Arab 
countries have a free press.  The paradox in Turkey is that 
as democratization becomes more settled, relations with the 
US weaken.  If we look at the full picture, the AK party, 
just like during the March 1 process, is in a very sensitive 
and delicate situation.  Despite everything, so far the AK 
party has managed to keep a balance in its policies toward 
Europe and the US.  Let's see what will happen now." 
 
EDELMAN