04ANKARA4072
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Wed Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 21, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Airbus Gesture for Chirac - Hurriyet 
30th Anniversary of Cyprus Peace Operation - Hurriyet 
Armenia Border Opening a Condition from Erdogan - Sabah 
Erdogan's Nuclear Energy Bribery for France - Milliyet 
Chirac: "Bush Might Attack Syria" - Milliyet 
Denktas Criticizes Annan Plan, GOT, and `TRNC Government' - 
Milliyet 
FM Gul to EU: "Keep Your Promise for TRNC" - Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Turkey Plays Economic Cards for EU entry - Cumhuriyet 
Chirac Remains Silent - Radikal 
Trade With France According to Its Support for Turkey's EU 
Bid - Yeni Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
 
PM Erdogan in France:  "Milliyet" reports that despite 
powerful economic incentives offered by PM Erdogan, France 
has declined to support Turkey's EU entry.  In his meeting 
with French President Chirac, Erdogan promised to give 
priority to France in Turkey's nuclear energy projects and 
in the purchase of new aircraft for the THY fleet.  Despite 
all these offers, Chirac extended only weak support to 
Turkey and did not hold a joint press conference with 
Erdogan.  Neither side issued a written statement following 
the meeting.  "Radikal" noted that Chirac remained silent 
after his meeting with Erdogan.  "Cumhuriyet" reports that a 
preliminary agreement for the Airbus deal will be signed 
today.  Left-leaning "Birgun" notes that despite all of the 
economic `bribery' offered to France, PM Erdogan will return 
to Turkey empty-handed.  "Turkiye" writes that Chirac 
extended France's support to Erdogan for Turkey's EU 
membership.  In a press conference in Paris yesterday, PM 
Erdogan said that Turkey would not accept conditional EU 
approval for accession negotiations, and reiterated that EU 
entry was not an `obsession' for the Turks.  "Sabah" reports 
that Chirac express his hope during the Erdogan meeting that 
US President George Bush `won't do anything crazy' before 
the US election.  Chirac specifically noted his concern 
about a possible US military action against Syria in coming 
months. 
 
Armenian Border Gate:  "Sabah" reports that the Armenian 
issue was raised during Erdogan's meeting with the French 
Foreign Relations Committee.  Erdogan said that the issue 
should be `left to historians.'  The Armenian Diaspora is 
making a mistake, Erdogan said, by keeping the issue on the 
agenda.  `This is not in favor of Armenia, he added. 
Erdogan said that ties between the two countries cannot be 
improved as long as the campaign against Turkey continues. 
`Turkey can open its border with Armenia when the campaign 
has ended.' 
 
Genocide Document Exchange With Armenia:  "Milliyet" reports 
that during the Vienna Armenian Turkish Platform on July 16, 
Turkish and Armenian scholars exchanged documents about the 
so-called Armenian genocide.  The Armenians presented the 
Turkish side with 100 documents confirming the genocide, and 
the Turkish side presented 100 documents to invalidate the 
claim. 
 
Cyprus:  "Milliyet" and "Cumhuriyet" report on the visit of 
State Department DAS Laura Kennedy to Ankara.  "Milliyet" 
notes that Kennedy has also assumed the responsibilities 
previously held by former US Cyprus envoy Thomas Weston. 
"Cumhuriyet" characterizes the visit as the US `testing the 
ground' for holding a new referendum in Cyprus.   All papers 
report about the ceremonies held in Cyprus for the 30th 
anniversary of the Cyprus `Peace operation.'  In a statement 
during the celebrations, Turkish FM Gul called on EU 
countries, the US, and the rest of the world should fulfill 
the promises given to the Turkish Cypriots before the 
referendum. 
 
US Official: Turkey's Improving Relations with Syria, Iran 
not a Problem:  "Hurriyet" quotes a US official in 
Washington as saying that Turkey's recent moves to improve 
relations with Syria and Iran do not cause a problem for the 
United States.  `Turkey knows these countries well,' the 
official said, adding that `one is ruled by the mullahs and 
the other is autocratic.'  `The Turks also know that these 
countries support terrorism and are trying to develop 
weapons of mass destruction,' the official said.  `We are 
pleased that Turkey has engaged with these countries to 
encourage them to take steps toward reform and democracy,' 
he concluded. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: EU Enlargement and Turkey 
 
"EU Creates New Conditions" 
Zafer Atay criticized in the economic-political Dunya 
(7/21): "The NATO summit was full of goodwill gestures and 
pro-Turkey rhetoric from EU leaders, yet it seems those days 
are over now.  EU officials continue to repeat that there 
will be no extraordinary criteria for Turkey's case, and 
that normal EU procedures will be followed.  That means the 
decision about Turkey will be based on whether Turkey meets 
the Copenhagen criteria and the tone of the upcoming EU 
Commission report. ...  However, some circles have started 
to create new conditions just to make the procedure more 
difficult for Turkey.  New `ideas' include an attempt by 
some French parliamentarians to force the acceptance of the 
Armenian `genocide' or to add more preconditions on the 
Cyprus issue.  On top of that, we have a statement from the 
German Prime Minister, who recently spoke about the 
possibility of giving a `conditional yes' to Turkey. ... The 
EU has never imposed such conditions or applied special 
criteria to any of its members in the past.  It seems that 
the Greek Cypriots have already forgotten about their shame 
in the April referendum, and are taking the lead in EU 
efforts to create new conditions for Turkey.  ... We hope 
the EU will not take such initiatives seriously, and will 
follow the normal procedures for Turkey's accession talks." 
 
"The EU's Litmus Test: Strategic Thinking or Racism?" 
Mehmet Ocaktan wrote in the Islamist-opinion maker Yeni 
Safak (7/21): "Turkey's EU vision is moving toward its final 
destination.  The fate of Turkey's effort will become clear 
in December 2004.  There are several scenarios circulating 
regarding the outcome of the EU summit.  This is quite 
understandable, because this is an international game being 
played among the giants.  The key players are France and 
Germany.  Their position will shape the outcome of the EU 
decision on whether or not to start negotiations with 
Turkey.  The recent statement by the German Prime Minister 
is quite confusing.  Although he was talking about a 
`conditional yes,' the real meaning of his comments is a 
postponement of accession negotiations with Turkey. ... In 
this process, we will all see whether EU countries, 
especially France, will be able to rid themselves of the 
`Christian Club' mentality and see the EU in a broader 
perspective. ...  EU decision makers should act with common 
sense based on political and strategic realities by 
beginning negotiations with Turkey right after the December 
summit." 
 
DEUTSCH