04ANKARA6803
EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE
Tue Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA FOR PWALKER, RGALBRAITH 
USDOE/NNSA FOR TPERRY 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR BGOLDEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM PREL
SUBJECT: EXBS: TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE 
(NOVEMBER 2004) 
 
REF: STATE 146478 
 
 ¶1.  Summary:  EXBS advisor spent this month primarily 
focused on ensuring previously introduced initiatives 
remained on track and continued to develop.  The advisor 
participated in meetings concerning the NP Agreement, 
development of the Commodity Identification Training (CIT) 
plan and Turkish Customs Service prioritization of engagement 
opportunities.  Finally, EXBS advisor coordinated the 
successful visit of the Interpol/DOE Threat Reduction 
Initiative Training (CRITr) program team.  This program 
provided training and equipment to the Turkish National 
Police to improve their radiological sensing capabilities. 
 
¶2.    Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.    Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent Reporting 
Period 
 
1)    November 2- EXBS advisor met with Department Head for 
Customs Enforcement Mehmet Guzel.  EXBS adviser presented an 
outline for the development of the CIT Training Plan for the 
recently presented DOE program.  EXBS Advisor was invited to 
participate in the upcoming planning meeting for the CIT 
plan.  EXBS adviser also prioritized with Guzel GOT requests 
for US assistance in improving the capabilities of Turkish 
customs. 
 
2)    November 4 - EXBS advisor participated in the Embassy 
Border security working group meeting.  This meeting is a key 
way in which the Embassy can review the various programs that 
are involved in assisting the GOT in making there borders 
more secure. 
 
3)    November 12- EXBS advisor met with MFA Head of 
Department, Arms Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric.  EXBS 
adviser reviewed the current status of the CIT, ICP, SLD 
programs and discussed the program and Turkey's future 
participation in the PSI experts working group.  EXBS Advisor 
presented official notification of the upcoming CRITr visit. 
 
4)    November 18- EXBS Advisor attended a Turkish Customs 
meeting to develop a training plan in support of the DOE CIT. 
 An outline for the training plan was constructed as well as 
a determination of the various levels of training and annual 
goals for initial and refresher training.  Additional 
meetings will be required to formalize the plan and 
incorporate additional required information.  Following this 
meeting, EXBS advisor presented to Mehmet Guzel, Department 
Head for Customs Enforcement, an overview presentation of a 
Targeting and Risk Management Workshop that could be 
customize for Turkey.  Guzel told advisor that he would 
review the information and would be able to discuss it in the 
near future. 
 
5)    November 18- EXBS advisor met with Head of Department, 
Arms Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric, to deliver several 
NP- related demarches and discuss various NP issues.  EXBS 
adviser also discussed the latest proposed NP Agreement, 
noting minor comments from Washington concerning the Turkish 
proposal.  EXBS Advisor negotiated compromise language that 
is currently being vetted with Washington.  If approved by 
USG, Meric will advocate interagency approval by the GOT. 
 
6)    November 23- EXBS Advisor participated in meetings led 
by ICE Attach Robert Stiriti, who briefed a GOT interagency 
group, including officials from MFA, the Foreign Trade 
Undersecretariat (FTU), the Customs U/S, the Security General 
Directorate of the Interior Ministry, and the Maritime U/S, 
on expanding the Container Security Initiative (CSI) to the 
Turkish port of Izmir.  During separate meetings, Turkish 
officials, including Acting Customs U/S Riza Tuna Turagay and 
MFA Deputy Director General for Aviation and Maritime Affairs 
Vakur Gozdenizler, reaffirmed Turkey's interest in joining 
CSI.  While Turkey is very interested in CSI, there are 
several issues including equipment shortfalls and a legal 
review by the GOT, which need to be resolved. 
 
7)    November 29-December 4- Interpol/ Department of Energy 
Radiological Threat Reduction Initiative Training (CRITr) 
team visited Turkey to oversee training and the transfer of 
equipment to the Turkish National Police. 
 
¶B.    Training Conducted During Reporting Period: 
 
1)    Nov 29- Dec 4- 30 Members of the Turkish National 
Police were trained to detect and mitigate radiological 
security threats and how to remain competent in the use of 
basic radiological sensing devices.  An additional 30 
National Police members will be trained during the week of 
Dec 6-10, by qualified Turkish instructors. 
 
¶C.    Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: 
 
1)    Although not part of the EXBS program, EXBS advisor 
facilitated the donation of nearly $40,000 of basic radiation 
protection equipment to the Turkish National Police.  This 
equipment was provided through the joint INTERPOL/DOE 
Radiological Threat Reduction Initiative Program. 
 
¶D.    Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.    Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security 
 
1)    The United States received the formal Turkish reply to 
the U.S. comments on the NP Agreement. These latest comment 
were forwarded to Washington for comment and approval. 
 
¶3.    Future Activities 
 
¶A.    Dec 23- Jan 3- EXBS Advisor will be on in-country 
leave. 
 
¶B.    Jan 10- 14, 2005 (tent)- DOC team scheduled to visit 
Ankara to introduce the Product Identification Tool to 
members of the Turkish government.  This tool can improve the 
resources available to Turkish Customs official at the border 
processing locations. 
 
¶C.    Feb 21-25, 2005 (tent)- DOE SLD Team to conduct follow 
on visit to Ankara to coordinate required implementation 
agreements, finalize list of priority of border locations for 
installation of equipment and to begin planning for site 
surveys.  This visit is dependent on the status of NP 
Cooperation Agreement. 
 
¶E.    Mar 21-24 2005 - EXBS Advisor to conduct program 
consultations in Washington DC. 
 
¶4.    Red Flag Issues 
 
¶A.    Finally approval of the U.S. Turkey NP Cooperation 
Agreement is needed in order for the EXBS program to begin to 
have an impact in Turkey.  Without this agreement, which has 
been in negotiations for over two years, training and 
equipment cannot begin in Turkey.  Post awaits Washington's 
reply to the Turkish comments and is prepared to expedite 
presentation to GOT in hopes of a quick approval. 
 
¶5.    Contact Information for EXBS Advisor Kevin Lyon, phone 
(90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, email 
LyonK@state.gov. 
 
EDELMAN