04ANKARA6072
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS: MFA REPORTS ONGOING EFFORTS
Tue Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 ANKARA 006072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS: MFA REPORTS ONGOING EFFORTS 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: In response to G/TIP inquires about anti-TIP 
public information campaigns, post provides the following 
October 2004 TIP Country Report produced by the Turkish 
MFA's National Task Force on Human Trafficking.   The Report 
will be published on-line at the MFA website at 
http://www.mfa.gov.tr/grupa/ac/acb/Traffickin ginHumanBeings. 
htm: 
 
¶2. (U) BEGIN TEXT: 
 
   Updated Country Report of Turkey on Trafficking in Human 
   Beings 
 
   Introduction 
 
   During past decades, organized criminal groups have 
   increasingly taken advantage of globalization and 
   technological developments and expanded their activities 
   worldwide by employing sophisticated strategies. 
   Accordingly, organized crime, including human smuggling 
   and trafficking in human beings, have become more 
   transnational and complex in nature. Therefore, 
   combating these activities requires comprehensive 
   strategies dealing with all aspects of prevention, 
   prosecution and protection, as well as firm and 
   effective international co-operation and co-ordination. 
 
   Organized crime activities are interrelated. Criminal 
   networks behind human smuggling and trafficking in human 
   beings are at the same time involved in one or more 
   other forms of organized crime such as drug trafficking, 
   document fraud and money laundering. Also, once they 
   establish their network and connections, they easily 
   shift the focus of their business from one form of crime 
   activity to the other depending on their calculation of 
   risk and profit at a given time. In this respect, it is 
   currently recognized that trafficking in human beings is 
   rivaling drug trafficking and arms smuggling in higher 
   profitability for lower risk. There are also evidences 
   demonstrating the fact that some terrorist organizations 
   resort to organized crime activities as a source of 
   finance.  This state of affairs calls for an overall 
   fight against all forms of organized crime activities 
   and terrorism, not prioritizing one over the other in 
   international co-operation and co-ordination efforts. 
 
   On the other hand, a multi-disciplinary approach is 
   required particularly in the combat against trafficking 
   in human beings and human smuggling, including 
   appropriate social and economic measures which will 
   address their root causes such as poverty, economic 
   disparities and unemployment in the countries of origin 
   and the demand for sexual exploitation and for 
   inexpensive, socially unprotected and often illegal 
   labour in the countries of destination. In achieving 
   this, political will and collective efforts by origin, 
   transit and destination countries are crucial. 
 
   A distinction should however be made between human 
   smuggling and trafficking in human beings due to their 
   own specifics. This report deals only with trafficking 
   in human beings. 
 
   The Situation in Turkey 
 
   Turkey, at the crossroads of Asia, Middle East and 
   Europe, bordering eight countries and lapped by 5,000 
   miles of coastline, has seriously been confronted with 
   various forms of transnational organized crime, which 
   pose a threat to its social order and human and 
   democratic values. 
 
   In recent years Turkey has become a destination country 
   for nationals of transitional democracies, who are in 
   search of better living conditions and job opportunities 
   abroad in the face of conflicts or economic and social 
   hardships prevailing in their own countries. 
 
   Countries surrounding Turkey from the North to the 
   Northeast are generally accepted as countries of origin. 
   Nationals of these countries may enter Turkey by a visa 
   obtained at border gates and may stay in Turkey for up 
   to one month. Their purpose is twofold. Mostly, they 
   travel to Turkey for "suitcase trading", the volume of 
   which has reached considerable amounts during past 
   years. Secondly, they come to Turkey in search of job 
   opportunities, which were available for them only in 
   illegal labour markets until recently. 
 
   While their presence in Turkey is generally voluntary, 
   their illegal work and resident status, nevertheless, 
   make them vulnerable to exploitation. Some of them 
   obtain legal residency through arranged marriages. Some 
   others end up in small workshops, in tourism and 
   entertainment sector or in private households, working 
   illegally without any job security, insurance or 
   administrative and judicial safeguards. According to 
   statistics, majority of male workers are employed in the 
   construction sector and females in domestic services. 
 
   International obligations 
 
   In addition to many longstanding international 
   instruments dealing with "white slave trade" and 
   "trafficking in women and children", Turkey is a party 
   to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  According 
   to Articles 34 and 35 of the Convention, States Parties 
   undertake to protect the child from all forms of sexual 
   exploitation and sexual abuse and to take all 
   appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral 
   measures to prevent inducement or coercion of a child to 
   engage in any unlawful sexual activity, the exploitative 
   use of children in prostitution or other unlawful sexual 
   practices, the exploitative use of children in 
   pornographic performances and materials and the 
   abduction of, sale of or traffic in children for any 
   purpose or in any form. 
 
   On 9 May 2002, the Turkish Grand National Assembly also 
   adopted the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
   Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child 
   prostitution and child pornography. 
 
   In Palermo, on 13 December 2000, Turkey was among the 
   initial signatories of the UN Convention against 
   Transnational Organized Crime and of its two additional 
   Protocols including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress 
   and Punish Trafficking, especially women and children. 
   Turkey ratified both the Convention and its additional 
   Protocols on 18 March 2003. 
 
   By adopting these international instruments Turkey 
   clearly indicated her political will to combat against 
   trafficking in human beings in co-operation with the 
   world community and commits herself to translate the 
   provisions included therein into its own legislation. 
 
   Legal framework 
 
   While voluntary individual prostitution is legal in 
   Turkey, incitement to prostitution and trafficking in 
   human beings are described as crimes and are punishable 
   under the Penal Code and the Law on Combating Benefit- 
   Oriented Criminal Organizations. Additionally, certain 
   provisions of the Passport Law and the Law on the 
   Prevention of Money Laundering contain provisions that 
   apply to trafficking cases. Administrative decrees and 
   regulations build on the legal basis with a focus on 
   implementation. 
 
   Article 201 of the Penal Code, as amended in August 
   2002, includes the definition of trafficking in human 
   beings and prescribes heavy penalties for traffickers, 
   including 5 to 10 years of heavy imprisonment. The 
   amended article (Article 201/b) reads as follows: 
 
   "Article 201/b - Those who provide, kidnap, take or 
   transfer from one place to another and house individuals 
   with the intention of making them work or serve by 
   force, subject them to slavery or similar treatment, 
   threaten, pressure, use force or coercion to persuade 
   them to give up their bodily organs, use undue 
   influence, secure their consent by deception or by 
   exploiting the desperation of such individuals shall be 
   sentenced to five to ten years of heavy imprisonment and 
   a heavy fine of not less than one billion Turkish Liras. 
 
   If the actions that constitute a crime are attempted 
   with the intentions described in the first paragraph, 
   the victim is assumed not to have given his/her consent. 
 
   If children below the age of eighteen are procured, 
   kidnapped, taken or transferred from one place to 
   another or housed with the intentions specified in 
   paragraph one, even when no intermediary actions 
   relating to the crime are committed, the penalties 
   foreseen in paragraph one shall still be applied to the 
   perpetrator. 
 
   If the crimes listed in the paragraphs above are 
   committed as an organization, the penalties foreseen for 
   the perpetrators shall be doubled." 
   The Law on Combating Benefit-Oriented Criminal 
   Organizations, on the other hand, criminalizes 
   establishing, promoting, leading or participating in 
   benefit-oriented criminal organizations with a view to 
   carrying out organized crime activities, which could 
   include, inter alias, trafficking in human beings. In 
   order to combat criminal organizations, the law empowers 
   the investigative authorities with special procedural 
   techniques such as tapping or intercepting 
   telecommunications, clandestine surveillance, reviewing 
   records and data, and employing secret agents. However, 
   to safeguard respect for human rights, judicial decree 
   is sought before implementing such measures. Protective 
   measures are available for witnesses. In trans-boundary 
   and organized cases of trafficking in human beings, like 
   in any other organized crime activities, perpetrators 
   are tried before the State Security Courts, whereas 
   individual cases of incitement to prostitution fall 
   under the jurisprudence of the courts of justice. 
 
   According to Article 8 of the Passport Law, foreigners 
   who are engaged in prostitution, or earn their living by 
   inciting women into prostitution, and those involved in 
   trafficking in women are denied entry to Turkey. 
 
   The Turkish Parliament approved the Amendment to Article 
   5 of the Citizenship Law on 4 June 2003. With this 
   amendment, a probation period of 3 years is required for 
   acquiring Turkish citizenship through marriage. 
   Accordingly, those who have a job incompatible with the 
   marriage and do not share the same house with his/her 
   spouse will not be able to acquire Turkish citizenship. 
 
   The Law on Residence and Travel of Foreigners in Turkey, 
   on the other hand, allows entry of the child under 18 to 
   Turkey only when accompanied by or with the permission 
   of their parents or legal guardian. 
 
   Legislative review 
 
   In September 2003, a new Law on Working Permits for 
   Foreigners entered into force. The law increases legal 
   employment opportunities for foreigners in Turkey, by 
   permitting their work under limited, unlimited or 
   independent work permits. Employment in domestic 
   services is also made possible. The Ministry of Labour 
   and Social Security is authorized to issue all forms of 
   work permits for foreigners to ensure better management 
   and control over the process. The law aims at providing 
   legal protection for foreigners against exploitation in 
   labour markets and extending legal and administrative 
   safeguards to private services. 
 
   National coordination and international cooperation 
 
   In Turkey, Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible 
   for national coordination of issues related to 
   trafficking in human beings. The Ministry chairs the 
   National Task Force on Combating Trafficking in Human 
   Beings, which is composed of experts from concerned 
   ministries and NGOs such as the Human Rights Presidency 
   of the Prime Minister's Office, the Foundation for the 
   Development of Human Resources (IKGV), the Ministry of 
   Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry 
   of Justice, the Ministry of Labour and Social Security 
   and the Directorate General of the Status and Problems 
   of Woman. 
 
   The National Task Force was convened for the first time 
   in October 2002 and had five more meetings, last being 
   on 18 February 2004. The National Action Plan, prepared 
   by the Task Force is already under implementation. The 
   next meeting of the National Task Force will be held on 
   November 2004. 
 
   The Directorate General of the Status and Problems of 
   Woman, on the other hand, provides co-operation and co- 
   ordination with the non-governmental organizations.  In 
   accordance with the National Action Plan, the non- 
   governmental organizations active in the field of 
   protection of foreign victims of human trafficking, are 
   encouraged and supported with the best means possible. 
 
   Turkey supports all international efforts aimed at 
   combating trafficking in human beings and actively 
   participates in activities of the OSCE, the Council of 
   Europe, NATO and the Stability Pact Task Force on 
   Trafficking in Human Beings. IOM, ICMPD, SECI and 
   EUROPOL are other main co-operation partners of Turkey 
   in this area. Furthermore, Turkey is about to complete 
   the legal procedure to acquire membership in 
   International Organization for Migration (IOM), which 
   will enable further cooperation. 
 
   In this framework, Turkey participated to the seminar 
   organized by the European Council in co-operation with 
   the "Gender Development Association", a Georgian NGO, on 
   6-7 November 2002 in Tbilisi on fight against 
   trafficking in South Caucusus. Ukraine, Georgia, 
   Armenia, Azerbaijan, Italy and IOM Georgia also attended 
   the seminar. 
 
   Turkey also participated in the regional Validation 
   Seminar that has been organized on 15-16 November 2002 
   in Bucharest regarding the project on publication of the 
   Regional Anti-Trafficking Law Enforcement Manual. 
 
   Turkish judges have participated to the programme for 
   the "Development of an Anti-Trafficking Module for 
   Judges and Prosecutors" organized by the Stability Pact 
   and the ICMPD on 10-13 April 2003 in Sofia and the 
   follow-up seminar of the same programme on 17-19 
   November 2003 in Sofia. 
 
   Turkish experts also participated in the Experts Group 
   meeting organized on 16 May 2003 by the European Union 
   in Brussels. 
 
   Turkish experts are participating to the ongoing 
   meetings of the ad-hoc committee (CAHTEH), which is 
   entrusted to prepare a Convention Against Trafficking in 
   Human Beings. 
 
   Further co-operation possibilities are being considered 
   particularly with the IOM on a project basis in areas of 
   awareness raising, national referral mechanisms, victim 
   protection, and voluntary return and reintegration 
   assistance. As a result of these consultations, assisted 
   voluntary returns of 41 victims of trafficking in human 
   beings have been successfully conducted in cooperation 
   with IOM and IKGV as of January 2004. 
 
   In this framework, Turkey is not only participating but 
   also co-funding the project on "Establishment of the 
   Network of and Joint Training for Operational Law 
   Enforcement Officers, NGOs and International 
   Organizations in Fighting Human Trafficking" which is 
   implemented by IOM, in cooperation with the European 
   Commission (EC), European Parliament (EP), selected EU 
   Member States, as well as the Candidate Countries and 
   Third Countries bordering the enlarged European Union 
   under the European Commission Directorate General 
   Justice and Home Affairs' AGIS Programme 2003. 
 
   Designated focal point for general international 
   contacts in counter-trafficking efforts is the Director 
   General of Consular Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign 
   Affairs. The Ministry of Interior, on the other hand, 
   has appointed national contact points to cooperate with 
   the Stability Pact Task Force in areas of awareness 
   raising, exchange of expert information, law enforcement 
   and victim protection. Contact point from the Ministry 
   of Justice has assumed co-ordination on legal reform. 
 
   Turkey has proposed bilateral co-operation and a draft 
   protocol on cooperation in combating trafficking in 
   human beings to the main countries of origin, whose 
   nationals target Turkey in search of better standards of 
   living and some of them become vulnerable to 
   exploitation. So far, the positive responses of Belarus, 
   Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Georgia have been received. In 
   this respect, on 28 July 2004, Turkish and Belarus 
   Interior Ministers signed a Memorandum of Understanding 
   to enhance cooperation and show their determination in 
   combating trafficking in human beings. In source 
   countries, Turkish missions have expanded their 
   activities in order to cooperate within the framework of 
   the said protocols. 
 
   A Twinning Project on "Strengthening Institutions in the 
   Fight against Trafficking in Human Beings" has been 
   developed under the European Union 2003 Pre-accession 
   Financial Assistance Programme. The overall objective of 
   the project is to meet the minimum standards for the 
   elimination of trafficking in human beings and 
   strengthen the institutions dealing with trafficking. 
   The planned duration of the project is 18 months. The 
   proposal of the Federal Republic of Germany has been 
   accepted, within this proposal the short-term expertise 
   of the Austrian team will also be provided. 
 
   On the other hand, visa application measures are set in 
   order to prevent fake certificates of good services 
   issued by some companies in the countries of origin to 
   be used in the entertainment sector, such as in casinos 
   or hotels. In this respect, a questionnaire is prepared 
   to obtain detailed information on the identity of visa 
   applicants. Visa applicants are requested to fill in and 
   sign in this questionnaire. The aim of the questionnaire 
   is to determine whether or not the certificates of good 
   services are authentic. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
   of the States concerned has to certify the authenticity 
   of these documents before Turkish authorities accept the 
   said documents. 
 
 
   Current activities and needs for improvement 
 
   - Prosecution of Traffickers 
 
   In Turkey prostitution is legal and is considered as a 
   personal matter of the individual. It is, however, 
   prohibited for foreigners. 
 
   Although incitement to prostitution and trafficking in 
   human beings are crimes that require heavy penalties 
   under Turkish Penal Code, since the victims tend to hide 
   or deny their cases due to traditional and ethical 
   reasons or security concerns, identification and/or 
   prosecution of those responsible for these crimes is 
   difficult. Without victim's assistance and testimony, 
   legal action against criminals becomes impossible. 
 
   In the meantime, police has initiated action against 40 
   enterprises in the entertainment sector upon suspected 
   human trafficking activities. Investigations are 
   underway. 
 
   -Victim Protection 
 
   As a major step, the Ministry of Interior signed a 
   protocol on 4 September 2003 with the Foundation for the 
   Development of Human Resources (IKGV), a well- 
   established non-governmental organization that actively 
   involves in projects aimed at improving social and 
   health conditions and assists to victims of trafficking 
   in human beings. The protocol includes provisions on the 
   establishment of shelters and a center to provide 
   victims with psychological and medical counseling, the 
   establishment of a regional network involving NGOs also 
   from the countries of origin and on awareness raising 
   activities. According to the protocol, the security 
   units will inform the IKGV when they identify a victim 
   of trafficking. Representatives of the IKGV will 
   communicate with the victim and provide the victim with 
   medical and legal assistance. The Gendarmerie has 
   recently signed another protocol with the IKGV on June 
   2004, to this end. 
 
   The Turkish Government, with its limited resources, 
   provides, if necessary, accommodation and emergency 
   services including psychiatric services, out of national 
   budget and funds. The Ministry of Health has made the 
   necessary arrangements in order to provide medical 
   treatment free of charge to victims of trafficking in 
   human beings. A decree to this effect has become 
   effective on 2 January 2004. 
 
   The Ministry of Interior is developing an improved 
   screening method in order to identify victims of 
   trafficking and to address their specific needs. A 
   questionnaire with the cooperation of the MFA and the 
   IKGV has been prepared to this effect. At the National 
   Task Force meeting members were asked to elaborate 
   additional criteria to be included in the questionnaire. 
 
   Moreover, victims who would like to return to their 
   country are not subjected to pay a fine due to their 
   illegal overstay. 
 
   Women who are not identified as victims of trafficking 
   in human beings go through a process that includes a 
   thorough compulsory medical check at hospitals. Multiple 
   tests are conducted to confirm the diagnosis in cases of 
   infection. Tests are completed within one day. In 
   curable cases like syphilis, treatment is also 
   concluded. Final test results should be available before 
   repatriation. 
 
   The National Task Force is working on a special 
   arrangement to allow allocation of funds from the Social 
   Aid and Solidarity Fund of the Prime Ministry, which is 
   designed to provide aid to Turkish citizens in need of 
   help and, if necessary, to those who entered to Turkey. 
   When finalized, foundations established by the Fund in 
   931 towns will be able to assist victims of trafficking 
   under this arrangement. 
 
   To address the specific needs of the children, a new 
   Department for Children Affairs has been established 
   within the Ministry of Interior. Accordingly Children 
   Protection Units have been designated in 81 cities. 
 
   - Repatriation 
 
   Certain difficulties are experienced in the safe return 
   of victims to their countries of origin. It takes 
   between 10 days to 2 months to obtain necessary travel 
   documents. Difficulties are also encountered in covering 
   travel expenses due to lack of special funds. 
 
   The Ministry of Interior authorized governorates to 
   issue the victims of trafficking with a humanitarian 
   visa and temporary residence permit where necessary in 
   order to allow them to stay in Turkey for rehabilitation 
   and treatment. So far, 25 victims were issued with such 
   permits. 
 
   The Ministry of Interior has authorized governorates on 
   April 9, 2004, to extend the duration of temporary 
   residence permits up to 6 months for the victims of 
   trafficking. Residence permits may be extended further 
   if necessary. 
 
   - Researches and Statistics 
 
   A special questionnaire was prepared and sent over to 
   10.000 courts nationwide. Another questionnaire to 
   collect detailed data on sentenced criminals and on 
   trafficking victims has also been sent out. 
 
   According to Article 201/b (human trafficking) of the 
   TPC the final processed data regarding the cases that 
   were transferred to the criminal courts and concluded 
   within the first half of the year 2004, is as follows: 
   12 lawsuits were concluded. In two of these cases 7 
   accused persons were confined to imprisonment or fine. 
 
   Yalova Criminal Court issued verdict (according to 
   Article 201/b of the TPC) for five defendants on 
   February 11, 2004, four of whom have been confined to 
   imprisonment of 4 years and 2 months and a fine of 
   1.325.000.000. -TL. The accused persons are prohibited 
   from employment in public services for 3 years. 
 
   Fethiye Criminal Court issued verdict (according to 
   Article 201/b of the TPC) for three defendants on May 
   12, 2004. According to the verdict, all of the 
   defendants have been confined to imprisonment of  4 
   years, 10 months and 10 days and a fine of  972.221.000. 
   -TL. 
 
   - Awareness Raising/Media Coverage 
   Turkish media is sensitive to criminal and humanitarian 
   aspects of trafficking in human beings. Trafficking 
   cases and international developments are reported widely 
   in the media. 
 
   Awareness raising activities are focused on official 
   targets such as law enforcement authorities. In addition 
   to training programs, various events were organized to 
   raise awareness and interest on the issue. 
 
   In this respect, the Enlarged Council of the 
   International Women Lawyers Federation, which was held 
   in Turkey on 1 September 2001, had trafficking in human 
   beings as the special topic on its agenda. The President 
   of the Republic of Turkey, Mr. Ahmet Necdet Sezer and 
   the Minister of Justice opened the meeting. 150 women 
   lawyers attended the meeting and a final declaration was 
   adopted. 
 
   The Directorate General of the Status and Problems of 
   Woman organized two panels on 19 December 2002 and 18 
   December 2003. Chiefs of Security of several cities, 
   several NGOs and local press representatives 
   participated in the said panels. During the panels, a 
   consensus on establishing cooperation to combat human 
   trafficking between NGO's representatives and 
   Governorates has been reached. Similar panels are 
   planned to be organized in other provinces.  Moreover, a 
   meeting with the representatives of media has been 
   organized in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to inform 
   the public through the media on the fight against 
   trafficking in human beings. The statements made in the 
   panels were also published as a book in 2004. 
 
   The Human Rights Presidency of the Prime Minister's 
   Office organized ten seminars for representatives of the 
   media in May 2003. Seven other seminars for state 
   officials are planned within the framework of a project 
   financed by the Council of Europe. Awareness raising 
   programs are also planned for members of city and town 
   councils. 
 
   Within the framework of the World Tourism and Ethical 
   Act, the Ministry of Tourism in July 2002 has prepared a 
   guide for the use of all the actors of the tourism 
   sector. The Guide has been compiled by the members of 
   144 countries of the World Tourism Organization and has 
   been accepted by the General Assembly of the United 
   Nations during the 13th Meeting of the UN General 
   Assembly by the majority. It includes regulations to be 
   implemented by all the parties concerned in the tourism 
   sector. 
 
   According to the paragraph 3 of the Article 2 of the 
   said guide, countries shall in cooperation with other 
   countries, take the necessary measures in order to 
   prevent all kind of exploitation and especially the 
   exploitation of children. These measures shall not be 
   taken only by the country which is receiving tourists, 
   but also by the country of origin of the person who 
   committed the said offense during his visit." 
 
   - Training 
 
   Anti-trafficking training is an integral part of the 
   general professional training in the Turkish 
   International Academy against Drugs and Organized 
   Crimes. During the 4-week basic training program a full 
   day is allocated to special training on trafficking 
   issues. Participants include police officers as well as 
   other national and regional law enforcement officials. 
 
   Trafficking in human beings has also been included in 
   the curricula of the Police Academy for final year 
   students starting from this academic year. Around one 
   thousand students will benefit from this lesson. 
   Additionally, the Turkish Gendarmerie has included as 
   from October 2003 the subject of trafficking in human 
   beings in its education curriculum. 
 
   The Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of Justice are 
   organizing special seminars/training programs to address 
   different aspects of trafficking. Turkish experts take 
   part also in comprehensive training programs organized 
   by the Stability Pact Task Force, ICMPD and IOM. 
   In this framework, in 2004, 332 law enforcement officers 
   took in-service training courses on professional 
   approach to the trafficked persons and combating human 
   trafficking. 
 
 
   Recent Developments 
 
   As a result of the consultations between Istanbul 
   Metropolitan Municipality and Human Resources 
   Development Foundation (IKGV) under the guidance of 
   Ministry of Foreign Affairs, a shelter in Istanbul was 
   provided for the victims of trafficking. A protocol on 
   the establishment of the shelter was signed between 
   Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality and IKGV during the 
   NATO Summit with the participation of Deputy Prime 
   Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Abdullah Gl 
   and United States Secretary of State Colin Powell. 
   In accordance with the National Action Plan, competent 
   authorities were also notified for the establishment of 
   a hotline. 
 
   The new Penal Code which was adopted by the Turkish 
   Grand National Assembly on 26 September 2004 placed a 
   special emphasis for human trafficking and migrant 
   smuggling. In this respect, it introduces an important 
   provision (Article 80) bringing penalties 8 to 12 years 
   imprisonment and a fine corresponding to a maximum 
   period of ten thousand days' imprisonment to human 
   traffickers. Article 80 which will become effective on 1 
   April 2005, also introduces safety measures for legal 
   entities involved in human trafficking. 
 
   As a result of the operation organized by the 
   Directorate of Security of Erzurum, 11 persons have been 
   arrested and 9 of them have been sent to Court. 3 of 
   them were police officers. An investigation has been 
   launched about those 3 police officers. After their 
   trial, 2 police officers are sentenced to 6 months of 
   imprisonment and to heavy fine. They are also expelled 
   from their profession. One police officer has acquitted. 
   This event shows once again the importance that Turkey 
   attaches to combating trafficking in human  beings. 
 
   On January 2004, with the cooperation of the Ministry of 
   Justice, the IKGV and the British Council, a seminar for 
   judges on trafficking in human beings was organized in 
   Istanbul. The particularity of the seminar was that 40 
   attorney generals have attended this training. 
 
   The Ministry of Interior, ensuring better dialog and co- 
   ordination between the police and the other relevant 
   authorities dealing with human trafficking, has 
   established a specialized unit dealing with trafficking 
   cases on January 2004. 
 
   Following the new Road Transportation Law which entered 
   into force on 19 July 2003, a Road Transportation 
   Regulation became effective on 25 February 2004. The 
   Regulation states that the transportation permit will be 
   cancelled for 3 years if the person is sentenced 
   according to certain crimes including human trafficking 
   and migrant smuggling. According to the regulation, the 
   sentenced persons are also prohibited to work at 
   transportation cooperatives as members of executive 
   boards or as representatives with authorization to sign. 
 
   The Ministry of Labor and Social Security prepared a 
   sample contract in Turkish and in the language of the 
   applicant for working permit. The sample contract 
   includes clauses on the working conditions, such as the 
   minimum wage. Furthermore, the emergency number of the 
   police is mentioned in the sample contract. The 
   coordinates of the IKGV were also included. 
 
EDELMAN