04ANKARA2007
MFA MAKES CASE FOR ANTI-TIP EFFORTS
Tue Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: MFA MAKES CASE FOR ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) In separate April 5 discussions with Turkish MP 
Egemen Bagis and MFA Director General of Consular Affairs 
Murat Ersavci, the Ambassador raised concerns about the 
GOT's silence on specific anti-trafficking efforts.  The 
Ambassador engaged Bagis and Ersavci on repeated requests 
for information on 1) efforts to establish a shelter for 
victims of trafficking; 2) efforts to coordinate law 
enforcement and prevention measures with TIP source 
countries; 3) adoption of standards for humane, thorough 
screening of victims; and 4) a comprehensive, anti- 
trafficking public relations campaign.  Both Bagis and 
Ersavci asserted the GOT was "galvanized" against TIP, and 
would work to provide Post with details of the GOT's anti- 
TIP efforts. 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador Murat Ersavci, Turkish MFA Director 
General of Consular Affairs responded with the following 
Aide-Memoire.  Begin text: 
 
 
     The Government of Turkey attaches great importance to 
     the fight against trafficking in human beings. 
 
 
     The statement made by Mr. John Miller, Senior advisor 
     to Secretary of State Colin Powell on human trafficking 
     and Director of the Office to Monitor and Combat 
     Trafficking in Persons at the US Department of State, 
     that "Turkey is one of the countries which really 
     stepped up in the fight against trafficking in human 
     beings", at the online active forum of the White House 
     on March 22, 2004, was appreciated. 
 
 
     Turkey has accomplished concrete progress in combating 
     trafficking in human beings since it was moved from 
     Tier 3 to Tier 2, on September 2003. By adopting and 
     implementing international instruments, Turkey clearly 
     indicated her political will and determination to 
     combat against trafficking in human beings in co- 
     operation with the world community and translated the 
     provisions included therein into its own legislation. 
 
 
     Ministry of Foreign Affairs chairs the National TIP 
     Task Force, which is composed of experts from relevant 
     ministries and non-governmental organizations.  The 
     main strategy and policy on the fight against human 
     trafficking has been formed within this Task force. 
 
 
     Further co-operation possibilities are considered 
     particularly with the International Organization of 
     Migration (10M) on a project basis in areas of 
     awareness raising, training of law-enforcement bodies, 
     national referral mechanisms, victim protection, 
     vo1untary return and reintegration assistance. 
     Moreover, Ministry of Interior signed a protocol on 4 
     September 2003 with the Foundation for the Development 
     of Human Resources (IKGV), a well-established NGO that 
     actively involves in projects aimed at improving social 
     and health conditions and assists to victims of 
     trafficking in human beings. 
 
 
     The Turkish Government, despite its limited resources, 
     provides, if necessary, accommodation and emergency 
     services including psychiatric services, out of 
     national budget and funds. To this end, the Ministry of 
     Health made the necessary arrangements in order to 
     provide medical treatment free of charge to victims of 
     trafficking in human beings. A decree to this effect 
     became effective in January 2004. 
 
 
     Victims of trafficking are provided with safe, secure 
     and free accommodation in various facilities, including 
     shelters for battered women, student dormitories, 
     hotels and government guesthouses. However, it is 
     estimated that as a result of the consultations between 
     Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality and IKGV under the 
     guidance of MFA it would be possible to provide a 
     shelter for the victims of trafficking within the 
     following months. 
 
 
     On January 2, 3004, the Ministry of Interior 
     established a specialized unit dealing with trafficking 
     cases, ensuring better dialog and co-ordination between 
     the police and other relevant authorities dealing with 
     human trafficking. Moreover, a Twinning Project on 
     "Strengthening Institutions in the Fight against 
     Trafficking in Human Beings" has been developed under 
     the European Union 2003 Pre-accession Financial 
     Assistance Programme. 
 
 
     The Ministry of Labor and Social Security prepared a 
     sample contract in Turkish and in the language of the 
     applicant for working permit.  The sample contract 
     includes clauses on the working conditions, such as the 
     minimum wage. The emergency number: of the police and 
     the IKGV are also included in the contract. 
 
 
     Turkey is already cooperating with other countries 
     against the inhuman and criminal practice of 
     trafficking, as well as with the US Government. Turkey 
     has proposed bilateral co-operation and a draft 
     protocol on cooperation in combating trafficking in 
     human beings to the main countries of origin, whose 
     nationals target Turkey in search of better standards 
     of living and some of them become vulnerable to 
     exploitation. So far, positive responses from Belarus 
     and Ukraine have been received. In source countries, 
     Turkish missions have expanded their activities in 
     order to cooperate within the framework of the said 
     protocols. 
 
 
     As a result of an operation organized by the 
     Directorate of Security of Erzurum, 11 persons have 
     been arrested and 9 of them have been sent to Court, 3 
     of whom were police officers. An investigation was 
     launched about those 3 police officers. After their 
     trial, 2 police officers were sentenced to 6 months of 
     imprisonment and heavy fines. They are also expelled 
     from the force. One police officer has been acquitted. 
     Moreover, Yalova Criminal Court issued a verdict 
     (according to Article 201/b of the TPC) for five 
     defendants on February 11, 2004, four of whom have been 
     confined to imprisonment of 4 years and 2 months and a 
     fine of 1.325.000.000. - TL. The accused persons are 
     prohibited from employment in public services for 3 
     years. 
 
 
     It is a fact that since the last evaluation there has 
     been considerable progress. Turkey will continue to 
     fight against this scourge. Therefore, the Government 
     of Turkey would be most appreciative of the valuable 
     support and firm standing of US Government is provided 
     against any pressure groups, which would like to see 
     Turkey placed in Tier 3, thereby defining the 
     Government of Turkey once again as "not in full 
     compliance with minimum standards for the elimination 
     of trafficking and not making significant efforts". 
     End Text. 
 
 
EDELMAN