04ANKARA4233
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Thu Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
THURSDAY, JULY 29, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Tehran assures Turkey on PKK - Milliyet 
Iran gives full support against PKK - Vatan 
No freedom for women in Iran - Sabah 
Blood bath in Iraq: 114 killed - Sabah 
Democrats did not let Bush opponent Moore speak - Hurriyet 
Saddam, paralyzed, may die before appearing at court - 
Hurriyet 
Bernard Lewis: Europe will fall under Islam's influence - 
Milliyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara-Tehran alliance against PKK/Kongra Gel - Yeni Safak 
All is fine with Iran - Radikal 
Tehran Times: Zionists wanted to prevent Erdogan's visit - 
Yeni Safak 
Iranian natural gas to West via Turkey - Yeni Safak 
Bakuba turns into hell: 68 dead - Cumhuriyet 
Iraqi captive: Gen. Karpinski witnessed torture at Abu 
Ghraib - Cumhuriyet 
Doctors Without Borders flee Afghanistan - Cumhuriyet 
Sharon calls, 200 French Jews migrate to Israel - Zaman 
French Jews follow Sharon's call, leave for Israel - Radikal 
If elected, Kerry will continue Bush's `GME' project - Zaman 
Kerry, too, says `GME' - Birgun 
Holbrooke Democrats' candidate for State Secretary - Zaman 
Kerry a `warrior,' according to wife - Radikal 
Michael Moore to Democrats: Don't go right - Radikal 
 
BRIEFING 
 
PM Erdogan in Iran:  Visiting Turkish PM Erdogan held 
Wednesday a press conference at Turkey's Embassy in Tehran, 
saying both Iran and Turkey had paid heavy costs because of 
terror.  The two sides have discussed Afghanistan, Iraq, 
Israel-Palestine, and Cyprus, and agreed to sign a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) on terrorism on Thursday, 
Erdogan said.  Responding to a question on the US Greater 
Middle East (GME) project, Erdogan said that Turkey, a co- 
chairman of the GME, would monitor progress with regard to 
democracy, freedom, and economy in the Middle Eastern and 
north African countries.  Iranians told him they would use 
nuclear energy for civilian purposes, Erdogan noted, and 
added: "Tehran has signed an agreement with the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), but the Iranian 
parliament did not endorse it.  I welcome Tehran's decision 
to sign the additional protocol to the nuclear non- 
proliferation treaty that would give UN increased authority 
for inspection."  Erdogan warned Tehran to be `more careful' 
in relations with the IAEA.  We will be improving relations 
not only with Iran, but all neighboring countries as part of 
Turkey's efforts towards regional peace, Erdogan stressed. 
Erdogan also urged Tehran to support Turkey's candidacy for 
a non-permanent member seat at the UNSC.  Turkish PM 
welcomed a recent opening of Turkish Language and Literature 
Department at an Iranian university.  Erdogan also 
reiterated Turkey's position against the disintegration of 
Iraq. On Cyprus, Erdogan recalled US efforts to end the 
international isolation of `TRNC,' and asked Tehran to 
imporve relations with northern Cyprus.  Turkey would take 
over the ISAF command from February-August 2005 in 
Afghanistan, Erdogan said and underlined Turkish efforts to 
improve the infrastructure of the war-torn country.  Turkey 
will also continue to contribute to peace efforts in 
Palestine, he added.  Iran's First Vice President Mohamed 
Reza Aref said that Iran was not developing nuclear weapons. 
Tehran shares Ankara's views on terror, Aref said and 
pledged to do their best regarding PKK activities in the 
region.  Aref suggested the establishment of a free trade 
zone between Iran, Turkey and Pakistan, to which Syria and 
Lebanon would also join.  PM Erdogan will be received by 
President Khatami today. 
 
Turkish Cypriots to hold early polls:  `TRNC' council of 
ministers has decided to hold early elections on November 6, 
papers report.  Meanwhile, FM Gul said international 
sanctions on the `TRNC' would eventually end, and that 
international flights to northern Cyprus would soon begin. 
We soon expect a rise in international investments in the 
`TRNC,' Gul stressed. 
 
Turkey to produce tanks for military:  Turkish Defense 
Ministry will sign Thursday an agreement with BMC, Otokar 
and FNSS for the production of 250 tanks for the Turkish 
military, "Milliyet" reports.  In May, the Defense Industry 
Undersecretariat cancelled an international bid invited by 
the Turkish government for purchase of tanks in 1996.  The 
locally produced tanks will cost below $10 million each, and 
will be handed over to Turkish military in 2010.  The tanks 
will be deployed in Thrace in the face of the threat posed 
by Greece, "Milliyet" speculates. 
 
Ankara prefers OIC, not EU on Sudan:  The ruling AK Party 
government does not agree with the EU's calling for 
sanctions on Khartoum for not disarming the Janjaweed 
militia, which killed black Africans in Darfur.  Instead it 
supports the Organization of Islamic Conference's (OIC) 
calling for more time for the Sudanese government, writes 
"Cumhuriyet."  MFA Spokesman Namik Tan said the OIC troika 
of Turkey, Iran and Yemen asked the UN on July 15 to give a 
chance to the African League's efforts towards a solution. 
"Cumhuriyet"s headline says that the AK Party government 
asked the UN for time for `the extension' of violence in 
Darfur. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
"US' Stance and Turkey's Calculations Over the Iranian Gas" 
Mustafa Karaalioglu wrote in the Islamist-opinion maker Yeni 
Safak (7/29):  "After the intense series of meetings in 
Iran, I asked PM Erdogan if the meetings were up to his 
expectations.  He responded that the meetings were good but 
nothing was as easy as it seemed.  On the commercial side of 
the relations Turkey has two requests from Iran. The first 
one is reducing of the prices of natural gas, and the second 
is changing the `take it or pay for it' principal. Turkey 
wants to stop paying for gas which exceeds its needs.  The 
natural gas purchase from Iran already exceeds the needs. 
The most important issue to be resolved is Iran's request to 
sell gas to Europe through Turkey.  Iran tied this offer, 
which causes political worries for Turkey, with Turkey's 
requests.  That is what PM Erdogan meant with `nothing is 
easy as it seems'.  This is an area of real tough 
bargaining.  Energy Minister Guler also stated that nothing 
has been finalized yet and the discussions continue.  Of 
course, we have to remember that the meeting of the two 
ministers started  in the shadow of  US' warnings to Turkey 
regarding transferring Iranian gas to Europe.   Turkey's 
approach to all these warnings is that Europe, which wants 
to reduce its reliance on Russian gas, wants to have more 
options.  European countries will get the Iranian gas 
somehow.  "But, if you (the US) are against this project, 
let us implement the Sahdeniz Project together and sell 
Turkoman natural gas to Europe''.If the US cannot bring a 
rational suggestion to this issue, as a Turkish official in 
the delegation says, `this will be no more than a 
provocative initiative for the US, trying to direct the 
media and the public." 
"Friendly Pictures From Tehran" 
Nuray Basaran commented in the mass appeal Aksam (7/29): 
"PM Erdogan is realizing one of the most important foreign 
trips of the year.  The rising tensions in the Middle East 
since the Iraq operation also highlight Iran's importance in 
the region for Turkey.  PM Erdogan's visit became 
politically very important, because it has coincided with a 
time of rising tensions between the US and Iran over Iran's 
nuclear program.  AKP government has regularly repeated its 
aim to improve relations with neighboring countries.  And 
this visit is the indication of this.  Prior to his visit, 
PM Erdogan reiterated Turkey's expectation from Iran on the 
PKK/KONGRA-GEL issue.  After his meetings, Erdogan implied 
that there were positive measures taken on the issue.  That 
shows, despite the US' warnings, that Turkey is determined 
to establish good relations with its neighboring countries. 
As PM says,  `maintaining good relations is a requirement to 
establish peace in the region'.   As indicated by the 
friendly images emanating from Tehran, we can say that this 
visit, which started under the shadow of  US warnings, will 
be useful to lower the tension in the region and allow 
Turkey and Iran to continue their relations in a secure and 
stable  atmosphere.  Of course, the time will tell.  PM 
Erdogan's aim is to return to Turkey today after signing 
many important agreements." 
 
DEUTSCH