04ANKARA7023
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171323Z Dec 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, DECEMBER 17, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
 
EU Gives Date to Turkey For Accession Talks - Sabah 
The Date is October 2005 - Hurriyet 
Turkey Must Recognize Cyprus to Start Talks - Hurriyet 
Kaddafi: "Turkey is Terrorists' Trojan Horse in Europe" - 
Hurriyet 
Conditional Date For Talks - Milliyet 
France/Austria Put Up Obstacles for Turkey - Milliyet 
Date: October 3, 2005; Condition: Recognition of Cyprus - 
Tercuman(DB) 
EU Says `Yes' to Turkey - Turkiye 
Bargaining in Brussels Focuses on Cyprus Issue - Turkiye 
Annan Steps In - Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
The Cyprus Knot - Yeni Safak 
Insurgents' Victory in Fallujah - Yeni Safak 
Cyprus Issue Deadlocks Talks - Zaman 
Cyprus Crisis With the EU - Radikal 
Diplomatic War in Brussels - Radikal 
EU Presents Turkey With Tough Conditions - Cumhuriyet 
Annan Plan Reemerges - Cumhuriyet 
 
BRIEFING 
 
EU Summit in Brussels:  All papers report on the conditional 
date given to Turkey for the beginning of accession talks 
with the European Union.  The summit draft statement 
provides a date of October 3, 2005 for the talks to begin, 
with a condition that Turkey recognize Greek Cyprus before 
that date.  While "Turkiye" reports the decision as a 
success, most other papers interpret it as a disappointment. 
"Radikal" says the summit been clouded by the demands about 
Cyprus.  "Hurriyet" says that with or without the condition, 
the outcome of the summit will change life in Turkey. 
Turkey and the EU reached consensus on all conditions except 
Cyprus issue, which deadlocked the talks.  "Milliyet" 
reports that PM Erdogan worked all night on the formula 
offered by the EU and presented his objections to the 
Netherlands as EU term president.  "Sabah" quotes European 
Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso as saying that 
`Tonight the EU has opened its door to Turkey.  I genuinely 
believe this is an offer that Turkey should be glad to 
accept.'  "Radikal" quotes Berlusconi as saying that `one 
cannot join a club without recognizing all of its members.' 
 
The Turkish Response:  "Cumhuriyet" reports that PM Erdogan 
sent a message to EU leaders saying that Turkey will never 
take a step forward on issues in a way that would harm the 
national interest.  "Aksam" draws attention to the differing 
comments about the recognition of Cyprus made by PM Erdogan 
and FM Gul.  Gul said that the direct or indirect 
recognition of  Greek Cyprus is `out of the question.' 
About an hour later, Erdogan said that Turkey would carry 
out the steps dictated by its national interests.  "Yeni 
Safak" drew attention to a message given by Erdogan prior to 
the summit saying that `Turkey can cut off talks with the EU 
if not satisfied with the terms of settlement offer.'  Most 
papers portray the EU as having acted in bad faith on the 
Cyprus issue, and most commentators write that the Prime 
Minister should not be blamed if he were to walk out of the 
talks. 
 
Libyan Leader Kaddafi Comments:  Speaking to an Italian 
radio station, Libyan Leader Muammar Kaddafi said that if 
Turkey enters the EU, it would become the `Trojan Horse for 
terrorists,' inculding Al-Qaeda leader Osama Bin Laden and 
other radical Islam groups. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  US-EU-Turkey 
 
"The Fallujah Dispute and Silent US Support for EU 
membership" 
Sedat Ergin observed in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (1/17): 
"Secretary Powell's call to Turkish Foreign Minister to 
check on developments in the EU process came at a time when 
Ankara is giving its full attention to the December 17 
summit.  This shows that Washington is also watching these 
developments very closely.  Similarly, US Ambassador Edelman 
asked Turkish PM Erdogan last week if `there is anything we 
can do prior to the December 17 decision.'  Turkey has no 
objection to US support on the EU, but this suggests that 
Ankara prefers that the US engage in quiet diplomacy.   This 
suggestion stemmed from past experience, which was rather 
bitter, when George Bush intervened in the process rather 
loudly during the Copenhagen summit in December 2002. 
Things are very different now.  Currently, Washington is 
using its utmost influence through quiet diplomacy and is 
working for a positive decision from the EU summit. 
Turkey's gratitude for the American contribution was 
expressed by Turkish PM Erdogan to Ambassador Edelman during 
a bilateral meeting on December 13.  Interestingly enough, 
Turkey was experiencing a serious crack in its relationship 
with the US due to the Fallujah issue just at the time when 
Turkey's relationship with Europe had taken center stage. 
Foreign Minister Gul earlier said that Turkey had devoted 
its full energy to the EU, and mentioned the possibility 
that Turkey may have `ignored' the US relationship.  Turkish- 
American ties have gone through a period of turbulence 
highlighted by PM Erdogan's delaying for 6 weeks in giving 
an appointment to the US Ambassador Edelman.  In last week's 
meeting, Erdogan managed to put the Turkish-American 
relationship back on track before leaving for Brussels. 
Ambassador Edelman handed the PM a file of information and 
photos in an effort to convince him of the reasons for the 
US operation in Fallujah.  Erdogan reiterated his concerns 
about civilian losses.  Neither side convinced the other. 
From the American point of view, however, at least the Prime 
Minister was shown `the other side of the coin.'  In sum, 
the two sides agreed that criticism needs to be expressed in 
a way befitting allies, and that these kinds of issues 
cannot be allowed to cloud the big picture in US-Turkish 
relations." 
 
EDELMAN