04ANKARA1287
MFA VIEWS VISIT OF GERMAN OPPOSITION LEADERS AS
Wed Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 001287 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU
SUBJECT: MFA VIEWS VISIT OF GERMAN OPPOSITION LEADERS AS 
POSITIVE 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 975 
 
 
¶1. (U) Kemalettin Eruygur, chief of the MFA Deputy 
Directorate General for Western Europe, told us March 1 that 
he believes the February 15-17 visit to Turkey of German 
opposition CDU-CSU opposition leaders Angela Merkel and 
Wolfgang Schauble was helpful for both sides, although 
neither side shifted from its position regarding Turkey's EU 
candidacy.  Merkel and Schauble had not visited Turkey 
before, and were clearly unfamiliar with the country, so the 
visit was an opportunity for them to learn about Turkey and 
meet some of the GOT leaders behind the EU-related 
legislative reforms.  This cable is a follow-up to reftel, in 
which we reported the German Embassy view of the visit. 
 
 
¶2. (U) In his meeting with Merkel and Schauble, PM Erdogan 
flatly rejected the idea of a "privileged partnership" 
between the EU and Turkey, advocated by the German opposition 
leaders as an alternative to full membership.  The PM argued 
that Turkey, as a member of the EU Customs Union, already 
enjoys a privileged partnership.  The GOT's reform efforts 
are aimed at nothing less than full membership.  At the same 
time, Eruygur said, Erdogan emphasized that he knows the EU 
at the December Summit will decide only on the question of 
whether to set a date to begin accession talks with Turkey. 
Turkey's accession to the EU is years away.  When the time 
comes, the EU will have an opportunity to judge Turkey's 
performance and determine whether it fully meets membership 
criteria. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Merkel told Erdogan she is impressed by the 
legislative reforms adopted by the Turkish Parliament over 
the past two years, and does not doubt Turkey's ability to 
meet EU membership criteria.  However, she questioned the 
EU's ability to absorb a large country like Turkey with such 
a distinct culture.  It is important for the EU to maintain 
good relations with Turkey.  However, EU membership for 
Turkey might not be the best option for either side.  Merkel 
said she does not necessarily oppose starting accession talks 
with Turkey, but argued that both sides should accept the 
possibility that the talks will lead to something less than 
full membership.  Eruygur said Merkel and Schauble did not 
define their concept of a privileged partnership. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Eruygur said Merkel appeared to be breaking new ground 
politically by saying she is not opposed to starting 
accession talks with Turkey.  She clearly wanted to deliver 
the message that she is not anti-Turkish.  Eruygur opined 
that her position seems entirely based on internal German 
politics -- i.e., she is addressing the concerns of German 
voters concerned about the economy and fearful that EU 
membership for Turkey will lead to an overwhelming influx of 
Turkish migrants. 
EDELMAN