04ANKARA3738
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Thu Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003738 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
THURSDAY, JULY 1, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
International press: Bush pushes Turkey toward Europe - 
Milliyet 
NATO Summit over, Istanbul returns to daily routine - Sabah 
Barzani: Either federation or independence - Aksam 
EU plans to by-pass Greek Cypriots - Hurriyet 
Dutch PM: We will treat Turkey fairly - Hurriyet 
`Ordinary' criminal Saddam may receive capital punishment - 
Milliyet 
Death penalty awaits Saddam - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
French press: Bush ignored Chirac on Turkey - Zaman 
Powell extends helping hand to Darfur - Radikal 
Barzani: Independence is Kurds' destiny - Radikal 
Al-Zarkawi captured - Iraqi daily - Yeni Safak 
Saddam and 11 top aides in Iraqi court - Zaman 
Iraqis to charge Saddam on Halabja - Yeni Safak 
ECHR ruling on headscarf disappoints AK Party - Cumhuriyet 
Paddy Ashdown sacks 60 officials for protecting Karadzic - 
Radikal 
Guantanamo detainees to be transferred to US - Radikal 
US to recall 6,000 soldiers for Iraq, Afghanistan - 
Cumhuriyet 
Israeli court shifts route of security fence - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
AK Party hides decree on Incirlik AB:  A government decree 
on the extension of US use of Incirlik Airbase has not been 
revealed to the public, "Cumhuriyet" claims.  The 
unclassified government decree authorizing the extension of 
 
SIPDIS 
the US military presence at Incirlik has not been published 
in the Official Gazette.  The decree, which was endorsed by 
the AK Party government prior to the Bush visit to Turkey, 
allows Iraqi coalition forces to use military facilities in 
Turkey in a way that goes beyond the scope of humanitarian 
assistance.  The decree allows for the transfer of 
logistical support, military personnel and equipment via 
Turkey, "Cumhuriyet" claims. 
 
Israeli ambassador denies secret activities in Iraq: 
Israel's Ambassador to Ankara, Pinhas Avivi, denied 
allegations by "The New Yorker" with regard to Israeli 
intelligence operatives providing military training to 
northern Iraqi Kurds.  Speaking to "Aksam" daily, Avivi said 
Israel has carried out all of its activities in the region 
in consultation with Ankara.  Israel would not jeopardize 
its `crucial' relationship with Turkey, Avivi emphasized.  A 
divided Iraq would be a considerable loss for Israel, he 
stressed. 
 
Barzani expects sovereignty for Kurds:  KDP leader Massoud 
Barzani told the Arabic  `Al-Hayat' daily that the Kurds 
would eventually unite and gain independence.  `Iraqi Kurds 
are not inferior to Arabs,' Barzani ssaid, adding that `we 
won't accept second-class treatment in Iraq.'  Barzani 
warned that the Kurds would opt for separation and 
independence if the new Iraqi constitution does not bring a 
federal, democratic regime. 
 
Cyprus:  The European Commission (EC) is expected to endorse 
on July 7 a package of measures aimed at removing economic 
sanctions on northern Cyprus by by-passing the Greek 
Cypriots, "Hurriyet" reports.  Greek Cypriots have warned 
that they will take the agreement to European courts if the 
Commission approves the package.  According to the 
agreement, the EU would allow the direct export of 
commodities produced in the `TRNC.'  The EU will also 
release a long-promised Euro 259 million in assistance to 
Turkish Cypriots.  The assistance will be administered by an 
EU office to be opened in northern Cyprus.  Meanwhile, 
coalition bargaining between the three Turkish Cypriot 
parties has ended unsuccessfully.  `TRNC PM' Mehmet Ali 
Talat said that early elections would have to be held if an 
agreement is not reached soon. 
 
Turkey cuts defense spending:  Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul 
has announced that there had been a TL 4,000 trillion cut in 
defense spending in 2003.  Gonul added that the government 
is also working to reduce the number of conscripts.  The 
Turkish General Staff is planning to eliminate a brigade at 
the border with Greece and two other brigades in central and 
eastern Turkey, "Hurriyet" reports. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: POTUS Speech in Istanbul 
 
"A Historical Speech for Middle East" 
Cuneyt Ulsever commented in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" 
(7/1): "President Bush's speech in Istanbul was a 
declaration by the United States to the world.  The US 
President declared that bringing democracy and freedom to 
the Middle East is the most immediate priority for the US in 
its fight against terrorism.  This is a very impressive 
declaration, because the gist of the Middle East issue stems 
from the dictatorial regimes in the region and the support 
given to those regimes by the Western powers.  President 
Bosh openly acknowledged this sin committed by the West. 
This is a very significant self-criticism. ... The 
President's speech also provided guidance on the content of 
the Broader Middle East and North Africa Project.  As Bush 
listed the main goals of the initiative, it is obvious that 
achieving those goals must involve Turkey.  This makes 
Turkey the luckiest country in the 21st century. ... The 
main goal outlined by President Bush is a democratic and 
free Middle East.  This would be in the interest of the 
region, the United States, and the world.  Let us all pursue 
this goal." 
 
"A Brand New NATO" 
Zafer Atay observed in the economic-political "Dunya" (7/1): 
"The NATO alliance has assumed a brand new identity after 
the Istanbul summit, which marked the end of NATO's search 
for a new role in today's world. ... NATO has expanded its 
scope of interest as much as possible.  From now on, the 
borders of the NATO alliance will not be limited to the two 
sides of the Atlantic, but will encompass the entire world. 
The new threats have been identified as international 
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction.  These are global threats, and the alliance has 
responded accordingly." 
 
"A Message to the Middle East from Istanbul" 
Akif Emre argued in the Islamist-intellectual "Yeni Safak" 
(7/1): "The choice of the venue for the Bush speech was 
symbolically important and provided a message to the Middle 
East.  The gist of the message is that the US considers 
Istanbul as its gateway to the Middle East.  Transforming 
the Islamic world has now been described as a strategic goal 
for NATO, and Turkey, as a Muslim country, should take the 
first step in standing against this concept.  However, the 
government is preoccupied with efforts to enhance its 
domestic power and gain more international legitimacy.  All 
of this will only lead to a policy whereby Turkey 
facilitates the US infiltration of the Islamic geography 
through the use of NATO.  The US now holds in its hands 
every legal and military prerequisite for taking the Middle 
East under its hegemony.  Those who consider this as an 
historic summit should realize that this is all part of a 
strategy that will bring the region only more chaos and 
bloodshed." 
 
EDELMAN