04ANKARA6995
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161446Z Dec 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006995 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 16, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Open Letter to European Friends - Hurriyet 
Green Light From Chirac - Hurriyet 
"Yes" To Turkey - Sabah 
Chirac: "Turkey Will Strengthen Europe" - Milliyet 
European Parliament Rejects `Privileged Partnership' for 
Turkey - Milliyet 
Le Figaro: "Erdogan A Legend in Turkey" - Star 
Chirac Says `Yes' to Turkey - Turkiye 
407 Yes Votes in Every Language - Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Brave Support From Chirac For Turkey - Zaman 
Erdogan: "If Necessary We Will Put the EU on Ice" - Zaman 
European Parliament Recommends Opening of Talks - Cumhuriyet 
Last Message From Ankara: "We Will Leave the Table if We 
Have To" Cumhuriyet 
Turkish Engineer Killed in Afghanistan, Two Drivers Killed 
in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Clear Message From Chirac - Radikal 
The Longest Night in Brussels - Yeni Safak 
 
 BRIEFING 
 
European Parliament Decision Favors Accession Talks: 
Today's papers give extensive front page coverage to the 
decision of the European Parliament in favor of opening 
accession talks with Turkey `without delay.'  All papers 
carry photos of Parliament members holding up `yes' signs in 
various languages, including some in Turkish.  Opposition 
"Cumhuriyet" remains skeptical about the EU decision 
document, but notes that the European Parliament dismissed 
the idea of a `privileged partnership' as an alternative to 
full EU membership.  He paper claims, however, that the 
Parliament  approved a proposal urging Turkey to recognize 
the Armenian genocide.  In a press conference after the 
vote, European Parliament Speaker Joseph Borrell said that 
the Parliament was not seeking alternatives to Turkey's 
accession. 
 
Support From EU Leaders:  All papers report the strong 
support expressed by French President Chirac for the 
beginning of EU membership talks with Turkey in a TV 
interview yesterday.  In the interview, Chirac said the 
Turks are `honorable people' who would never accept a 
`privileged partnership.'  Turkey's EU accession would be in 
Europe's interest, and would make Europe stronger.  "Zaman" 
reports that Chirac warned that the EU would pay a high 
price by rejecting Turkey.  "Vatan" claims Chirac's remarks 
have changed the mood in favor of Turkey.  "Sabah" reports 
that British Prime Minister Tony Blair called Erdogan prior 
to his departure for Brussels to extend support to the 
Turkish position on Cyprus.  "Cumhuriyet" reports that 
German FM Fischer wrote an article published in the German 
daily "Bild"  urging the EU to approve the opening of talks 
and stressing that Turkey is a part of Europe. 
 
Powell Calls Gul on EU Issue:  "Sabah" reports that US 
Secretary of State Powell called Turkish FM Gul to reiterate 
 
SIPDIS 
US support for Turkey's EU entry.  Powell stressed that the 
US is ready to extend all necessary support to Turkey. 
"Radikal" notes that the US is closely following 
developments at the EU summit. 
Turkish Leaders' Comments:  "Hurriyet" reports that PM 
Erdogan sent a letter to EU leaders on the eve of the 
summit.  The letter was published in today's edition of the 
German newspaper "Bild".  In his letter, Erdogan reminds the 
EU that in NATO, Turkish and European soldiers fought 
shoulder to shoulder for freedom and democracy.  He added 
that now Turkey wants to share the same values of freedom 
and democracy with Europe under one roof.  Erdogan expresses 
confidence in the potential of Turkish people for change and 
development, and adds that Turkey would offer advantages to 
the EU economy with its young population and economic 
dynamism.  "Hurriyet" also highlights Erdogan's remarks that 
`if the EU tries to impose unacceptable conditions, we will 
definitely put the matter on ice and continue on our way.' 
In a press conference at the airport on his way to Brussels, 
Foreign Minister Gul said that Turkey is looking forward to 
a clear statement for accession talks to begin.  Gul 
implied, however, that Turkey could leave the negotiations 
if `forced' to do so by the EU. 
 
Turks Killed in Afghanistan, Iraq:  All papers report that a 
Turkish engineer working on a highway project in Afghanistan 
was killed by his captors after being abducted on Tuesday. 
Meanwhile, two more Turkish truck drivers were reportedly 
killed on the road north of Baghdad. 
 
Interview With Treasury DAS Loevinger:  The economic daily 
"Referans" carries a front-page interview with Treasury DAS 
David Loevinger focusing on the positive aspects of Turkey's 
EU accession and a number of US-Turkish bilateral economic 
issues.  Loevinger had come to Ankara for contacts with 
economic officials following the first meeting of the Forum 
for the Future in Rabat, Morocco.  He stressed that Turkey 
could bring needed economic dynamism to the EU, and noted 
that EU accession would be good for the Turkish economy. 
Loevinger added that US Treasury officials were providing 
assistance to Turkey on tax and tax collection issues. 
Asked about the 8.5 billion USD loan package approved by 
Congress for Turkey in 2003, Loevinger noted that the 
package had served as a stabilizing influence in Turkish 
markets.  He stressed that Turkish officials are aware that 
the loans are still available should they choose to accept 
them.  Loevinger said there is no specific deadline for a 
Turkish decision on the loans.  The DAS praised Turkey's 
successful implementation of its IMF program, but noted that 
persistent obstacles in the Turkish bureacracy and judiciary 
had served to limit foreign direct investment in Turkey. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: EU-Turkey 
 
"Time for Turkey and the EU to Act Responsibly" 
Mehmet Barlas commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" (12/16): 
"Turkey placed itself as an active part of the Western world 
during the cold war.  Today the world is going through an 
intercultural cold war, and through its western and Muslim 
identity, Turkey has a chance to prove that this war is not 
rational.  Turkey has a role to play in bringing this 
atmosphere of confrontation to an end.  If the leaders of 
the EU pave the way for Turkey's membership, the challenges 
we have seen in the first four years of the 21st century can 
be overcome.  An EU-Turkey cohabitation will bring some 
difficulties, but countless benefits as well." 
 
"Good News" 
Gungor Mengi wrote in the mass appeal "Vatan" (12/16): 
"Turkey sees its future in Europe, and wants to be a part of 
European Union.  This certainly will mean a heavy price to 
pay, both economically and socially, for the EU.  However, 
the pay-off for the EU is the fact that by letting Turkey 
in, there will be message given to the Islamic world that 
highlights the EU as a global power.  Tomorrow is a critical 
day.  We hope nad believe there will be a decision to 
celebrate." 
 
"Hope for the Best" 
Idris Akyuz wrote in the mass appeal-sensational "Posta" 
(12/16): "It seems that the Turkish Prime Minister has 
demonstrated the leadership necessary to convince European 
leaders regarding Ankara's expectations from the December 17 
summit.  The summit should provide a date for the start of 
negotiations on the way to full EU accession.  It should be 
clear, and there should be no strings attached.  The PM was 
convincing enough to show that Turkey will not accept 
certain conditions.  Enough things are going in the right 
direction to give ample reason for optimism.  The European 
Parliament's approval of the positive report on Turkey and 
its rejection of a `privileged membership' status bodes well 
for tomorrow's meeting of EU leaders." 
EDELMAN