04BRATISLAVA672
SLOVAK ACTIVISTS ON CUBA
Thu Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Bratislava
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRATISLAVA 000672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV EAID LO CU
SUBJECT: SLOVAK ACTIVISTS ON CUBA 
 
REFTEL: STATE 152813 
 
The GOS is supportive of pressing for political change in Cuba 
and working more closely with civil society leaders. In Slovakia, 
there are NGOs and former political dissidents who frequently 
speak out about human rights violations in Cuba. The following is 
a list of organizations and individuals who have traveled to Cuba 
and/or have contacts with Cuban civil society (as requested in 
reftel): 
 
-- Laszlo Nagy, Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee for Human 
Rights, Minorities, and the Status of Women. He participated in a 
non-official parliamentary visit with Slovaks, Czechs, and Swedes 
this spring. He frequently participates in public discussions and 
makes statements in the press about events in Cuba. Nagy told 
poloffs in April that he believes the world ignored Cuba in 1989 
focusing instead on the fall of communism in the Soviet Union and 
the Eastern Block and he would like to do more to help. He also 
stated that the Cuban opposition is very evolved compared to the 
pre-1989 Czechoslovak political situation and there is more 
potential for their direct involvement in developing policy 
frameworks for the future. 
 
-- Kalman Petocz, Slovak Ambassador to the UN in Geneva. Petocz 
is also very active on Cuba issues. Two years ago he mobilized a 
vote in the UN that almost resulted in him begin recalled from 
his position. 
 
-- The Pontis Foundation, main contact: Lenka Surotchak. The 
Pontis Foundation operates a program called the Institute for 
Citizen Diplomacy, which brings speakers to Slovakia, supports 
dissident networks, and fundraises for the dissident community in 
Cuba. They helped to lead a petition drive for Oswald Paya to 
receive a Nobel peace award, which was spearheaded by Nagy. Paya 
also visited Slovakia last year through this program. 
 
-- People in Need, main contact: Patrick Kosicky. The Slovak 
branch of People in Need (based in the Czech Republic) operates a 
Slovak Committee for Cuban Democracy and actively fundraises for 
the families of dissidents. This organization mainly focuses on 
raising awareness within the Slovak populace of human rights 
violations in Cuba. 
 
WEISER 
 
 
NNNN