04BRUSSELS4119
European Parliament (EP) Plenary September
Mon Sep 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brussels
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 004119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PREF IZ SU CD BO CY TU EUN AID ICTY USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: European Parliament (EP) Plenary September 
13-16: Iraq, Darfur, Belarus and ICTY 
 
REF: BRUSSELS 4016 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  The September 13-16 EP plenary included 
debate on Iraq and Darfur.  External Relations 
Commissioner Chris Patten criticized U.S. policy on 
terrorism and Iraq.  MEPs qualified the Darfur 
situation as "tantamount to genocide."  Also, the EP 
passed a resolution criticizing human rights abuses 
in Belarus and supported the freezing of assets of 
people indicted by the International Criminal 
Tribunal for former Yugoslavia (ICTY).  In contrast 
to Patten, the plenary's resolution on Iraq avoids 
direct criticism of the U.S.  END SUMMARY. 
 
PATTEN: U.S.TESTOSTERONE, EU SUPERCILIOUSNESS 
--------------------------------------------- 
¶2. In his last speech before the EP as Commissioner 
for External Relations, Chris Patten sniped at the 
U.S. on Iraq, the fight against terrorism and the 
future of transatlantic relations.  After noting 
that the world was not safer after the overthrow of 
the "appalling Saddam," with "violence raging across 
much of the liberated land," he called for Europe to 
be involved in trying to hold the democratic project 
together, for "if Iraq goes badly, we all suffer." 
He stressed that the Commission had already pledged 
200 Million Euros for 2004 and was hoping to secure 
an agreement for an additional 200 Million Euros for 
next year. On transatlantic relations, Patten 
worried that "America's unwillingness to discuss 
with foreigners would lead to Europeans mixing up 
sniping at America and building up their common 
foreign and security policy," and that "on either 
side of the Atlantic, we will bring out the worst in 
our traditional partners."  He added that "the world 
deserves better than testosterone on one side and 
superciliousness on the other." 
 
MEPS ON IRAQ: EUROPE SHOULD ASSIST 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. On September 16 MEPs adopted a resolution (533 
votes in favor; 43 against; 26 abstentions) 
reaffirming "the EU's determination to assist the 
transformation of Iraq and its reintegration into 
the international community as a sovereign, 
independent and democratic partner country" and 
supporting the Commission proposal to allocate a 
further 200 million euros of EU contribution for 
Iraq's reconstruction in 2005. MEPs did not include 
any request for election monitoring, and they 
avoided criticism of U.S. policy. 
 
DARFUR "TANTAMOUNT TO GENOCIDE" 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. On September 16, the European Parliament adopted 
(566 for; 6 against; 16 abstentions) a resolution 
condemning Sudan for its support in Darfur of the 
targeting of civilians in both villages of origin 
and centers for displaced people (reftel).  The EP 
urged Sudanese authorities "to end impunity and to 
bring to justice immediately the planners and 
perpetrators of crimes against humanity, war crimes 
and human rights violations, which can be construed 
as tantamount to genocide." 
 
MEPS CRITICIZE LUKASHENKO 
------------------------- 
 
¶5. In a resolution adopted by 499 votes in favor to 
20 against with 26 abstentions, MEPs lambasted the 
Belarus regime's "indiscriminate attacks on the 
media, journalists, members of the opposition, and 
human rights activists."   MEPs call for free 
parliamentary elections on October 17 and ask the EU 
Council presidency to allow an EP delegation to 
monitor these elections.  The resolution also 
criticizes President Lukashenko's attempts to seek 
an extension of his presidential term by referendum, 
against the provisions of the Belarus constitution. 
 
 GREEN LIGHT TO COMMISSION ON ICTY 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6. In support of the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), MEPs passed a 
resolution giving the Commission a green light to 
allow the freezing of assets of people indicted by 
ICTY. 
 
(Drafted by POL: MVANAVERBEKE) 
 
MCKINLEY