04FRANKFURT6769
Resignation of Liberal Justice Minister Almost
Mon Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 006769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON PINR GM
SUBJECT: Resignation of Liberal Justice Minister Almost 
Topples Baden-Wuerttemberg Government 
 
REF: Frankfurt 5551 
 
Sensitive but unclassified - not for internet distribution 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The July 22 resignation of Baden- 
Wuerttemberg (B-W) Minister of Justice Corinna Werwigk- 
Hertneck (Free Democrat Party - FDP), amid allegations that 
she leaked confidential information to former Economics 
Minister and B-W FDP chairman Walter Doering, triggered a 
call for new elections by B-W Minister-President (M-P) 
Erwin Teufel (Christian Democrat Union - CDU).  Teufel's 
subsequent retraction -- reportedly the result of pressure 
from national CDU chair Angela Merkel -- has led CDU and 
opposition insiders to question his leadership during the 
FDP scandal and postulate that Teufel saw the resignation 
as a chance to solidify his absolute majority through new 
elections.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Corinna Werwigk-Hertneck resigned as B-W Justice 
Minister on July 22 following reports that she leaked 
confidential information to former B-W FDP chairman and B-W 
 
SIPDIS 
Economics Minister Walter Doering on investigations against 
him related to the Flow-Tex scandal (reftel.)  In a 
personal statement released to the press, Werwigk-Hertneck 
rejected the charges but noted that she would step down to 
prevent further damage to the office. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Although initially calling for new elections in 
the wake of Werwigk-Hertneck's resignation, M-P Teufel 
stated on July 23 that he believed that the CDU-FDP 
coalition was capable of governing until state elections in 
¶2006.  Press reports attribute the reversal to pressure 
from national CDU chair Angela Merkel, who was reportedly 
asked by national FDP chairman Guido Westerwelle to 
intervene with Teufel on the FDP's behalf. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The CDU-FDP governing coalition has resisted 
calls from opposition Social Democrats and Greens to 
discuss Teufel's about-face, voting down a July 28 SPD- 
Greens' motion to discuss new elections.  This followed an 
agreement between the CDU and SPD caucuses the day before 
to hold talks on the issue.  B-W SPD caucus chief Wolfgang 
Drexler labeled the rejection a violation of parliamentary 
procedure and threatened to bring the matter before the B-W 
Constitutional Court. 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT: Teufel's call for new elections damaged 
relations with the FDP and was perceived by many within the 
B-W CDU as an impromptu power-grab to extend his elected 
mandate as M-P for an additional five years in the face of 
declining support.  Observers (including some within his 
own party) contend that recent miscalculations have damaged 
Teufel's reputation as a keen political tactician.  Septel 
will track debate within B-W on whether Teufel should stand 
again for M-P in the state's 2006 elections.  END COMMENT. 
 
PASI