04KIGALI1208
EMBASSY KIGALI PARTICIPATION IN SEVENTH
Fri Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KIGALI 001208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USTR PASS TO CMILLER AND PCOLEMAN 
GENEVA FOR USTR - TAGLIANI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD PREL EAGR KTEX EINV RW AGOA
SUBJECT: EMBASSY KIGALI PARTICIPATION IN SEVENTH 
ANNUAL RWANDAN TRADE FAIR 
 
¶1. Summary.  Post sponsored a booth at the seventh 
annual Rwandan Trade Fair that showcased Rwandan 
exports to the United States and provided information 
on the theme "Global Business Partners."  The 
presentation, the first of its kind to be offered by 
any diplomatic mission in Rwanda, was well received by 
the Rwandan government and the business community. 
End summary. 
 
------------------------ 
GLOBAL BUSINESS PARTNERS 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. The Government of Rwanda (GOR), through the Rwanda 
Private Sector Federation, held its seventh annual 
International Trade Fair August 7-15 in Kigali. 
Boasting over 240 vendors and businesses in and around 
Rwanda, the fair attracted over 100,000 visitors. The 
theme of the fair was "Producing For Export." 
 
¶3. Post's Economic and Commercial Section sponsored a 
booth at the annual event, the first of its kind by 
any diplomatic mission in Rwanda. Under the theme 
"Global Business Partners," the booth highlighted 
current Rwandan exports to the United States and 
opportunities under the Africa Growth and Opportunity 
Act (AGOA). In addition, U.S. Mission staff provided 
hundreds of U.S. Foreign Commercial Service brochures 
and other information materials. A computer 
workstation was available for accessing information on 
BuyUSA.com via the Internet. 
 
¶4. The USG-sponsored booth showcased a number of 
Rwandan products as export success stories under AGOA 
or Generalized Specialized Preferences (GSP). The 
items included handicrafts, baskets, textile goods, 
coffee, tea, peppers, and other agricultural products 
representing eight business organizations in Rwanda. 
 
--------------- 
POSITIVE IMPACT 
--------------- 
 
¶5. The American booth attracted a great deal of 
favorable attention both with visitors at the fair and 
in local media. President Paul Kagame paid a personal 
visit to the booth and was impressed by the items 
displayed and American interest in Rwandan products. 
Rwandan television and newspapers lauded the positive 
impact of the Embassy's efforts to promote further 
exports from Rwanda to the United States. Moreover, 
hundreds of visitors, including several key ministers 
and elected representatives, took a keen interest in 
the booth, and many were surprised that items were 
already being exported to the United States. During 
closing ceremonies for the Trade Fair, Post received a 
trophy award for having made the most positive impact 
towards the overall fair theme of "Producing For 
Export." 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. Comment: Rwanda's participation in AGOA has begun 
and continues to show great promise. Rwandan 
entrepreneurs and those with venture capital are 
beginning to take a strong interest in trade 
opportunities under AGOA and GSP. The GOR is also 
enthusiastic about supporting these efforts. With 
continued stability in the country, prospects are good 
for further expansion of exports under AGOA that will 
be important for Rwanda's overall trade balance. 
Export-oriented job growth will also help lead Rwanda 
away from aid dependence to greater integration into 
the global economy. Rwanda has a niche in that global 
economy that can be exploited to its advantage 
economically. Specialty coffee, exquisite basketry, 
spicy peppers, and beautifully sewn textile goods 
ranging from aprons to patch quilts can command a 
market niche and profit that can have a tremendous 
impact in this very poor country. American marketing 
and distribution linkages are beginning to take root 
and will need to be cultivated and supported in every 
way possible. Americans also know about Rwanda and its 
efforts to rebuild from the horrible losses of the 
1994 Genocide and war. Capitalizing on these 
advantages, Rwandan exports to the United States help 
build a free market economy here, create a stronger 
commercial partnership between the two nations, and 
hold the promise of a better life for thousands of 
impoverished Rwandan families. End Comment. 
 
PATRICK