05ADANA223
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR NOVEMBER 30, 2005
Fri Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 000223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR NOVEMBER 30, 2005 
 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for November 30, 
¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        The daily reported that the arrest 
of the military officers was welcomed by the public and 
expectations were that the government would further unveil news 
about the Semdinli incident following the arrest of the 
officers.   Separately, Ozgur Gundem reported that the people of 
Semdinli reacted against the remarks of PM Erdogan, which 
reportedly cast doubts about the credibility of Semdinli people 
as witnesses for the Semdinli case since "Semdinli people were 
under the threat of the PKK". 
 
RADIKAL / ZAMAN:        The prosecutor demanded the arrest of two 
officers on grounds that the officers 'committed crimes against 
the public, established an unlawful organization, and planned 
action to kill people.'  The judge of Van's Heavy Penalty Court, 
however, arrested the officers on charges that they 'attempted 
to destroy the state's unity and nation's solidarity', as well. 
This development marks the first time that the judiciary has 
been willing to bring action against military officers for being 
involved in 'separatist activity.'  The officers may reportedly 
face life in prison under these charges. 
 
RADIKAL:        In the ninth day of the diarrhea epidemic seen in 
Malatya (see press summary 11/29), in which nearly 6000 people 
contracted the disease, a doctor said on the condition of 
anonymity that the municipality had been warned many times in 
the last two months about the city's contaminated potable waters 
because of an increased number of patients suffering from the 
same symptoms.   However, the municipality reportedly did not 
heed the warnings and kept telling the public that the city 
water was clean. 
 
EKSPRES:        Ekspres daily continues to report on an alleged 
fraud scandal concerning the issuing of false construction 
certificates in the Yuregir Municipality in Adana (see press 
summary 11/29). Previous Mayor Ahmet Unal dismissed claims that 
he was involved in such fraud.  The daily reported rumors 
circulating about a municipality official attempting to retrieve 
the false certificates from the people. 
 
RADIKAL / EVRENSEL:     An investigation has been filed against 
Selahattin Demirtas, Chairperson of the Diyarbakir Human Rights 
Association, who allegedly made statements to Roj TV about 
terrorist leader Abdullah Ocalan.  The number of investigations 
opened against Demirtas reportedly increased to 62. 
 
EVRENSEL / OZGUR GUNDEM:        A former CHP (Republican People's 
Party) deputy will call for an action against Commander Faruk 
Comert who the deputy blames for allegedly allowing F-16 
aircraft to fly low over a funeral ceremony in Yuksekova. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Cavit Torun, Diyarbakir AKP deputy and 
Parliamentary Human Rights Investigation Committee member, urged 
authorities to shed light on alleged other people that Jandarma 
Chief Sergeant Ali Kaya, who was recently arrested, has 
connections with. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   NGOs in Mersin demanded that counter-guerillas 
and JIT (Jandarma Intelligence) be abolished so that more light 
could be shed light on the Semdinli incident. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   As a result of a confrontation between police 
officers and alleged burglars, one of the reported burglars was 
killed by a police officer in Reyhanli district of Hatay.  12 
people were detained. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   Joost Lagendijk, European Parliament (EP) 
member and Co-Chairperson of the Joint EP-Turkish Parliamentary 
Commission, reportedly said that the (Turkish) Army was 
provoking people and aiming to draw PKK into committing 
violence.  According to Lagendijk, the Kurds should back the 
(Turkish) government in its attempt to unveil the Semdinli 
incident. 
 
OZGUR GUNDEM:   SES (Union of Health Workers) drew attention 
to the insufficient services provided by hospitals in 
Diyarbakir.  The hospitals in Diyarbakir reportedly lack the 
means to provide essential health care services to the people, 
according to a report generated by SES. 
 
RADIKAL:        Deputy Security Director of Mersin dismissed claims 
that the police gave gum and foot-balls to a group of children 
as gifts when they confronted another group of nearly 200 
children as they were allegedly chanting pro-PKK slogans (see 
press summary 11/29).  The deputy director said that the 
terrorists were in the habit of using children and women to 
support their actions. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 
DUNYA:  Exports to Syria and Middle East will reportedly be 
shipped faster after completion of the railway rebuilding work 
between Islahiye of Turkey and Meydan-? Ekbez of Syria at the 
end of November 2005.  Hasan Koprulu, the Director of the sixth 
region of TCDD (Turkish State Railways), said that the work, 
which runs 40 kms along the Turkish-Syrian border, started on 
the 15th of November.   Pointing out that the directorate covers 
eleven cities, and railway net stretching from Konya to Mardin 
runs through several cities which are important in terms of 
commerce and industry;  Koprulu reports that they have been in a 
period of "rebuilding" because the railway net used for long 
years was old and below standards.  He adds that they have been 
rebuilding the net under international standards in which the 40 
kms long work along the Turkish-Syrian border is covered as 
well.  Koprulu reports that trains, which can travel at 40 kmph 
currently, will be able to travel at 95 kmph after completion of 
the work; then, exports to Syria and Middle East will be able to 
be shipped faster and safer. 
 
¶2.      HURRIYET (CUKUROVA):    Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul, who 
came to Gaziantep to attend a series of ground breaking and 
opening ceremonies, paid a visit to the Organized Industrial 
Zone in Gaziantep and facilities of a company called SANKO, as 
well. 
 
¶3.      SABAH (GUNEY):  Antakya Chamber of Commerce in Hatay and 
Gaziantep Chamber of Industry expressed a joint effort to solve 
the common industrial problems the two provinces have. 
 
¶4.      SABAH (GUNEY) / BOLGE:  The 2nd Cukurova Construction and 
Building Materials Fair, which will be held in Adana between 
March 23 and 27, 2006, will be organized by Start Fair; a 
reported Adana company specialized in organizing fairs. 
REID