05ALMATY2957
KAZAKHSTAN AVIAN INFLUENZA UPDATE
Wed Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
US Office Almaty
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ALMATY 002957 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/CACEN JMUDGE, OES/STC AND EUR/RUS NOLL 
ALSO FOR EB/TPP/ATP, EB/TPP/BTA AND INR/REA 
USDA FAS FOR ITP FOR MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP WETZEL 
FAS PLEASE PASS TO APHIS AND FSIS 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER, PBUDASHEWITZ 
CDC FOR SBLOUNT, EMCCRAY 
BRUSSELS PLEASE PASS TO APHIS/FENANDEZ 
ANKARA FOR FAS ATTACHE HIGGISTON 
GENEVA FOR HEALTH ATTACHE 
TASHKENT FOR ESTH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR TBIO ECON RS ETRD PGOV KZ POLITICAL
SUBJECT: KAZAKHSTAN AVIAN INFLUENZA UPDATE 
 
REF: (A) ALMATY 2842     (B) ALMATY 2904 
 
¶1. Summary: Post has obtained confirmation that on August 
12, Kazakhstani health authorities released diagnoses of 
H5N1 AI in birds from parts of North Kazakhstan and 
Akmolinskaya oblasts.  The diagnoses were based on 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests developed with the 
assistance of U.S. experts (reftels).  No/no further 
suspected cases of human exposure have been reported.  The 
epidemiological situation appears to be stable, but it is 
possible that cases have been underreported in affected 
regions.  The affected regions of Kazakhstan are all in 
close proximity to the affected regions of Russia. 
Additionally, some regions of Kazakhstan border on known 
sites of AI outbreaks in China.  These regions have yet to 
report cases but may be considered to be at risk.  End 
Summary. 
 
H5N1 Confirmed in NKO, Akmola 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On August 12, the Agricultural Research Institute of the 
Ministry of Education and Science informed the Ministry of 
Health that H5N1 was detected in PCR tests of serum from 
wild and domesticated fowl taken from the Kyzylzharskiy 
region of North Kazakhstan oblast, as well as the villages 
of Ushsart in the Korgalzhino region of Akmolinskaya oblast 
and Akkul in the Alekseyevskiy region of Akmolinskaya 
oblast.  These diagnoses are added to already-confirmed 
cases in Pavlodar (Irtyshskiy and Lebyazhinskiy regions) and 
East Kazakhstan (Borodulikhinskiy region) oblasts, and to 
recently-reported cases in Karaganda oblast.  These tests 
were performed with the assistance of members of the U.S. 
Naval Medical Research Unit-3, who have since departed 
Kazakhstan. 
 
Authorities Describe Situation as Stable 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Kazakhstani authorities are describing the 
epidemiological situation as stable, as no new cases of AI 
in birds were reported over the weekend (August 13-14).  It 
is, however, possible that cases are being underreported in 
the affected locales now that quarantine measures are in 
place.  No/no further suspected cases of human exposure have 
been reported. 
 
¶4.  However, Ministry of Agriculture authorities have 
publicly identified regions where preparations for potential 
AI outbreaks are insufficient.  Aktyubinskaya, Zhambylskaya, 
West Kazakhstan and Kyzylordinskaya Oblasts were singled out 
as not having sufficient diagnostic reagents on hand. 
Aktyubinskaya, East Kazakhstan and West Kazakhstan oblasts 
were identified as lacking sufficient disinfectants to 
contain an outbreak.  On August 12, the Agriculture Ministry 
also criticized Kostanay Oblast as deficient in its 
preparations because it had not approved a comprehensive 
plan for dealing with an outbreak.  (Comment: A lack of 
preparation in Kostanay, if genuine, is cause for concern, 
as that oblast borders on already-affected North Kazakhstan, 
Akmolinskaya and Karaganda oblasts.) 
 
Correlation to Russian Outbreaks 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  According to a report prepared for the Kazakhstani 
 
authorities, the incidents of AI in Kazakhstan track closely 
in a geographic sense with those happening in the Russian 
Federation.  Specifically, Kyzylzharskiy (North Kazakhstan) 
borders on Tyumenskaya oblast.  Irtyshskiy (Pavlodar) 
borders on Omskaya oblast.  Lebyazhinskiy (Pavlodar) and 
Borodulikhinskiy (East Kazakhstan) both border on the Altay 
Kray. 
 
¶6.  Akmolinskaya and Karaganda oblasts do not border the 
Russian Federation.  In Akmolinskaya, the affected region of 
Korgalzhino includes Lake Tengiz, which is a major location 
along the migratory routes of wild birds. 
 
¶7.  Kazakhstani authorities are keeping a particularly close 
eye on areas of the North Kazakhstan, Pavlodar, and East 
Kazakhstan oblasts (all bordering Russia) that have not yet 
reported outbreaks, as well as on the Kuruchumskiy, 
Zaysanskiy and Urdzharskiy rayons of East Kazakhstan oblast. 
These three districts, which have not/not reported any cases 
of AI, border the Sinkiang-Uighur Autonomous Region of 
China, where post understands there has been an outbreak. 
 
Further Risks from Migratory Birds 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  In addition to the border locations identified as being 
at substantial immediate risk for AI, authorities are 
keeping a close watch on several interior regions thought to 
be at risk as fall approaches due to their location on the 
migratory paths of birds to and from India and Pakistan. 
These routes begin in parts of Russia where AI has been 
observed.  These regions include parts of the already- 
affected Pavlodar, East Kazakhstan, North Kazakhstan, 
Akmolinskaya, and Karaganda oblasts.  They also include 
areas in as-yet unaffected Kyzylordinskaya oblast, South 
Kazakhstan oblast (which borders Uzbekistan), and 
Almatinskaya oblast (which surrounds but does not include 
the city of Almaty). 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. The Kazakhstani authorities continue to respond in a 
measured and calm manner to the bird flu outbreaks, although 
post notes that underreporting may be happening in some 
places where quarantines are already in place.  The GOK has 
accepted U.S. help in diagnosing the problem and CDC/CAR 
continues to provide advisory services to the Kazakhstani 
ministries involved in the response.  While the role of USG 
entities has not been publicly acknowledged, the GOK has 
been receptive to U.S. assistance throughout the epidemic. 
 
¶10. Dushanbe Minimize considered. 
 
ASQUINO 
 
 
NNNN