05AMMAN7112
Jordan Notes Cool Reception for Red-Dead Project
Tue Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

060901Z Sep 05UNCLAS AMMAN 007112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV IS JO
SUBJECT: Jordan Notes Cool Reception for Red-Dead Project 
 
Ref: A) Amman 4726, B) State 130427 
 
¶1.  Summary: Jordanian Ministry of Planning (MOP) Secretary 
General Maher Madadha told Econcouns and ESTHOff on August 
31 that the GOJ has noted with concern the donor community's 
cool response to requests for funding of the feasibility 
study for the "Red-Dead" water conveyance project.  The GOJ 
continues to push the project as the way to "rescue" the 
Dead Sea.  End summary. 
 
If You Think Paying for the Feasibility Study is Tough... 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2.  S/G Madadha said that the GOJ would like to see more 
donor support for the "Red-Dead" project to desalinate ocean 
water from the Red Sea for municipal use and to "rescue" the 
plummeting Dead Sea with the resulting brine (Ref A).  He 
said that the French and U.S. contributions to the 
feasibility study (Ref B), representing about one-third of 
the estimated $15.5 million cost, are still the only solid 
commitments.  Econcouns encouraged Madadha to seek 
additional funding for the study from Gulf countries and 
from Japan, noting current USG budget constraints. 
 
¶3.  S/G Madadha said the GOJ sees the cool donor support for 
the feasibility study as an indicator of a lack of support 
for the project itself.  He asked how the multibillion 
dollar project can happen if donors won't even pony up for 
the feasibility study.  He described Red-Dead as an 
important regional (read Peace Process) and international 
project, not something that is just for Jordan's benefit. 
He said that Red-Dead would protect the Dead Sea, a unique 
global treasure, and deserved strong international support 
on that basis. 
 
¶4.  Comment: Jordan is looking past the feasibility study to 
the project itself.  We need to keep the GoJ focused on 
asking the right questions and getting real answers from the 
feasibility study, not in moving toward a predetermined 
outcome. 
 
HALE