05ANKARA3877
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

061417Z Jul 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003877 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 6, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Erdogan to Brief Sun Valley Conference on Islam, Democracy - 
Sabah 
Survey: Turks Dislike Bush, Not Americans - Milliyet 
G-8 Battle Begins - Sabah 
Bahrain's Ambassador Wounded in Attack in Baghdad - Sabah 
Pentagon to Change War Strategies - Hurriyet 
`Olympic War' Over 2012 Games - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
EU's Kretschmer: Turkey Now a Key Energy Bridge - Yeni Safak 
Kurds Pressure Jafari on Kirkuk - Cumhuriyet 
Resistance Target Diplomatic Missions in Baghdad - Yeni 
Safak 
Shanghai Group Urges US Pullout From Central Asia - 
Cumhuriyet 
Bomb Attack Against Srebrenica Commemoration Foiled - Zaman 
EU Agrees to Deport Illegal Immigrants - Zaman 
`Stressful' Summit of the Rich in Scotland - Radikal 
G-8's Africa Show - Cumhuriyet 
Basayev Threatens to Attack Olympic Games if Moscow is 
Picked - Radikal 
Women's Rights Activist, Daughter Killed in Pakistan - 
Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Survey on the United States in Turkey:  A survey conducted 
by the NGO Ari Movement shows that only 16 percent of Turks 
have negative views of the United States, Americans, 
President Bush, and the American way of life.  According to 
the survey, conducted among 1,244 Turks in 15 provinces 
across Turkey, 44 percent of respondents oppose the US and 
President Bush, but not the American lifestyle.  27 percent 
voiced positive feelings about the US, Americans, and their 
way of life.  71 percent said they mistrust President Bush. 
32 percent expect a deterioration in ties between Turkey and 
the US, while 36 percent are concerned that there could be a 
war between the two countries. 
 
Erdogan in the US:  Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan will 
participate in the Sun Valley Conference in Idaho starting 
on Wednesday.  Erdogan will use the opportunity to tell 
world business giants about Turkey's EU harmonization 
efforts and reformprogram.  He will also describe Turkey's 
progress on strengthening the free market economy.  Erdogan 
adviser Cuneyt Zapsu reportedly said that the Turkish prime 
minister would issue a message on behalf of the Islamic 
world by defending the idea that Islam and democracy are 
compatible.  Before leaving yesterday for the US, Erdogan 
declared that `the close alliance between Turkey and the 
United States, which is based on shared values, will 
continue.'  He added that `Turkey will continue efforts to 
strengthen the relationship, especially in the fields of 
politics, defense, the economy, and trade.' 
 
Erdogan to Meet Putin In Sochi:  "Sabah" columnist Muharrem 
Sarikaya reports today that Russian President Vladimir Putin 
has invited PM Erdogan to meet with him in the Black Sea 
resort city of Sochi later this month.  Sarikaya speculates 
that the meeting may take place July 17-18, when the Prime 
Minister will be on his way to Mongolia. 
 
Turkish MFA, Intelligence Warn Against German Protestant 
Church:  "Sabah" reports that a joint delegation of the 
German Protestant Church and the Brussels-based Commission 
of Churches were been prevented from meeting with local 
officials in southeast Turkey during a June visit.  The 
delegation had come to Turkey to carry out research on the 
problems of immigrants and minority groups in the region. 
The Turkish embassy in Berlin reportedly advised the group 
against visiting the southeast, and urged them to hold all 
of their meetings in Ankara.  The group shrugged off the 
advice, and traveled to Diyarbakir, Mardin, and Van while 
some members of the delegation stayed in Ankara for meetings 
with officials.  "Sabah" reports that there are claims that, 
on the eve of the group's travel to Turkey, the Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) and the Turkish Intelligence Service 
(MIT) sent to the parliament and to local officials in the 
southeast a letter warning that the Evangelical Church had 
been campaigning in Germany for the removal of restrictions 
on the PKK, and for official recognition of Armenian 
`genocide' claims.  A German embassy official told "Sabah" 
that `serious problems' would arise if these claims are 
confirmed. 
 
Interior Ministry Supports Return of Displaced Villagers: 
The English-language daily "Turkish Daily News" (TDN) 
reports that Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu is trying to 
boost the return of villagers who were displaced in fighting 
between security forces and PKK militants.  In a circular 
sent to governors, Aksu said that 125,539 out of an 
estimated 360,000 displaced people have returned home under 
a government-sponsored project launched in 2004.  Aksu 
referred to lawsuits filed against Turkey at the European 
Court of Human Rights (ECHR) by some displaced villagers, 
and ordered governors to assist those who want to return by 
providing resources to create sustainable living conditions. 
The interior ministry plans to encourage the active 
involvement of Turkish NGOs to support the return project. 
 
Council of Ministers Approve Bill on Cargill Dispute: 
Turkey's Council of Ministers approved a decree declaring 
that the factory of the US agricultural giant Cargill is 
located in a `special industrial zone.'  The decree 
reportedly protects the company against legal challenges 
based on the claim that Cargill built on agricultural land 
near Turkey's industrial northwestern city of Bursa.  The 
decree stipulates that Cargill be given production licenses 
for its Bursa plant.  Papers speculate that the problem was 
resolved through the efforts of Prime Minister Erdogan in 
response to a request made by President Bush during the two 
leaders' meeting in Washington last month. 
 
Europe Provides Financial Support for DEHAP Municipalities: 
The Turkish military gave a briefing to Prime Minister 
Erdogan and Defense Minister Gonul last Friday concerning 
financial support provided to the outlawed PKK by European 
countries, "Yeni Safak" reports.  Chairing the AK Party 
board meeting on Saturday, Erdogan drew attention to funds 
provided by Scandinavian countries and Germany for 
municipalities in the southeast run by pro-Kurdish DEHAP. 
`Large amounts of money have been given to DEHAP 
municipalities to be transferred to certain projects and 
individuals in the region,' Erdogan said, adding that Turkey 
should counter such attempts by supporting the region 
economically. 
 
Draft Bill Would Lift Age Restrictions For Koran Courses: 
Several papers report today that the Religious Affairs 
Directorate (Diyanet) has forwarded to the Prime Minister's 
office a draft bill that would eliminate age restrictions 
for children to study in Koran courses.  Currently, children 
must have reached 12 years of age before undertaking formal 
study of the Koran. 
 
Erdogan Decides to Extend Logoglu's Term in Washington: 
During his visit to the United States last month, Prime 
Minister Erdogan decided to extend for one year the term in 
office of Turkey's Ambassador to Washington, Faruk Logoglu, 
despite opposition from Foreign Minister Gul.  The FM had 
wanted to send MFA Deputy Undersecretary Nabi Sensoy to 
replace Logoglu at the important post.  Turkey's special 
Iraq envoy, Osman Koruturk, will be assigned as ambassador 
to Paris, while MFA Middle East  deputy director Safak 
Gokturk will be sent as ambassador to Iran.  The government 
decree on ambassadorial assignments must be submitted to 
President Sezer for approval. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: The G-8 Summit 
 
"Who's Interest?" 
Umur Talu wrote in the mass appeal "Sabah" (7/6): "For me, 
American interests come first.  This statement came from the 
man who some of his supporters argue cares about global 
issues such as humanity, freedom, democracy, and the rule of 
law.  In fact, President Bush has made a very sincere 
remark.  He is supposed to put his country's interests 
first, as well as the interests of his country's most 
influential groups.  In other words, those who are powerful 
define the interests of the country, and the government 
watches out for them.  . Bearing this statement in mind, let 
us look at some world issues.  Global warming is an issue 
that calls for immediate measures, and George Bush is the 
president of the country that is the biggest contributor of 
poisons in the atmosphere.  Yet Bush clearly says, in the 
midst of American nuclear tests, enormous planes, huge cars, 
and increasing exhaust gases, that he does not care about 
global warming as long as the poisonous gases help to expand 
American welfare and consumption.  Bush is simply saying 
that 300 million American are far superior to the rest of 
the 6 billion people in the world.  That is his argument." 
 
"A Revolution" 
Hasan Cemal argued in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" (7/6): 
"The Live-8 concerts were certainly done good intentions. 
Such initiatives could play a role to create pressure on the 
US and Europe for more aid for Africa.  Yet the question is 
still there: Will these initiatives be beneficial?  Even if 
aid to Africa is increased, and if all African debt is 
forgiven, could a new process begin in Africa that would be 
effective in helping to eliminate poverty?  Many people have 
doubts about this.  .  The leaders of the G-8, the world's 
eight richest countries, are meeting in Scotland to discuss 
such an agenda.  If the current effort, under the leadership 
of Tony Blair, is successful, aid for Africa will double 
over the next ten years, and annual assistance will increase 
by up to 25 billion dollars.  Moreover, the debts of 14 
African countries will be eliminated.  If such results 
emerge from the summit, this will be a positive development. 
But some people will continue to have their suspicions. 
They will worry that, as has happened in the past, the 
assistance money for Africa will disappear into a bottomless 
pit." 
 
MCELDOWNEY