05ANKARA2140
CIVAIR:  NEW TRANSIT PASSENGER
Fri Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002140 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA/OTP AND EUR/SE 
PARIS FOR TSA 
DHS FOR TSA 
DEPT PASS TRANSPORTATION DEPT 
BRUSSELS FOR FAA AND TSA 
ROME FOR ICE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ASEC TU
SUBJECT:  CIVAIR:  NEW TRANSIT PASSENGER 
ARRANGEMENT/LIGHTER BAN PUBLICIZED 
 
Ref: (A) State 41383 (B) State 66181 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) On March 27, Turkish authorities eliminated a gap 
in the border control system by requiring passport and 
customs controls to be performed at the initial airport 
of entry, rather than at the final destination.  The 
change, which also affects transit passengers leaving 
Turkey, has led to passenger complaints.  Turkish 
authorities have publicized the TSA lighter ban.  End 
Summary. 
 
Transit Passengers - Loophole Eliminated 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Following more than a year of Embassy advocacy on 
this issue, Turkish aviation authorities on March 27 
reverted to their earlier practice of requiring 
international passengers connecting to domestic flights 
to clear passport and customs control at the first port 
of arrival in Turkey (usually Istanbul Ataturk Airport). 
Previously, transit passengers were subject to these 
controls at their final destination, but systems for 
ensuring this were weak and circumventing them was a 
real possibility.  In addition, the GOT also required, 
as of the same date, that travelers departing Turkey 
clear customs and exit controls at the last airport in 
the country.  Both changes require transit passengers to 
claim and re-check baggage at the first port of entry 
and last port of exit in Turkey. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The changes should not impact implementation of 
TSA's emergency amendment requiring additional screening 
 
SIPDIS 
for U.S.-bound flights from Istanbul, but do add the 
hassle of claiming and re-checking luggage for Turkish 
Airlines (THY) passengers (including those with American 
Airlines codeshare tickets).  According to Delta's 
station manager in Istanbul, the changes apparently 
affect only passengers connecting to THY international 
flights, since those transferring from domestic flights 
to other carriers, including Delta, had already been 
required to claim and recheck their luggage in Istanbul. 
In this way, the new measures in one sense level the 
playing field between THY and foreign carriers. 
 
¶4. (SBU) THY's Chief Manager of Ground Operations told 
us on April 8 that the new measures are being 
implemented successfully, but that there have been 
passenger  complaints and that THY has been forced to 
increase the minimum time for flight connections from 45 
to 90 minutes.  The THY representative predicted that 
the new policy, in combination with the new EC 
regulation on Air Passenger Rights, would cost the 
airline millions of dollars this year in compensation 
and lodging costs. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Istanbul Ataturk Airport's Director of Airport 
Police remarked to Econoff April 8 that the new system 
was working, but expressed concern that border control 
officials were now performing significantly more 
passport checks (around twice as many as previously) 
with the same number of staff (protect). 
 
¶6. (SBU) While the new policy is good news, it remains 
to be seen whether border and customs authorities will 
continue to give security priority over passenger 
comfort.  We understand that passenger complaints, 
especially by those from political and business elites 
in Turkey, led to the abandonment of the same system 
several years ago. 
 
Explosive Detection System 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) THY and Delta Station Managers noted that the 
current terminal operator's contract was set to expire 
this spring, and that Ataturk Airport would gain an 
Explosive Detection System (EDS) with the next operator. 
However, the Airport Police Director pointed out that a 
dispute between the State Airport Authority (DHMI) and 
the operator (Tepe Akfen - TAV) over the terms of the 
latter's build-operate-transfer contract could delay 
turnover to a new operator and hence installation of the 
EDS. 
 
TSA's Ban on Lighters 
 
SIPDIS 
--------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Per ref A, Econoff on March 10 informed the 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), the 
Turkish National Police (TNP) and MFA that lighters will 
be banned from U.S. flights.  On March 24, DGCA 
referenced this message on its website, though it added 
matches to the list of items banned from U.S. flights. 
DGCA told us that this information was publicized in the 
Turkish press.  THY's station manager claimed on April 8 
the lighter ban was already being implemented. TNP and 
Gozen Security both indicated recently to Consular 
Section Chief that while they will implement the lighter 
ban, they think lighters will be easy to miss in 
screening. 
Edelman