05ANKARA6291
Avian Influenza Situation Update in Turkey
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006291 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/RUS, OES/STC, EB/TPP/ATP, EB/TPP/BTA 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER/PBUDASHEWITZ 
ITP/MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
FAS PASS FSIS AND APHIS 
VIENNA PASS APHIS 
BRUSSELS PASS APHIS/FERNANDEZ 
GENEVA PASS HEALTH ATTACHE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR KPAO TBIO AMED TU
SUBJECT:  Avian Influenza Situation Update in Turkey 
 
Ref:  (A) Ankara 5119 
      (B) Ankara 6105 
      (C) Ankara 6138 
      (D) Ankara 6232 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for Internet Distribution. 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Although there have been several suspicious 
cases of bird deaths in the Western and Eastern regions of 
the country, there have been no new outbreaks of Avian 
Influenza in Turkey.  The Government plans to lift the 
quarantine restrictions in the AI affected zone by the end 
of the month if there are no new confirmed AI outbreaks in 
the quarantined area.  End summary. 
 
--------------- 
No New Outbreaks 
--------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Since the outbreak was first announced on October 9 
there have been no new incidents in Turkey.  In addition, 
there have been no reports of human deaths or illness due to 
the outbreak. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Dead Pigeons in Istanbul.Dead Chicken Scam in Pathos 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3.  (U) There have been several reports of bird deaths in 
various regions of Turkey including Istanbul and eastern 
Turkey.  However, thus far, none of these birds have tested 
positive for Avian Influenza (AI).  There was a report last 
week that about a dozen pigeons were found dead in Istanbul. 
Lab results determined that the pigeons were free of AI. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) This weekend reports circulated that about 1000 
chickens had died in the eastern part of Turkey and that the 
government had culled another 5000 birds.  However, contacts 
at the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs clarified 
that a Turkish poultry trader who had purchased 2,200 
chickens in the Western part of Turkey and was transporting 
them to sell them in the East because of his inability to 
sell the birds.  This trader claimed that 1,000 birds died 
upon arriving to the Eastern region of Patnos.  Government 
officials do not believe that these deaths resulted from AI 
case, but rather may have been the trader's attempt to 
receive compensation money from the government, which is 
higher than the current market price.  Nevertheless, 
government officials buried the dead animals and put a 
quarantine area around the burial site.  In addition, 
samples were sent to the lab to test for AI.  Lab results 
are still pending. 
 
------------------------- 
Future Government Action 
------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Government of Turkey (GOT) has indicated that 
it plans to lift the quarantine in western area of 
Baliksehir, the site of the first outbreak, at the end of 
October as long as no new outbreaks occur.  Should any new 
hen new outbreaks occur, the GOT would take similar 
precautions as it did for the first outbreak. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) According to the GOT and the Industry, the 
government has already reimbursed farmers for birds that had 
to be destroyed.  This was good news for the farmers as they 
did not suffer any financial losses.  Reports of this quick 
compensation from the government will hopefully encourage 
other breeders or farmers to inform the authorities 
immediately of any future outbreaks.  However, if the 
government does not continue or is unable to continue 
compensating farmers at such a rapid pace or at an 
acceptable price, farmers may be reluctant to report future 
outbreaks.  That could create a very dangerous situation in 
Turkey since many private breeders and small farms depend on 
their small flocks for their livelihood. 
MCELDOWNEY