05ANKARA132
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JANUARY 10, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
 
Palestine's New Hope, Mahmud Abbas - Sabah 
Turkey and Syria Solve 66-Year-Old Hatay Problem - Hurriyet 
Victory Belongs to Abbas in Palestine - Hurriyet 
Turkish Troops to Take ISAF Command - Hurriyet 
Pentagon to Create `Death Squads' in Iraq - Milliyet 
A New Plan for Cyprus - Milliyet 
Turkish Businesses Landing in Moscow - Turkiye 
A New Era in Palestine - Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
Ambassador: "US-Turkey Agree on Iraq's Territorial 
Integrity" - Zaman (1/8) 
Erdogan Goes to Russia With 650 Businessmen - Radikal 
Palestinians Voted for Their Future - Cumhuriyet 
A New Plan For Cyprus From Europe - Cumhuriyet 
Abbas  is the New Leader of Palestine - Yeni Safak 
Erdogan Sends Friendship Message to Putin - Zaman 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ambassador Edelman Interviewed by Zaman:  "Zaman" carried an 
interview with Ambassador Edelman in two sections over the 
weekend issues.  During the interview, Edelman stressed that 
Turkish press allegations claiming that the earthquake and 
tsunami in South Asia were caused by US nuclear experiments 
 
SIPDIS 
are `fabrications' that have greatly upset the United 
states.  The Ambassador also answered charges that US troops 
used excessive force in the battle for Fallujah.  He 
highlighted that mosques damaged in the fighting had been 
used as weapons storage facilities by Iraqi insurgents. The 
Ambassador also stressed that the US shares Turkey's views 
concerning Kirkuk and the need to preserve the territorial 
integrity of Iraq.  (NOTE:  A full translation of the 
Ambassador's "Zaman" interview is now in preparation and 
will be distributed soon.  END NOTE.) 
 
Erdogan Goes to Russia:  All papers report that PM Erdogan 
will travel to Russia today for an official visit.  Energy 
issues, including the Blue Stream Project, the Samsun-Ceyhan 
pipeline, and the passage of oil through the Turkish 
Straits, will top the bilateral agenda.  Cyprus and 
cooperation in the fight against terrorism will also be 
discussed.  Erdogan is taking over 500 businessmen and more 
than 90 journalists with him on the visit.  The PM will meet 
with President Putin on Tuesday, and open a Turkish Trade 
Center in Moscow on Wednesday. 
 
Turkey And Syria Solve Hatay Problem:  "Hurriyet" reported 
that Syria, by approving the trade agreements last month 
during the visit to Damascus by Prime Minister Erdogan, has 
accepted that the long-disputed Hatay province belongs to 
Turkey.  The agreement reportedly includes a provision that 
provides recognition of Turkey's current borders. 
 
New European Effort to Solve Cyprus:  Cypriot Radio reported 
that experts on the European Constitution are currently 
developing a plan to resolve the Cyprus dispute.  The new 
proposal would be a European alternative to the Annan Plan, 
and would mark the beginning of Brussels' active efforts to 
reacha Cyprus solution. 
Palestinian Elections:  All papers and TV channels announce 
the victory of Mahmud Abbas as the new leader of the 
Palestinians.  "Milliyet" claims that the Palestinians voted 
in hopes for a cease-fire between Israel and Palestine. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
?    Iraq 
?    Palestine Elections 
 
"The US Ambassador Talks to Zaman" 
Ekrem Dumanli commented in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" 
(1/8): "US Ambassador Edelman had two important documents in 
his hand when he arrived at our offices on Friday.  The 
first was a press release on the tsunami disaster. The text 
noted that some news articles that appeared in some 
newspapers were "fabrications" and included "outrageous 
claims."  Apparently, the Americans are extremely upset 
about allegations linking the earthquake and tsunami to US 
underground nuclear trials.  The view that some countries 
were not informed about the earthquake in time was also 
addressed in the press release. A second thick folder in 
Edelman's hand concerned Fallujah.  He presented information 
from a very different perspective about the incident in 
Fallujah that created so much intense criticism in the world 
media. The file included numerous photographs and visual 
images documenting the activities and weapons of some Iraqi 
groups.  It was claimed that certain places - including some 
mosques - were used as weapons' storage facilities and 
contained some implements used in torture.  .  [During the 
interview] the questions were not raised in a way that would 
suggest anti-Americanism, but the policies of the US 
administration were questioned.  As a matter of fact, this 
questioning is being done around the world -- especially in 
the American media. The general opinion is that if the US 
follows bad policies, it does harm not just to the US but to 
the entire world.  It would be impossible not to be 
impressed by Mr. Edelman for his part in this brainstorming 
sesion.  He answered all of our tough but polite questions 
one by one. He did not drop "off the record" into any of his 
answers. In a diplomatic way,  he sometimes indicated he did 
not agree with us and clearly stated his views. He answered 
many questions covering many subjects; from a question on 
Kurds living in Iraq, to the danger of the spread of Anti- 
Americanism, to Turkey-US relations.  .  My impression was 
that the Ambassador is concerned by the spread of Anti- 
Americanism, particularly in the Islamic world -just like 
many Americans are.  He is right.  Neither the US nor the 
Islamic world benefits from this development.  For this 
reason, such misunderstandings must be cleared up. That's 
why I think the meeting with Edelman is important.  I wish 
that more such meetings could be held on a larger scale. 
Perhaps in this way, criticism could be relayed to officials 
more directly and statements from officials could receive 
wider coverage." 
 
"Abbas, Sharon and Bush" 
Yasemin Congar wrote in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (1/10): 
"According to US diplomats, Washington wants to see a 
determination from Abbas regarding the fight against 
terrorism.  One of the criteria on this issue will be 
whether there are any figures with terrorist links in the 
new Palestinian cabinet.  If Abbas tries to limit the 
influence of Islamic Jihad and Hamas, the US will act 
accordingly.  This would entail allowing the use of 
financial aid for Palestine which was earlier suspended. 
The US wants to make sure that this money will not fall into 
the hands of terrorists. . Washington has already been 
working on a series of gestures toward Palestine in the 
event that Abbas shows leadership in controlling the 
violence and terrorist groups.  These concrete measures 
would include steps to revive the security cooperation 
between Israel and Palestine, and a new security concept for 
the West Bank and Gaza.  Egypt is expected to support this 
kind of process, which would lay the foundation for a cease- 
fire.  Another step would be to support the Israeli 
withdrawal from Gaza, followed by a series of security and 
reconstruction efforts.  The Bush administration might 
engage Secretary Rice directly on this issue as soon as the 
hearing and confirmation process is concluded.  The 
appointment of a new Middle East envoy might be the next 
phase for Washington.  It is also possible that Abbas will 
soon receive an invitation to the White House." 
 
EDELMAN