05ANKARA3104
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 003104 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JUNE 2, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Dutch Say a Louder `No' - Milliyet 
French Kill, Dutch Bury EU Constitution - Vatan 
France to Demand Privileged Partnership for Turkey - Sabah 
Pakistan Gives Turkey Support on Cyprus - Aksam 
Turkey, Pakistan to Increase Military Cooperation - Hurriyet 
Brussels to Hold International Iraq Conference June 22 - 
Milliyet 
Assassination Attempt Against Barzani - Vatan 
Nixon Knew Who `Deep Throat' Was - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
US Delegation: Sanctions on North Cyprus Must be Removed - 
Cumhuriyet 
Whitfield: Hope Papadapoulos Got Our Message - Yeni Safak 
Dutch Overwhelmingly Reject EU Constitution - Radikal 
Chirac Says France Will Stay in EU Despite `Non' - Zaman 
Syrian Kurds Preparing for Mass Rally - Yeni Safak 
Rafsanjani Pledges to Open Iran to World - Yeni Safak 
Wolfowitz Takes World Bank Helm - Yeni Safak 
US Puts Up Webpage to Fight Misinformation - Radikal 
Suicide Bomb Attack at Kandahar Mosque Kills 20 - Cumhuriyet 
Bishkek in Turmoil Again - Radikal 
Detainee Testimonies Verify Torture at Gitmo - Yeni Safak 
CIA Uses Civilian Planes for Covert Operations - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
US Delegations Continue Meetings in Turkey, North Cyprus:  A 
delegation led by Congressman Ed Whitfield, co-chairman of 
the Turkey Caucus in the US House of Representatives, paid a 
visit to Turkey's influential business organization, The 
Union of Chambers (TOBB), in Ankara on Wednesday.  Whitfield 
told the press after meeting with TOBB Chairman Rifat 
Hisarciklioglu that the fourth Congressional study group has 
been formed, adding that the fact that this group focuses on 
Turkey shows the importance given to Turkey by the US 
Administration.  He noted that the US delegation's visit to 
northern Cyprus had been a `symbolic statement' to help lift 
the international isolation of the Turkish Cypriots. 
Whitfield added that his delegation will propose some new 
ideas to the American administration on that issue wht it 
returns to Washington.  Specifically, Whitfield said the 
group would propose direct flights between Ercan airport and 
Washington by Turkish Cypriot Airlines.  Whitfield said that 
Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan's visit to the US next week 
will contribute to further cooperation in US-Turkish 
relations: `There may be differences of opinion between 
friends, but mutual visits can help overcome these 
differences.'  TOBB Chairman Hisarciklioglu praised the 
Americans for entering Turkish Cyprus directly from Turkey: 
`This visit will help in ending the unfair isolation of the 
Turkish Cypriots, and will contribute to the integration of 
northern Cyprus with the rest of the world.'  Another US 
Congressional delegation crossed over into the `TRNC' from 
the southern part of the island, papers report.  The head of 
that delegation, Congressman Jim Kolbe, said after meeting 
`TRNC President' Talat that all Americans are waiting for 
the day when they will see Cyprus reunited. 
 
Turkish papers report US State Department Spokesman Richard 
Boucher as `defending' the US Congressmen's visit to 
northern Cyprus.  Responding to a question, Boucher, a 
former US ambassador to Cyprus, said there is a `different' 
environment in Cyprus now: `There have been various steps on 
the part of the US to ensure that the Turkish Cypriots do 
not feel as isolated as they have in the past.' Boucher said 
the visit had not been a violation of international law. 
Boucher described the `TRNC' and Ankara as the side that 
sincerely wants a solution to the Cyprus problem. 
 
Johnson: US Visits to Cyprus a First Step for Dialogue: 
Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson of Texas, a member of 
the US delegation that visited north Cyprus, told "Tercuman- 
HO" that there is no impediment to Americans who want to 
travel to Turkish Cyprus.  Johnson said the US Congressional 
delegation now had a better grasp on the situation of the 
Turkish Cypriots.  `We also aim to understand Turkey 
better,' she noted.  Johnson added that visits by US 
delegations to northern Cyprus and Turkey marked a beginning 
for opening channels of dialogue.  Johnson said she was 
surprised to see several women lawmakers in the Turkish 
Cypriot `parliament,' including `speaker' Fatma Ekenoglu, 
the paper reports.  `American women have not had such an 
opportunity yet,' Johnson said.  Johnson, named as one of 
the 10 most powerful women in the US by "Ebony" magazine in 
2001, was first elected to the US House of Representatives 
in 1991. 
 
Turkish Cypriot Leaders Due in Ankara:  Turkish Cypriot 
leaders - `President' Talat, `Prime Minister' Soyer and 
`Foreign Minister' Denktas -- are to visit Ankara on 
Thursday for meetings with PM Erdogan and FM Gul for a final 
retouching of the Turkish position on Cyprus in advance of 
Erdogan's upcoming visit to the United States next week. 
The Turkish Cypriots will return home on June 3 after 
meeting Parliament Speaker Arinc.  Talat said yesterday 
before arriving in Ankara that the attitude of the Greek 
Cypriot side is `far outside the parameters' of the Annan 
Plan.  `It is uncertain how the Cyprus problem will be 
resolved,' Talat said. 
 
Erdogan to Visit Sikorsky While in the US:  Prime Minister 
Erdogan will pay a `surprise' visit to the Sikorsky 
helicopter plant in Connecticut after meeting with UN 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan on June 9, "Sabah" reports. 
 
SIPDIS 
The Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation had previously held talks 
with the Turkish Aerospace Industry (TAI) in a bid to make 
Turkey its main production center for all models of Black 
Hawk helicopters, but no progress was made on the project, 
"Sabah" notes.  Erdogan will discuss with Sikorksy the 
manufacture of helicopters using Turkish parts and 
technology, according to the report. 
 
Turkey's National Security Policy Document:  Turkey's draft 
`National Security Policy Document,' which outlines the 
priorities with regard  to threats to Turkey's security, is 
to be finalized at the National Security Council (NSC) 
meeting on June 21, papers report.  The document describes 
fundamentalism, separatism, and extreme left-wing activities 
as the main domestic threats.  The 25-page document also 
delineates unemployment, the uneven distribution of national 
wealth, and disproportionate development levels between 
regions in the country as among the primary domestic threats 
to public order.  Cyprus is of `first-degree importance' to 
Turkey's security, the document says, and it goes on to list 
Iraq and Iran as among the risky elements that create 
uncertainty in Turkey's neighborhood.  `Turkey has to 
maintain a deterrent military force to preserve the current 
balances against symmetric threats and defend its national 
interests,' the document notes.  It also regards 
international terrorism and narcotics and human trafficking 
as `asymmetric threats' to Turkey. 
US Creates Website to Fight Misinformation:  The US State 
Department has created a webpage for responding to 
misinformation about American policies and actions with 
regard to issues such as Iraq and Afghanistan, Turkish 
papers report.  The webpage, posted in English and Arabic, 
responds to allegations such as those claiming that the US 
military used non-conventional weapons in Iraq, and that 
former Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri had been killed by 
Americans, say reports. 
 
Pakistan's Aziz Visits Ankara:  Visiting Pakistani Prime 
Minister Shaukat Aziz said after meeting his Turkish 
counterpart Tayyip Erdogan yesterday that Pakistan is ready 
to support Turkish efforts to ease the isolation of Turkish 
Cyprus.  During meetings between the delegations, Aziz said 
Pakistan wanted to purchase electronic warfare products from 
Turkey, and proposed a joint investment for the production 
of tanks, armored personnel carriers, and assault boats. 
Erdogan voiced support for Pakistan's position regarding 
Kashmir, and urged Aziz to make further efforts to enhance 
trade ties. 
 
Ankara Expects `Gestures' From Yerevan:  Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) Spokesman Namik Tan said at a weekly press 
briefing on Thursday that an `evaluation' of Armenian 
President Robert Kocharian's letter to Prime Minister 
Erdogan is continuing.  Erdogan had earlier proposed to 
Kocharian the establishment of a joint delegation of Turkish 
and Armenian historians to examine the incidents of 1915. 
The Armenian President responded by saying that the 
commission should have an inter-governmental status. 
`Future positive statements and gestures will affect our 
assessment of the Kocharian proposal,' Tan said. 
 
TOBB Chairman to Travel to Jerusalem:  Rifat Hisarciklioglu, 
Chairman of Turkey's Union of Chambers (TOBB), will visit 
Jerusalem June 7 to attend the second round of meetings of a 
`dialogue group' made up of Turkish, Israeli, and 
Palestinian businessmen.  He first round of meetings was 
held in Ankara on April 27.  During his two-day stay in 
Jerusalem, Hisarciklioglu will discuss trilateral business 
cooperation opportunities and problems in trade between 
Turkey and Palestine. 
 
Turkish Intelligence Admits to Wiretapping:  The Turkish 
intelligence service (MIT) admitted wiretapping telephone 
conversations across Turkey for the past two months, but 
said the measure was necessary to gather information on the 
activities of the outlawed PKK.  A senior police source told 
the press that the monitoring of civilian communications in 
Turkey had been continuing for more than a decade.  The 
source noted that the wiretaps had enabled police to prevent 
a bomb attack in Antalya and to seize explosives in 
Istanbul, Izmir, and Diyarbakir.  Human rights activists, 
NGOs, and some lawyers strongly criticized the practice, 
claiming that it was illegal. 
 
Syrian Kurds Prepare for Protest Rallies Over Clergy's 
Death:  Syrian Kurds are preparing to protest against 
Damascus in mass rallies over allegations that the revered 
Kurdish clergyman, Muhammad al-Haznawi, was tortured to 
death by Syrian intelligence, "Yeni Safak" reports from 
Damascus.  Haznawi's son claimed that his father, president 
of the Islam Center in Syria's mainly Kurdish border town of 
Kamishli, had been abducted by Syrian government forces 
during a visit to Damascus in early May. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
The EU Constitution; US-Cyprus; Syria 
 
"An Impact is Most Certain" 
Gunduz Aktan commented in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(6/2): "The French `no' vote on the EU Constitution is a 
very important development that puts the future of the Union 
in doubt.  Nevertheless, EU institutions will continue to 
function, as the Nice Treaty remains in effect.  So there is 
no question of a legal or institutional vacuum in the 
European Union. . On the other hand, the defeat of the EU 
Constitution by one of the two important founding members 
certainly pushes the EU toward a crisis it has never seen 
before.  . If these developments lead the UK to decide 
against holding a referendum, it would create a final blow 
against the dream of an EU `superstate.'  If and when that 
happens, the EU will move toward the British model -- in 
other words, a full commercial integration to be matched by 
a more limited political and economic integration.  Such a 
development will be a positive factor for Turkey's 
membership in the medium term." 
 
"Non, Nee, And What Comes After That?" 
Sami Kohen opined in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" (6/2): 
"Although, the French `Non' was sufficient for the EU 
constitution to be considered invalid, the additional `Nee' 
vote in the Netherlands has strengthened the rejection.  In 
a way, the people of France and the Netherlands used this 
referendum to punish their governments for the economic and 
social problems they are facing.  Increasing nationalist and 
anti-foreign sentiments in both countries caused the people 
to reject the EU constitution.  These referenda proved that 
Europeans generally value their national identities and 
national interests more than they value integration.  The 
European Union's idea of `being European' doesn't get much 
support in an atmosphere where nationalism is on the rise. 
It seems that after the referenda, efforts should be exerted 
to protect the unity of Europe rather than to protect the 
constitution." 
 
"The US Has Done What The EU Could Not" 
Fikret Bila observed in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" 
(6/2): "The EU has long promised to take steps to end the 
isolation of the Turkish Cypriots.  These pledges include 
direct flights, direct trade, and financial assistance to 
northern Cyprus.  However, the EU failed to meet any of its 
promises, and has hesitated to start a real effort in that 
direction.  On the other hand, US Congressmen have made an 
historic visit to the Turkish side of Cyprus and achieved 
exactly what the EU has failed to accomplish.  The visiting 
US delegation made some important statements, both in 
northern Cyprus and after coming to Ankara.  They promised 
to push for additional US measures to break the isolation of 
Turkish Cypriots, including the possibility flights by 
Turkish Cypriot Airlines from Ercan directly to Washington. 
Their statements also strengthened Prime Minister Erdogan's 
hand on the eve of his trip to Washington.  The Americans' 
`Cyprus gesture' prior to the Washington visit has given the 
Turkish side a big boost in morale.  Congressman Whitfield's 
remarks were supportive enough to help smooth Prime Minister 
Erdogan's meeting in the White House." 
 
"America's Anger Over Syria Continues" 
Semih Idiz wrote in the mainstream daily "Milliyet" (6/2): 
"Florida Congressman Robert Wexler is one of the leading 
figures in the Turkish Friendship Group in the US Congress. 
I ran into him the other night at a reception given by the 
German Marshall Fund.  I asked him what the feeling was in 
Washington toward Turkey, mentioning that it seemed as if 
things were getting back to normal.  But Wexler doesn't 
really see it that way.  Although he says the disappointment 
over the March 1 vote has largely been overcome, he added 
that Turkey's friends in the United States face a `Syria 
problem.'  As I understand it, the Americans view the recent 
high-profile visits of PM Erdogan and President Sezer to 
Syria as a kind of `challenge' from Turkey.  The effects of 
this are still being felt in Washington.  When I tried to 
explain the Turkish view that Bashar Assad is trying to 
change things in a way more favorable to US interests, 
Wexler would have none of it.  He argued that the regime is 
full of holdovers from Hafez Assad's days, and that it is 
following the same hard-line policies as it did in the past. 
`As long as American soldiers are dying in Iraq,' Wexler 
told me, `ordinary Americans are not going to buy that kind 
of subtle distinction.'  To make a long story short, what 
the Americans are saying is this: `We are trying to do now 
what you did with Syria over the PKK issue.  But when you 
encourage Damascus through these kinds of visits, you are 
bringing that process to a halt.  How can you think that 
there won't be negative fallout from this?'  This is enough 
to show that US-Turkish relations still haven't quite gotten 
back on track." 
 
EDELMAN