05ANKARA4794
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, July 31-
Tue Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 20 ANKARA 004794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, July 31- 
August 15, 2005 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2. Published by Vatan on Sunday, July 31: 
 
  TITLE:  HE RAPED ME WHEN I WAS 15 
 
  BEGIN TEXT:  Dietmar Herbert Egbert Hess, who lives in 
  Germany, took A.B. to Turkey for vacation after obtaining 
  her family's permission on July 3, 2000. 
 
  After spending their vacation in Kizkalesi, Mersin and 
  touring the region, Hess rented a house in the Atakent 
  township of Silifke despite the fact that their six-month 
  visa expired.  Hess allegedly did not allow B. to return 
  and took away her passport.  He kept her with threats. 
  He raped her and she gave birth to a girl, N., who is now 
  4 years old.  A.B. could not tell anybody her story. 
 
  A.B. spoke to her family from time to time but because of 
  the threats she said that she was happy in Turkey and was 
  having a good time.  So her family did not get 
  suspicious. 
 
  This summer A.B. requested help from, Heidrun Cakmak, 
  wife of Nuh Cakmak from Sanliurfa, who were on vacation. 
  ¶B. told her that she was held against her will and that 
  she was raped.  The German woman told the story to her 
  husband and they applied to the Jandarma.  The court 
  decided to deport Hess, who was under detention rape and 
  abduction and ordered for turning over A.B. to German 
  authorities. 
 
  ¶B. testified at the police station, where she was taken 
  with her daughter.  She said that she came to Turkey for 
  vacation with Hess with her family's consent and added, 
  "After a while I wanted to go back but he prevented me. 
  He kept preventing me with threats.  He raped me and I 
  got pregnant against my will.  I had a daughter.  He even 
  forced me into prostitution.  I was talking to me family 
  on the phone but I could not tell them anything because 
  of their threats.  He was introducing me as his daughter 
  and my daughter as his grand-daughter.  I want to get rid 
  of him." 
 
  Hess denied the accusations and claimed that he did not 
  rape her.  He defended himself by saying, "I knew her 
  family.  So they let her to come to Turkey with me.  I 
  did not return but she decided to stay with me.  I never 
  raped her.  Everything happened with her consent." 
 
  Hess, B. and their daughter were deported after necessary 
  paperwork.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published by Tercuman on Monday, August 1: 
 
     TITLE:  "Hello, we caught your husband with a 
     prostitute" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Nurettin Arici, Deputy Police Chief of 
     Erzurum gave instructions for calling the home of a man 
     caught with prostitutes and informing the wife. 
 
     Arici said that he was fed up with prostitution 
     incidents. 
 
     He said, "Fellow policemen must call the home of a man 
     caught with a prostitute and tell their wives with 
     which prostitute the husband was caught.  If Erzurum 
     people do not cooperate with prostitutes and demand 
     anything from them, these women won't survive here." 
 
     Erzurum Bar Association Chief Sadullah Kara reacted to 
     this decision by saying, "This cannot happen." END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by Vatan on Monday, August 1: 
 
     TITLE:  Inform the Wives of Husbands Who Sleep with a 
     Call Girls 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  At a meeting at the Erzurum Police 
     Department with the local district muhtars, the 
     prostitution issue came on the agenda. 
 
     Suat Gunacar, Muhtar of the Gez District, said that 
     they called the police about prostitution but that 
     sufficient measures were not taken. 
 
     Nurettin Arici, Deputy Police Chief, at the meeting 
     explained that according to laws, prostitution was not 
     a crime.  He added that they capture those on whom 
     there was information and check whether or not they 
     have venereal disease. 
 
     Arici later turned to Hanifi Sambur, the Director for 
     Public Order and gave the following instructions, "From 
     now on call the families of all men that you catch. 
     Tell the wife in particular.  Take this as an 
     instruction.  Chief police officers in police centers, 
     too, must call the homes of men caught with prostitutes 
     and tell their wives that their husbands were caught 
     with a prostitute.  I'm fed up with them.  If Erzurum 
     people do not cooperate with them, if they do not make 
     a demand from them, those women won't survive here. 
     Please take care of your friends.  Let's eradicate this 
     market.  I'll call his parents.  If he claims that he 
     does not have a phone, fine, I'll find the phone from 
     the local muhtar and call his parents and wife.  I'll 
     tell her that I caught her husband with this or that 
     person.  I don't have anything else to do." 
 
     While the instruction of the Deputy Police Chief 
     created a dispute in the town, Erzurum Bar Association 
     Chief Sadullah Kara reacted by saying, "This cannot 
     happen.  It is not consistent and nobody has such a 
     luxury.  It definitely is not legal.  If citizens who 
     suffer due to this implementation apply to us, we will 
     do whatever is necessary." END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by Cumhuriyet on Tuesday, August 2: 
 
     TITLE:  Announcement on Prostitution 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  It was reported that media reports that 
     the police would call the wives of men who were caught 
     with a prostitutes in Erzurum, were not true. 
 
     Erzurum Governor Celalettin Guvenc said that there 
     won't be such implementation. 
 
     Erzurum Acting Police Chief Ahmet Demiral said that 
     they could not implement something that was not in the 
     laws.  Demiralp said that those remarks were made in 
     order to serve as deterrence. 
 
     Hanifi Sambur, the Chief Police in Charge of Public 
     Order, noted that he did not make such an announcement 
     and that his position won't allow him to make such 
     remarks.  END TEXT. 
 
¶6.  Published by Vatan on Tuesday, August 2: 
 
     TITLE:  Should One Inform or Not Inform the Wife of 
     Thos Caught with a Prostitute? 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  When a local muhtar complained about 
     prostitution, Erzurum deputy Police Chief Nurettin 
     Arici, at a public peace at the Police Club, instructed 
     the police chiefs, "From now on whenever you catch a 
     man with a prostitute, call their families and tell, in 
     particular the wives, with which prostitute the husband 
     was caught  I'm fed up with them." 
 
     When these reports were published and broadcast in the 
     media, there was a big reaction.  Immediately after 
     this, Ahmet Demiralp made an announcement and said, 
     "This is against laws.  Certainly we won't make such an 
     implementation.  The Deputy Director might have made 
     such remarks for them to serve as a deterrent." 
 
     But Deputy Police Chief Arici insisted on his earlier 
     remarks. He even claimed that informing the wives was 
     in line with CMUK.  He said, "We have to inform the 
     families of those whom we detain." 
 
     The remarks of the Bar Association Chief carried the 
     controversy to a different dimension: "Prostitution is 
     not a crime.  You cannot detain a person who does not 
     commit a crime.  So why should you inform the family?" 
     Ahmet Demiral, Erzurum Acting Police Chief: 
     We have no such implementation and I don't think that 
     we won't have from now on either.  It cannot happen. 
     If it is not a crime according to laws, we cannot show 
     it as crime.  My colleague might have made those 
     remarks for them to serve as a deterrent. 
 
     Nurettin Arici, Deputy Police Chief in Erzurum: 
     According to CMUK Law Number 5271, we need to inform 
     the families of those who are detained.  Don't we call 
     the families of those we detain?  We do.  We will call 
     the families of those who are caught with prostitutes 
     as well. 
     Sadullah Kara, Erzurum Bar Association president: 
     According to laws, prostitution is not a crime.  You 
     cannot detain a person for an act that is not a crime 
     in the TPC.  So, why would one call his family? 
     Detaining such people is legally not possible. 
 
     Attorney Fatih Volkan: 
     According to the provisions of the TPC if a man sleeps 
     with a woman in return for money, this is not a crime. 
     Similarly there is no punishment for a woman for being 
     involved in prostitution.  On the contrary, if a police 
     gives away information about the private life of a 
     person, then this constitutes a crime for misusing 
     authority and also violating the privacy of personal 
     life as mentioned in Article 134.  It foresees 
     imprisonment from 6 months to two years or payment of 
     fine. 
 
     What Does CMUK Say? 
 
     In the first paragraph of Section 4 of CMUK Law Number 
     5271, states that when a person is detained r when his 
     detention period is extended, then with the orders of 
     the Public Prosecutor, a relative of the detainee or 
     anybody that he mentions should be informed as soon as 
     possible. 
 
     But experts say that men and women in prostitution are 
     not committing a crime.  Women are treated for VD. 
     Only those who mediate to prostitution and provide a 
     place are punished with imprisonment from two to four 
     years.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  Published by Hurriyet on Tuesday, August 2: 
 
     TITLE:  Women Forced into Prostitution with Hot Oil 
     Were Saved 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Five Ukrainian women, who reportedly were 
     forced into prostitution by pouring hot oil on them and 
     by beating, were saved by a Jandarma operation in 
     Antalya.  The Ukrainian women were rejoiced when they 
     saw the Jandarma. 
 
     A woman, who called the Hotline 157 on human 
     trafficking, said that they were forced into 
     prostitution and that they were kept in the dark in a 
     shelter.  She gave the address. 
 
     Since the house was located outside the police district 
     and in the Guzelyurt district of Calkaya area, the 
     information was passed over to the Antalya Jandarma 
     Regiment Command. 
 
     The Jandarma captured in the 3-storey house O.S. (42), 
     who already has a criminal record, and his son M.S. 
     (19). 
 
     When the Jandarma heard voices coming from underground 
     in the garden, they noticed that voices were coming 
     from a place covered with pebble stones.  The Jandarma 
     cleared the pebbles and discovered a shelter. 
 
     In the four square meters shelter they found five 
     Ukrainian women sleeping in one bed.  When the women 
     saw the Jandarma, they were rejoiced. 
     There was no lighting in the shelter.  There was only a 
     fan.  There was no washroom or shower either.  The 
     women said that they were forced to work in the 
     luxurious rooms of the 3-storey house in the evenings 
     and later they were put back in the shelter. 
 
     The Ukrainian women said that they were served only 
     breakfast.  Y.M. (20), N.P. (20), O.S. (35), K.A. (17) 
     and N.T. (27) said that they were brought to Antalya 
     with an offer of a job.  They have been forced into 
     prostitution for ten months. 
 
     Y.M. said that their passports were taken away from 
     them at the airport.  She went on, "We were locked up 
     in the shelter.  When we refused to be involved in 
     prostitution, we were beaten.  The father and son 
     poured hot oil on my legs and genitals.  They tortured 
     me on the face.  Marks of torture still are visible." 
     She showed her legs. 
 
     N.T. said that O.S. married to her on paper and she 
     began to use the name "Hulya Seker."  She reportedly 
     was forced into prostitution every night. 
 
     O.S. and his son M.S. were detained and sent to the 
     Judicial Hall since they were accused of being 
     "involved in human trafficking," "forcing women into 
     prostitution" and "mediating for prostitution." 
 
     The Ukrainian women said that they would like to return 
     home.  After taking their testimony, authorities sent 
     them to the Judicial Hall.  Later they were sent to the 
     Foreigners' Police to be sent to their country.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶9.  Published in Milliyet on Tuesday, August 2nd.  This is 
the third part of columnist Can Dundar's series on the Black 
Sea region. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The "Natasha epidemic" lasted for ten 
     years and led to the separation of hundreds of 
     families, women who are trying to look like Natashas 
     and establishment of hundreds of beauty salons. 
 
     Dundar went to the Comlekci district, the first place 
     these women came after the breakup of the Soviet Union. 
     When the Sarp border gate opened in 1989, initially 15 
     people came and after a decade, this figure has reached 
     280,000. 
 
     He noted that while people were coming initially for 
     suitcase trade, later well-educated and pretty but poor 
     women were brought by human traffickers in mass and put 
     in the hotels in the Comlekci District. 
 
     Men from villages were selling their tractors and 
     coming to these hotels and a "hotel Mafia" took over 
     the operation. 
 
     After ten years the police said "Enough," and cleaned 
     up the hotels.  In 2004 to 2005, 4000 women were 
     deported for prostitution and Natashas left the town. 
 
     Dundar wrote that today Comlekci looked like a town in 
     ruins after a hurricane.  On both sides of the street 
     there are many hotels lined up.  Small businessmen are 
     not joyful.  There are a few Georgian and Azeri women 
     in the street. 
 
     He noted that Natashas, who led to a tremor in the 
     social life of Trabzon for ten years, have moved 
     further South, leaving behind a town that was 
     psychologically, socially and sexually shattered. 
 
     Dundar referred to a "damage report for the region 
     where divorces increased after the arrival of foreign 
     women: 
     - In 2003 in Eastern Black Sea region 1730 couples 
     divorced. 
     - Divorces in Trabzon doubled in the last four years. 
     - In Gumushane in 1999, 25 couples got divorced.  In 
     2003 this figure reached 1005.  In other words, 
     divorces increased 40 percent. 
 
     Dundar also referred to "false" marriages for obtaining 
     work permits for foreign women. 
     He stated that today Trabzon is dressing its wounds. 
     "The Natashas have left but while leaving they changed 
     the Black Sea men and women," Dundar wrote. 
     He quoted a woman attorney in Trabzon as saying that 
     after the Natasha epidemic, there has been less rape 
     cases and that women had an easier time walking in the 
     street.  She said, "The Black Sea men have changed. 
     They learned to take a shower everyday and use 
     fragrance.  They also learned how to drink and dance 
     properly with women.  These were things that he was not 
     doing with his own wife....  Many women bore (the 
     burden) of having adulterous husbands.  The idol for 
     most was Hulya Avsar.  They were saying, 'Even if a 
     successful woman such as Avsar bears this, is it worth 
     for me to end the marriage?'" 
 
     Later the Black Sea women began to look for ways for 
     being prettier.  You can see dozens of beauty salons on 
     the main streets of Trabzon. 
 
     One of them is "Formed" that opened a year ago.  Dr. 
     Tartan Kalaycioglu said that they received 420 clients 
     in one year.  He added, "The Black Sea men in the past 
     did not come to such places.  In the last decade they, 
     too, became more concerned about their looks.  In the 
     past it was mostly women who wanted to get rid of 
     excessive hair.  Now the number of men between 25-40 
     has increased...." 
 
     What is more interesting was the fact that this was 
     valid in the rural areas as well.  A beauty salon 
     opened last month in Besikduzu sub-province. 
 
     Dundar wrote that some real love stories, too, took 
     place and there were men who made happy marriages with 
     foreign brides.  These couples now were raising a brand- 
     new mix-race Black Sea generation. 
     -- 
 
     Dundar interviewed attorney Sibel Suicmez.  Full 
     translation follows: 
 
     - What was the cost of Natashas to the Black Sea 
     region? 
     - A four dimensional sociological phenomenon took place 
     for man, both women and the children.  This is another 
     type of Chernobyl.  Women went through a psychological 
     trauma.  They still use pills but not speak (out). 
     Most of them had their husbands working in other 
     places.  In other words, they were not together anyway. 
     There was a tacit acceptance.  But for the first time 
     they had to face the reality of a second woman.  Some 
     men brought foreign woman to their home and took her to 
     their bed.  Their wife and children had to listen to 
     them in the room next door.  What could she do?  Many 
     of them accepted. 
 
     - Were there some who went to the police? 
     - They come to ask "What can I do?"  She cannot 
     criticize the man.  Some of them chose the wrong target 
     and entered a struggle against these women.  Some 
     others thought that they had deficiencies and tried to 
     look like the foreign women.  At one point all women in 
     Trabzon turned blond.  Women, who were working all day 
     in the field, put fragrance on and began to serve their 
     husbands.  Everybody was focused on the supply part of 
     the incident.  Those who were demanding, in other 
     words, the men, got away with it.  In fact the moral 
     behavior of men should have been discussed.  But men 
     might have a different story to tell. 
 
     - Children? 
     - An unhealthy new generation came out.  The kids of 
     the separated couples were there in the middle.  With 
     the arrival of foreigners, the domestic prostitution, 
     too, was triggered.  There were reports that some girls 
     from the universities were serving as "escorts." 
     Police had records on kids as young as nine for 
     prostitution. 
     Dundar also interviewed Ibrahim Azcan, Trabzon Deputy 
     Police Chief.  Full translation follows: 
 
     Ibrahim Azcan, the Deputy Police Chief in Trabzon, is 
     the most sympathetic policeman that I've seen in recent 
     years.  He regards the issue not like a policeman but 
     as a sociologist.  He has written two books.  Soon his 
     book on Natashas will be published.  He wrote this book 
     after talking to foreign women and also adding his own 
     observations. 
 
     - The Natasha business seems to have ended in the Black 
     Sea region.  How did this happen? 
     - Yes, it began to melt down in 1990s.  Trabzon is a 
     port town.  It is a gateway to Russia.  I know that at 
     one point five ships were taking off each week and 
     cafes were full of women.  Many new hotels opened in 
     1990s.  Now their numbers are less.  But this was not 
     due to the police.  The society got used to it and came 
     to a saturation point and it (the prostitution 
     business) began to come down. 
 
     - What has remained? 
     - The social damage was grave.  The number of divorces 
     was high.  Illegitimate children were born.  But on the 
     other hand, the man and woman realized the value of 
     their own spouse.  There was a social transformation. 
     In that regard, there was both a progress and 
     regression. 
 
     - It is claimed that the number of child molesting and 
     rape cases dropped after Natashas... 
     - I do not agree.  If that were the case, such things 
     would never take place in Russia.  But Russia is one of 
     the countries that experience a rough form of child 
     exploitation.  The decrease in such incidents might be 
     because of an increase in the education level. 
 
     - Did the police turned a blind-eye to what was 
     happening initially? 
     - According to laws, it is not a crime if a man enters 
     a sexual intercourse with a woman in return for money. 
     I do not have the right to go to the hotel and take 
     them out.  But if there is an organized prostitution as 
     part of human trafficking, or if the woman does not 
     have a visa or if she is sick, then we have the right 
     to interfere.  We take them and deport but human 
     traffickers change the name of those women and send 
     them back with new passports. 
 
     - What is the amount of money involved? 
     - There has been a serious money flow.  There were 
     clients coming from Erzurum and Agri.  One of the 
     Natashas that I talked to told me that she was taking 
     three to five clients each day.  She was sending back 
     $2000 each month to her country.  In a province where 
     there are 1000 Natashas working, at least $2 million 
     must have been sent abroad each month. 
 
     - What type of people were the Natashas that you 
     interviewed? 
     - Most of them were well-cultured women.  But they all 
     had problems in their lives.  They looked for economic 
     welfare and liberation.  They were involved in 
     prostitution out of necessity.  They had serious 
     cultural differences with the men they used to be. 
     Some of them were very stubborn.  There were some who 
     did not let the man approach them without making the 
     man perform religious prayers first. 
 
     - What about the Black Sea women? 
     - She was influenced both positively and negatively. 
     Many of them stayed with their men but the number of 
     divorces increased a lot as well.  We do not yet know 
     the cost.  The university must hold a study. 
 
     - What is the solution? 
     - This is an issue of demand and supply. As long as 
     there is the demand, it is hard (to solve) it.  It 
     cannot be solved (solely) through law-enforcement 
     measures. 
 
     - What should be done for Natashas? 
     - Their bosses tell these women, "We are cooperating 
     with the police and if you tip off the police, it will 
     be your end."  Women are being worked as if they are 
     slaves.  When we capture one, we put them in the 
     detention center.  But they need psychological support 
     and security.  We need to help socially, economically 
     and also from a humanitarian aspect these women who are 
     victims of human trafficking.  Women shelters which are 
     administered not by the state but by NGOs must be 
     established where women from similar nationality work. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶10.  Published by Milliyet on Wednesday, August 3: 
     TITLE:  Prostitution Torture with Hot Oil 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Jandarma saved four Ukrainian women, 
     who reportedly were forced into prostitution by being 
     subject to torture, following a call to the 157 Hot 
     Line in Antalya. 
 
     According to information from the Antalya Provincial 
     Jandarma Command, Jandarma Teams from Smuggling and 
     Organized Crimes Unit, upon a call they received, 
     searched a 3-storey house encircled with high walls and 
     barbed wire in Guzelyurt district.  The house was owned 
     by O.S., who has a criminal record for "mediating for 
     prostitution" and "kidnapping girls." 
 
     The team in the garden noticed that the base of a hut 
     made of straw in the garden was covered with pebbles. 
     When they removed the pebble and a blanket, they 
     noticed an iron lid.  When they opened it, they found 
     an underground room and Y.M. (20), N.P. (20), O.A. (37) 
     and K.A. 
 
     In this room the Jandarma found a vent and a bed made 
     of blankets and comforters. 
 
     O.S. (45), who is the owner of the house, and his son 
     M.S. (18) were detained and the investigation was 
     further expanded. 
 
     They discovered that the four women came to Antalya ten 
     months ago to work.  O.S. took away their passports and 
     with threats and beating had forced them into 
     prostitution. 
 
     Authorities said that these women were subject to 
     inhumane treatment, including pouring hot oil on them. 
     They were kept in that secret room for two months.  The 
     women will be sent back to their country whenever they 
     want. 
 
     Y.M.said that their passports were taken away at the 
     airport. She said, "We were locked up in the shelter. 
     When we refused to be involved in prostitution, we were 
     beaten.  The father and son poured hot oil on my legs 
     and genitals.  They tortured me on the face.  I carry 
     the signs of torture." 
 
     N.T. claimed that they were forced into prostitution 
     every night. 
 
     The father and son were detained for getting their 
     testimony.  Later they were sent to a judge.  END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  Published by Tercuman on Wednesday, August 3: 
 
     TITLE:  Prostitution Torture 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Four foreign women, brought to Antalya and 
     forced into prostitution ten months ago, were saved by 
     a Jandarma operation. 
 
     Osman Seker and his son Mehmet Seker kept the four 
     women with a method used by Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein 
     when he was hiding from U.S. troops. 
 
     After somebody called the 157 Hot Line, the Jandarma 
     raided a house in the Calkaya districts Guzelyurt 
     region.  When the Jandarma noticed in the garden of the 
     3-storey house a den whose lid is covered with sand, 
     they opened it and found four foreign women. 
     Four women of Russian nationality whose ages are 
     between 17 to 37, began to cheer with happiness when 
     they saw the Jandarma who saved them. 
     Osman Seker, who is known as "Hazir Osman" and his son 
     Mehmet, who were at the house during the raid, were 
     detained. 
 
     The women filed a complaint against the suspects and 
     said, "They told us that there were jobs in Turkey but 
     we were forced into prostitution in Antalya.  When we 
     objected, they poured hot oil on our body.  They beat 
     us and inflicted torture.  They took away our passports 
     to prevent us from fleeing.  We requested our clients 
     to help us.  We want to go back home."  END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  Published by Cumhuriyet on Wednesday, August 3: 
 
     TITLE: Forced into Prostitution with Hot Oil 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Jandarma teams raided a house upon a call 
     to the 157 Hot Line and saved four Ukrainian women who 
     were tortured by pouring hot oil on them and forced 
     into prostitution for months in Antalya. 
 
     These women were found in the basement of a 3-storey 
     house of O.S. (48) who has a criminal record for 
     kidnapping girls.  O.S. and his son M.S. (18) were 
     detained. 
 
     These women were locked up in the basement for two 
     months and were forced into prostitution.  END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  Published by Hurriyet on Wednesday, August 3: 
 
     TITLE:  Five Sex Slaves in a Shelter of 4 Square Meters 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A woman who called the 157 Hot Line in 
     Antalya and gave an address in the Calkaya District 
     claiming that they were forced into prostitution and 
     kept in a shelter. 
 
     The Jandarma carried out an operation and captured 
     Osman Seker (42) and his son Mehmet (19). 
 
     The Jandarma noticed that voices were coming from the 
     basement of a hut in the garden. 
 
     After clearing the pebble stone, the Jandarma noticed a 
     shelter.  They used a ladder to go down and saw five 
     Ukrainian women in a 4 square meter shelter.  The women 
     sheered when they saw the Jandarma. 
 
     Y.M. (20), N.P. (20), O.A. (35), N.T. (27) and K.A.(17) 
     said that they were brought to Antalya with promises of 
     employment but forced into prostitution for ten months. 
 
     Y.M. said that their passports were taken away and 
     added, "We were locked up in the shelter.  We were 
     beaten when we refused to be involved in prostitution. 
     The father and son poured hot oil on my legs and 
     genitals.  They inflicted torture on my face."  She 
     showed her legs. 
 
     The Ukrainian women were turned over to the police for 
     deportation.  END TEXT. 
 
¶14.  Carried by Radikal on Wednesday, August 3: 
 
     TITLE:  Horror House in Antalya: Nightmare Ended With a 
     Call to 157 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Five women who were brought to Antalya 
     with a job offer were locked up in a 4 square meter 
     shelter underground.  When the women resisted to forced 
     prostitution, they were subject to terrible torture. 
 
     A call to the 157 Hot Line disclosed a savagery in 
     Antalya.  A woman called the hot line and said that 
     they were forced into prostitution.  She gave the 
     address of the house in the Cankaya District of the 
     Guzelyurt region. 
     Upon this call the Antalya Jandarma Regiment Command 
     teams yesterday carried out an operation on a 3-storey 
     house where Osman Seker (42) who has a criminal record 
     for mediating for prostitution and for human 
     trafficking, and his son Murat (19) live. 
 
     The father and son were detained when jandarma heard 
     voices coming from the basement of a hut in the garden. 
     They removed the blanket covered with pebble stone and 
     noticed a shelter.  With a ladder they went down the 
     shelter and found Ukrainian Y.M. (20), N.P. (20), O.S. 
     (35), K.A. (17) and N.T. (27). 
 
     There was no washroom in the shelter and air 
     circulation was carried out with a single vent.  The 
     women said that in the evenings they were taken to the 
     luxurious rooms of the house and forced into 
     prostitution.  After their jobs were over, these women 
     were put back in the shelter.  They said that they were 
     only given breakfast.  They noted that they were 
     brought to Antalya with promises of job offers but 
     forced into prostitution for ten months. 
 
     Y.M. said that their passport was taken away from them 
     at the airport and went on, "We were locked up in the 
     shelter.  We were beaten when we did not want to be 
     involved in prostitution.  The father and son poured 
     hot oil on my legs and genitals.  They tortured me on 
     the face.  Signs of torture are still on me." 
 
     N.T. said that Osman Seker married to her on paper and 
     she began to use the name Hulya Seker.  She said, 
     "Every night I was forced into prostitution." 
 
     Osman Seker and his son Murat, after being detained, 
     testified and were sent to the prosecutor for having 
     committed the crimes of making human trafficking, 
     forcing people into prostitution and mediating for 
     prostitution. 
 
     The Ukrainian women to testified and were sent to the 
     judicial hall.  They were given to the Antalya Police 
     Foreigners Department for deportation.  END TEXT. 
 
¶15.  Also carried by Radikal on Wednesday, August 3: 
 
     TITLE:  Six Women Rejoiced in 45 Days 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The 157 Hot Line, a project by IOM 
     attached to the UN, which demonstrated the scary scope 
     of women trafficking in Turkey, became operational on 
     May 23, 2005. 
 
     According to data by IOM, 187 people called the hot 
     line with genuine reasons in 45 days and six victims 
     were saved. 
 
     The IOM campaign aims at saving and protecting 
     potential human trafficking victims coming to Turkey 
     from neighboring countries, including Moldova and the 
     Ukraine. 
 
     Many people call the 157 Hot Line but many call out of 
     curiosity. 
 
     From May 23 to July 6, 2005, 187 genuine calls came to 
     the hot line and 69 of them were giving tips, including 
     49 from neighbors and 20 by victims themselves.  When 
     authorities evaluated the calls, six victims were saved 
     from the hands of smugglers.  END TEXT. 
 
¶16.  The following column by Oral Calislar appeared in 
"Cumhuriyet" on Wednesday, August 3: 
 
     TITLE:  Calling the Wife of a Man Caught with a 
     Prostitute 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  When the newspapers began to carry reports 
     that prostitution was spreading in Erzurum, local 
     administrators were mobilized.  Nurettin Arici, Deputy 
     Police Chief of Erzurum, the other day at the Police 
     Club said that they would inform the wives of men 
     caught with a prostitute.  This report got prominent 
     coverage in our paper. 
 
     This was what the Deputy Police chief said but the 
     Erzurum Governor and Police Chief did not think alike. 
     Governor Celalettin Guvenc noted that the police was 
     working hard to fight against prostitution in the city 
     and that this fight would be carried out within the 
     boundaries of law.  The Governor concluded his remarks 
     by saying, "My colleagues made such an announcement as 
     a solution but there won't be any such implementation." 
 
     After the report was covered in the media, I thought 
     about it:  What kind of a situation would be created if 
     the wives of men caught with prostitutes were informed? 
     Certainly, there should first be a common understanding 
     of what prostitution is.  According to the general 
     belief in Turkey, prostitution means a married man 
     having sex with a woman in return for money.  Well, can 
     a married woman be with a man in return for money?  I 
     don't think that this was ever imagined. 
 
     Is it prostitution if a married man goes to a brothel? 
     A brothel is a legal place and one does not ask whether 
     or not clients are married.  Then it may not be called 
     prostitution.  The type of prostitution in Erzurum that 
     the police was talking about, looks as though it was 
     unlicensed sexual contact. 
 
     In the summer supplements and social pages of the 
     newspapers all reports talk about love.  It is hard to 
     track down who is with whose wife or husband.    Nobody 
     thinks whether those (relationships) would be 
     considered prostitution.  In a way such things are 
     considered normal.  Nobody thinks that they commit a 
     prostitution crime and there should be legal action 
     against them.  Maybe there are those who think that 
     there should be legal action but since such a thing 
     would lead to a scandal, they only talk about it. 
 
     Activities of the high society and stars at summer 
     resorts are considered normal but the same thing is not 
     considered normal in Erzurum.  But we are aware that 
     there are situations that are considered normal even in 
     Anatolian towns, such as Erzurum:  men can be involved 
     with a woman aside from their wives.  This is what 
     every man should do.  Both women and men are aware of 
     this (fact). 
 
     Erzurum is known to be a conservative town.  In recent 
     years people refer to a booming prostitution in other 
     conservative towns, such as Erzurum, as well.  I wonder 
     why?  It is not possible to think that women approve of 
     their husbands' relations with other women.  But in our 
     culture, in which men have superiority, polygamy 
     continues.  Women unwillingly accept this situation. 
 
     Women do not like the idea of men to be with other 
     women in return for money.  But still they do not raise 
     their voice much by saying that men would do such 
     things. 
 
     The real problem will arise if the wife of a man caught 
     with another woman is informed.  What would women do in 
     such a situation?  Since they won't say, "I'm glad that 
     you did," they should show a reaction.  How many women 
     can challenge or show a reaction to a husband who holds 
     the purse strings and in a culture that holds men 
     superior?  The reaction that she would show, may get 
     her in further trouble. 
 
     A man may beat his wife or throw her from the house if 
     the wife nags a lot over such an issue or makes a fuss. 
 
     Since the Erzurum Governor and the Police Chief were 
     aware of this culture in our country, they gave up 
     implementing (the method suggested by the deputy Police 
     chief).  What type of an image would husbands captured 
     with another women and their wives coming to police 
     station portray?  Eventually women would be suffering 
     (more) for such incidents because it is this culture 
     that cherishes supremacy of men that is behind 
     prostitution as well?  Is it not the man who thinks 
     that he has the right to be with more than one woman? 
 
     I believe the meaning of prostitution differ a lot from 
     country to country, city to city and culture to 
     culture.  Maybe it needs to be re-defined.  END TEXT. 
 
¶17.  Published by Vatan on Saturday, August 6: 
 
     TITLE:  Blow to Prostitution Mafia 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Anjelika A., a Turkmenistan citizen, was 
     caught in the Fatih District of Istanbul without a 
     passport.  She said that she was lured into Turkey by 
     promises of becoming a hair dresser but those people 
     who brought her forced her into prostitution.  Upon 
     this testimony the policy carried out an operation. 
 
     The Police Foreigners Department teams raided some 
     addresses in Fatih and detained five people, including 
     two women. 
 
     It was discovered that the ring leader was Cabbar E. 
     and that Anna C., who was a Moldavian and adopted 
     Turkish citizenship was bringing women from different 
     countries to Turkey. 
 
     In searches police rescued eight more women from 
     Russia, Kyrgysiztan, Turkmenistan and Moldova. 
 
     Selim U., Liliya K., Anna C., Aziz K. and Cabbar E., 
     were sent to the prosecutor with the accusation of 
     being involved in human trafficking, forming a gang for 
     committing a crime and forcing women into prostitution. 
     While Selim U., and Liliya K. were set free to be tried 
     on release, the others were arrested and put in jail. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶18.  Reported by Sabah on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  They Entered Happy But Came Out Sad 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Hair-rising results were obtained at the 
     health check ups of 120 women captured during Jandarma 
     Regiment Command operations on 32 hotels, pensions, 
     houses in five sub-provinces in Istanbul. 
 
     It was discovered that six of the women were carrying 
     HIV virus and 39 women had venereal disease. 
 
     Upon these operations carried out  simultaneously 
     against the international prostitution network in 
     Silivri, Beylikduzu, Buyukcekmece, Eesenyurt and 
     Kumburgaz, the men involved with these women were 
     surveyed.  The Jandarma appealed to the men who were 
     with women from Russia, Moldavia and Ukraine and asked 
     them to go to a hospital as soon as possible. 
 
     The medical check up was carried out at the Cankurtaran 
     Skin and Venereal Diseases Hospital and 70 of the 120 
     women already were deported.  END TEXT. 
 
¶19.  Published by Tercuman on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Spreading Disease 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Istanbul Provincial Jandarma Regiment 
     Command carried out simultaneous operations against an 
     international prostitution network in Silivri, 
     Beylikduzu, Buyukcekmece, Esenyurt, Kumburgaz and 
     Eminonu. 
 
     The 32 hotels, pensions and houses were raided by the 
     Jandarma teams and 120 women, who were determined to be 
     involved in prostitution, from Russia, Moldavia and 
     Ukraine were detained. 
 
     In their medical check up, it was seen that six of 
     these women had HIV virus, 26 had gonorrhea, seven had 
     fungus and other microbiotic infections. 
     The Jandarma teams tried to figure out with how many 
     men these women slept and appealed to men who were with 
     these women to go to a hospital as soon as possible. 
     The operations will continue and 70 of the women were 
     deported. END TEXT. 
 
¶20.  Published by Cumhuriyet on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Six Foreign Women HIV Positive 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  It was determined that six of the 68 
     foreign women, who were detained during a crackdown on 
     prostitution in Buyukcekmece and Silivri, were HIV 
     positive. 
     Six of these women, including four Moldavians and two 
     Russians, had HIV, while 31 women had venereal disease. 
 
     It was learned that the 68 women who were processed at 
     the Foreigners' Department will be deported. 
 
     Meanwhile, five people were detained in a raid on a 
     house in Fatih for forcing seven women into 
     prostitution.  Three of them were arrested.  END TEXT. 
 
¶21.  Published by Milliyet on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Six HIV Positive in a Prostitution Operation 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Six of the 68 foreign women detained for 
     prostitution during operations in Buyukcekmece and 
     Silivri were HIV positive. 
 
     The 68 women from Russia, Ukraine, Turkmenistan, 
     Kyrgyzstan and Moldavian were taken for a medical check 
     up and it was determined that four Moldavians and two 
     Russian, in other words six women were HIV positive and 
     31 women had venereal disease.  The 68 women will be 
     deported.  END TEXT. 
 
¶22.  Reported by Vatan on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Prostitution Operations in Full Speed 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Sixty-eight women from Russia, Ukraine, 
     Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan and Moldavia were captured 
     during an operation in Buyukcekmece and Silivri in 
     Istanbul were sent to a venereal disease hospital. 
 
     It was seen that six women, including four Moldavians 
     and two Russians, were HIV positive, while 31 of them 
     had venereal disease.  Those who had sexual contact 
     with these women were asked to report to a hospital. 
 
     Meanwhile, M.S., N.S., and S.K. were detained in 
     Silifke, Mersin for taking away the passports of 
     foreign women and forcing them into prostitution. 
 
     M.S. was arrested and the other two were set free 
     pending trial.  END TEXT. 
 
¶23.  Published by Aksam on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Six of them Are HIV Positive 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Sixty-eight women from Russia, Moldova, 
     Ukraine, Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan, who were detained 
     for prostitution during operations in Buyukcekmece and 
     Silivri, were sent to a venereal disease hospital after 
     necessary (paper) work. 
 
     It was discovered that six of the women were HIV 
     positive.  Four of them were from Moldova and two from 
     Russia.  The police said that 31 women had venereal 
     disease and asked men who had sexual contact with these 
     women to report to the closest hospital and take 
     necessary tests. 
 
     The women were taken to the foreigners department for 
     deportation.  END TEXT. 
 
¶24.  Published by Turkish Daily News on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  IOM commends progress in counter human- 
     trafficking increased prosecution 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey has made significant progress in 
     efforts to stop human trafficking over the past couple 
     of years but the prosecution of traffickers still needs 
     to be increased as the country takes steps in the 
     direction of achieving a "model success" in dealing 
     with one of the worst forms of crime, according to the 
     International Organization for Migration (IOM). 
 
     "We must be able to set an example to traffickers in 
     order for them to understand that Turkey does not 
     condone this form of crime," said Marielle Sander- 
     Lindstrom, chief of mission of the IOM's Turkey office. 
 
     The revised Turkish Penal Code (TCK), which came into 
     force on June1, includes an article, Article 80 that 
     calls for prison terms of eight to 12 years for 
     traffickers, but prosecutors have mostly tended to use 
     other articles that regulate prostitution, sticking to 
     an old habit that was sanctioned under the old TCK. 
 
     Sander-Lindstrom, in an interview with the Turkish 
     Daily News, said the degree of familiarity with Article 
     80 among judges and prosecutors should increase. 
 
     "These [the article's provisions] were placed into 
     Turkish law specifically for Turkey to be able to fight 
     human trafficking, which is an international crime," 
     she said.  "Turkey is doing its part and prosecutors 
     should support Turkey in this by applying the correct 
     articles." 
 
     Turkey, a destination country for increasingly many 
     women-mostly from the former Soviet republics-who have 
     been trafficked primarily for sexual exploitation, 
     introduced an action plan and launched a national task 
     force two years ago to cope with this issue, which is 
     widely seen as a modern-day form of slavery.  The 
     efforts were in response to a surge over the past few 
     years in the number of persons trafficked into Turkey, 
     mostly in parallel to improving living standards and 
     job opportunities here. 
 
     The improving standards ensuing from European Union 
     membership prospects presents a situation heavily 
     exploited by human traffickers, who sometimes lure 
     young women with promises of regular employment but 
     which ultimately results in forced prostitution, debt 
     and various forms of abuse including forced 
     confinement, control of personal documents such as 
     passports and threats.  In 2004, authorities identified 
     266 victims of human trafficking across Turkey but 
     officials say this is just the "tip of the iceberg." 
     Thus far this year, the IOM has provided assistance to 
     some 117 victims of trafficking, mostly from the former 
     Soviet republics, identified throughout several 
     provinces of Turkey. 
 
     The Geneva-based IOM, which Turkey joined in 2004, is a 
     major ally of the Turkish government in counter- 
     trafficking efforts. 
 
     In June, the IOM, in close coordination with the 
     Turkish government, launched the first major multi- 
     country prevention campaign to combat human trafficking 
     across Turkey and main source countries in Eastern 
     Europe and the former Soviet countries. 
 
     The $700,000 campaign, funded by the U.S. government, 
     is meant to raise awareness, step up legal training for 
     law enforcement and provide medical and other 
     assistance to the victims of human trafficking.  The 
     IOM is also promoting Turkey's 157 hotline for the 
     rescue of trafficked individuals both in Turkey and 
     three main source countries of the victims, namely 
     Ukraine, Romania and Moldova. 
 
     Travelers from source countries to Turkey are also 
     warned of the dangers of trafficking through inserts 
     put into their passports at ports of entry into Turkey, 
     provided by Turkish embassies in the countries 
     concerned. 
 
     Miracle of 157: 
 
     The fruits of the counter-trafficking efforts are not 
     difficult to see.  Last week, Turkish police rescued 
     five Ukrainian women who were tortured with boiling oil 
     and imprisoned in a basement by human traffickers in 
     the southern province of Antalya after they contacted 
     the 157 hotline and requested help. 
 
     Sander-Lindstrom said a total of 17 victims of human 
     trafficking, including the five Ukrainians, have been 
     rescued after calls to the 157 hotline over the past 
     two months, since the three-digit line was launched. 
     The rescued victims include nine Ukrainians, five 
     Moldovans and one Romanian as well as two Turks.  Eight 
     others, who are yet to be described as victims although 
     they have been identified as such because they still 
     await payment from people they say employed them, 
     remain as suspected trafficking victims. 
 
     In addition to rescue operations and a referral system 
     where the 157 hotline system works with police and the 
     gendarmerie to coordinate the rescue of the victims, 
     authorities have also taken steps to provide shelter 
     for the rescued victims, with the preparations in their 
     final stage to open a shelter in Ankara in addition to 
     a 12-person capacity shelter already open in Istanbul. 
     The IOM is planning to work with bar associations to 
     provide free legal assistance to the victims. 
 
     "Turkey has for many years been the missing link in 
     this region and it has now moved to fill this gap," 
     said Sander-Lindstrom.  "What remains is to expand the 
     network of NGOs [nongovernmental organizations] 
     providing assistance in Turkey, and we also need to 
     work with judges and prosecutors to put the 
     perpetrators behind bars." 
 
     Turkish NGOs, which the IOM says could be extremely 
     helpful in providing shelter and assistance that the 
     victims would need, either know nothing about the human 
     trafficking problem or are unwilling to address it 
     because they think it is about prostitution, according 
     to Sander-Lindstrom.  END TEXT. 
 
 
¶25.  Published by Turkish Daily News on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Anti-trafficking drive on course.  Turkey has 
     come a long way in a short period of time in the fight 
     against human trafficking, but prosecution of 
     perpetrators needs to be increased, as the only way to 
     stop trafficking is to hurt traffickers, says the IOM. 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey has taken giant strides to combat 
     human trafficking over the past couple of years, 
     raising public awareness and introducing legal 
     provisions to punish traffickers, but more perpetrators 
     need to be prosecuted vigorously for Turkey to send a 
     clear message that it does not condone this extreme 
     form of international crime, the chief official of the 
     International Office for Migration (IOM) said. 
 
     "The law is there, but it is not properly applied," 
     said Marielle Sander-Lindstrom, chief of the mission of 
     IOM's Turkey office, in an interview with the Turkish 
     Daily News.  "Turkey can be very strong if the 
     authorities concerned just use the tools that they 
     already have." 
 
     The new Turkish Penal Code (TCK) contains an article 
     that stipulates eight to 12-year prison terms for 
     traffickers, but prosecutors still prefer to use other 
     articles regulating prostitution, she said. 
 
     IOM's efforts in Turkey, which are closely coordinated 
     with the Turkish government, are bearing fruit, with 
     the police having rescued a total of 17 victims of 
     trafficking following calls made to the 157 hotline-a 
     national, toll-free telephone help line that has been 
     operational for two months.  In a sign of growing 
     public awareness on the issue, an overwhelming majority 
     of calls have been from men who are clients of the 
     trafficked women forced into prostitution.  END TEXT. 
 
¶26.  Published by Turkish Daily News on Sunday, August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Raising awareness, changing perceptions 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey's 157 hotlines for the rescue of 
     victims of human trafficking has received the majority 
     of calls since its launch two months ago from men, the 
     bulk of whom were clients of those trafficked and 
     forced into prostitution, data from the Geneva-based 
     International Organization for Migrants (IOM) shows. 
     The hotline, which operations 24 hours a day and seven 
     days a week, has received a total of 130 calls over the 
     past two months requesting emancipation from the 
     unfortunate circumstances the callers find themselves 
     in.  The IOM data reveals that 95 calls were from 
     clients and others, with only 35 coming from the 
     perceived victims themselves. 
 
     The figures highlight a gradual shift in the way women, 
     mostly from the former Soviet republics, are trafficked 
     for purposes of sexual exploitation in the Turkish 
     Republic, according to Marielle Sander-Lindstrom, chief 
     of mission of IOM's Turkey office. 
 
     "Usually, the clients visit these women and they tend 
     to think the women are regular prostitutes and that 
     they want to do it," she told the Turkish Daily News in 
     an interview.  "But as they get to know the women, they 
     realize that they are trapped and enslaved and want to 
     rescue them." 
 
     Women from the former Soviet republics have long been 
     viewed as willing workers in the prostitution sector in 
     Turkey and all of them were lumped together as 
     "Natashas" in the eyes of the Turkish public, who has 
     paid little attention to the differences between 
     willing labor and trafficked persons forced into 
     prostitution through ill-treatment and even torture. 
 
     The IOM and the Turkish government are aiming to raise 
     public awareness with a view to giving the public an 
     accurate picture of the reality, which authorities 
     think would be an asset in counter-trafficking efforts. 
 
     "That's why there is such a need for awareness at local 
     community level because people are very quick to judge. 
     But once they understand the whole story they become 
     sympathetic," Sander-Lindstrom said. 
 
     She said a change in the way the Turkish media 
     approaches the issue by focusing not at the 
     prostitution aspect but on the element of organized 
     crime behind the issue and the victims was also very 
     positive.  END TEXT. 
 
¶27.  Reported by (Internet) Athens News agency on Sunday, 
August 7: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkish Driver Arrested in Greece for 
     Transporting Three Illegal Immigrants 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSCRIBED TEXT:  A Turkish car driver was 
     arrested on Sunday [7 Aug] by border guards in Lavara, 
     Didymotiho, in northern Greece for illegally 
     transporting three fellow-countrymen illegal immigrants 
     into the country. 
 
     The Turkish trafficker had entered Greece legally from 
     the border post Kypon, Evros and later picked up the 
     illegal immigrants, with the purpose, for pay, to 
     advance them to the interior of the country. 
 
     All the arrested will appear before the Orestiada 
     public prosecutor.  END TEXT. 
 
¶28.  Published by Chisinau Infotag on Monday, August 8: 
     TITLE:  Moldovan NGO Publishes Human-Trafficking 
     Research 
 
     BEGIN FBIS-TRANSLATED TEXT:  Chisinau, 8 August:  The 
     International Centre for Women's Rights Protection and 
     Promotion La Strada presented the first analytical 
     research entitled "Human trafficking in Moldova: 
     commentaries, trends and recommendations" at a news 
     conference on Monday 8 August. 
 
     Ana Revenco, chairwoman of the La Strada centre, said 
     the research is based on 2001-04 statistics data of the 
     La Strada international programme on preventing 
     trafficking in women in Central and Eastern Europe. 
 
     "The goal of the research is to see what are the 
     hallmarks of human trafficking in Moldova, factors 
     contributing to this negative phenomenon and its 
     development trends," she said. 
 
     Revenco said the research could become a basis for 
     developing new strategies on fighting human trafficking 
     as it contains many valuable recommendations on how to 
     prevent it. 
 
     One of the authors of the study, Tatiana Fomina, said 
     the research is based on surveys carried out among 150 
     human trafficking victims and 105 NGOs and institutions 
     dealing with human trafficking, as well as hotline 
     calls. 
 
     [Passage omitted:  minor details] 
 
     The research shows that most victims are unmarried 
     women aged under 25 coming from rural parts of Moldova. 
     It also points to a significant increase in the number 
     of trafficked children recently.  As a rule, victims 
     are employed for sexual purposes or begging. 
 
     The head of the human trafficking department of the 
     Prosecutor General's Office, Eugen Rusu, said the 
     research is extremely important to both police and 
     general public. 
 
     "So far, we have opened 700 criminal cases against 
     people charged with human trafficking.  Thirty-seven 
     people were convicted on such charges in 2003, 97 in 
     2004 and 50 in the first half of 2005," he said. 
 
     Under Moldovan legislation, people found guilty of 
     human trafficking risk up to 25 years in prison and 
     various fines.  The 500-copy research has been issued 
     in three languages-Romanian, Russian and English-and is 
     to be distributed free of charge among members of the 
     public and NGOs engaged in fighting human trafficking 
     in Moldova, as well as international structures. 
 
     [The same research shows that over 46 per cent of 
     Moldovan women who went to Turkey in 2004 were forced 
     into prostitution.  The figure is 33 per cent higher 
     than in 2001, according to the Moldovan news agency 
     Basapress, Chisinau, in Moldovan.]  END TEXT. 
 
¶29.  Published by Hurriyet on Friday, August 12: 
 
     TITLE:  WATCH OUT IN BODRUM 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Celal Capa, a prominent manager of the 
     entertainment sector complained that families in Bodrum 
     were not showing due attention to their children who 
     were 13-14 and that these kids were providing services 
     for high prices. 
 
     Speaking to "Tempo" magazine, Capa made some striking 
     assessments: "There are some big brothers and not so 
     conscious girls who are wandering around.  Their 
     parents almost all are the same.  These are girls who 
     look alike.  Meanwhile, some youngsters are working 
     hard for taking these girls from one place to the other 
     and no entertainer says they won't admit them in since 
     they spend a lot of money.  Streets and corners are 
     full of 14-18-year old kids." 
     Capa asked, "How can entertainers take care of these 
     kids when their families don't?...  Let families not 
     leave their kids alone.  Am I supposed to be more 
     responsible for those kids than their parents who do 
     not know where their children are at midnight?"  (He 
     went commenting about the house prices in Bodrum and 
     that it was not worth buying property that would be 
     used for two months each year....) 
 
     "Tempo" reportedly spoke to D.U. (22), who was raped in 
     the Bodrum street of bars when she was 13.  The young 
     woman told the weekly, "I have many girl friends who 
     fled their homes.  They participate in orgies in Bodrum 
     for money.  They go to 5-star hotels with rich men. 
     They each get $150.  The age of these girls is 15 or 
     ¶16.  In recent years usage of drugs went up."  END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶30.  Published by Vatan on Sunday, August 14: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  We no longer are surprised with the 
     newspaper reports on foreign women who were forced into 
     prostitution by inflicting torture. 
 
     A great majority of these women, who have been coming 
     to Turkey for approximately ten years, have been 
     fleeing poverty in their country and they willingly and 
     knowingly get involved in prostitution in order to earn 
     money.  But there are also victimized women who were 
     deceived to be brought to Turkey and who were forced 
     into prostitution by human traffickers.  For some time 
     countries where such problems are seen have been doing 
     work for such victims with U.S. pressure. 
 
     Turkey has been trying to resolve it at a high level 
     since it realized the problem. 
 
     Everyday hundreds of calls come to the hotline 157, 
     established by the IOM to rescue women victims.  Hence, 
     relevant ministries and IKGV, under the surveillance of 
     the MFA, joined forces in order to reach the victims. 
     The IKGV shelter opened recently.  Women receive 
     support at the shelter and enable these women to return 
     to their countries. 
 
     Tuba Dundar, an administrator of the IKGV, commented on 
     the human trafficking issue, while V.T., who was forced 
     into prostitution in a house in Istanbul in which she 
     was kept for five years and who now stays at the 
     shelter, commented on her bitter journey in Turkey. 
 
     "THEY TOLD ME THAT THEY COULD AMPUTATE MY ARMS OR LEG 
     AND THROW ME IN THE SEA" 
 
     - When did you arrive in Turkey? 
     In August 2000. 
 
     - To do what? 
     To serve as a nanny and for cleaning jobs. 
 
     - Have you ever (served in those jobs)? 
     No. 
 
     - How did you end up being in the hands of human 
     traffickers? 
     A woman back home said that women were paid well here 
     and that people were earning $250-300 per month.  I 
     have kids.  My elder daughter was supposed to study 
     Criminology.  My salary was $15.  Sometimes we could 
     not get our money for six months.  So I came here with 
     five of my friends.  I did not know Turkish.  They 
     taught me.  Later the women who brought us here said, 
     "I did you a favor.  Now you will do me a favor."  She 
     asked us to be involved in prostitution. 
 
     - What did you say? 
     We did not accept.  She gave us neither food, nor 
     water.  We were starving. 
 
     - How many days did it last? 
     I believe for four days.  I don't know exactly because 
     we were locked up in the basement of a house.  Since 
     there was no light I don't know how much time passed. 
     Later somebody came and inserted an IV in us to make us 
     feel even hungrier.  There was a woman called Saadet 
     Hanim.  She was 60 years old and wore a head scarf. 
     She came down with a tray of food and sat in front of 
     us.  She began to eat the food.  One of us no longer 
     could stand it and agreed to work and she ate the food. 
     Later each and every one of us agreed to work. 
     - Who was Saadet Hanim? 
     Ali Bey was the name of our boss.  When we called him 
     "Ali," he was beating us and saying, "You are my 
     property.  I can kill you."  Saadet Hanim taught us 
     Turkish.  There was a certain vocabulary that we needed 
     to learn everyday.  If we could not learn it, she would 
     beat us with a stick with three chains on it.  We 
     complained about her to Ali Bey.  He said, "This is her 
     method."  Sometimes she used to hit us with that stick 
     and the chains that go around our limbs used to rip 
     open our skin as she pulled the stick back.  Once I got 
     it on my ankle skin.  Since I was a nurse, I put back 
     the skin.  When Saadet Hanim asked whether I cared for 
     medicine, I said "Yes" and she brought some salt and 
     put it on my wound.  As my skin recovered, she used to 
     pull it open again. 
 
     - For how long did you work? 
     After learning Turkish I began to work.  I don't 
     remember the time exactly.  I had lost my memory.  As I 
     said, we could not understand whether it was day or 
     night.  When a guest arrived, they were taking us to 
     the second floor. 
 
     - Who was the guest? 
     Ali Bey asked us not to call them clients but guests. 
 
     - Did you try to flee? 
     Yes, during the early days when a guest arrived I told 
     him that I did not want to work and requested his help. 
     He agreed and took me out.  I saw a huge wall and I did 
     not know anything.  Indeed he deceived me.  A minute 
     later the boss arrived.  He beat me in such a way that 
     five of my ribs were broken.  He said, "If you ever try 
     to flee again I'll kill you.  You are a foreigner. 
     I'll amputate your arms or leg and throw you into the 
     sea.  Nobody will look for you." 
 
     - Have you not asked anybody else to help? 
     No.   I was looking into the eyes of the clients but 
     never saw a trace of humanitarian feeling.  I know that 
     they wouldn't help me.  I did not get positive 
     electricity from anyone. 
 
     - How were the clients treating you?  What type of 
     people were they?  Were some of them educated? 
     They were degrading us.    They were treating us as if 
     we were a piece of furniture.  There were some educated 
     people but having information does not necessarily have 
     anything to do with education.  There were also rich 
     and chic people. 
 
     - How were you saved? 
     On a TV program I heard about the hotline 157.  I told 
     myself that this was my last chance: I would either die 
     or be saved.  I told this to a client and begged him to 
     allow me to use his phone.  He said that he had a wife 
     and children and did not agree.  He thought that 
     something would happen to them.  When I begged a lot, 
     he allowed me to call 157.  I told the operator to come 
     and save me.  They asked for the address but I did not 
     know the address.  I asked the man to tell ME the 
     address but he was afraid so he did not.  Later I 
     really begged a lot.  He told me that one day he would 
     come and take me out and that I could call the hotline 
     then.  One day he came and took me out.  I called 157. 
     The man left me and said, "May God help you.  Don't 
     ever do this again."  Policemen came and took me.  This 
     was how I was saved. 
 
     - A client of yours helped you, in other words? 
     Yes.  He was a good person.  Our souls were alike.  He 
     liked poetry.  He knew about Goethe and Dumas.  We 
     chatted a lot. 
     - Where were you staying? 
     I don't know.  I went out only three times in five 
     years, including twice during the night.  The third was 
     when I fled.  I did not know any place.  We were always 
     in that house.  Even in the house we could not wander 
     freely.  When a client arrived, they opened the lock 
     and took us to the second floor to a specific room. 
     The curtains were always closed.  We used to look 
     behind the sheers.  I could see only the sea.  I wanted 
     to learn the address because there are two more women 
     left behind there. 
 
     - Where are the rest of your friends? 
     Two of them are in the house.  Indeed one of them was 
     working voluntarily.  The other tried to flee and was 
     captured.  Ali bey beat her in such a way that I have 
     never seen anything like that.  Her ears, eyes, nose 
     were bleeding.  Later she never could recover.  Her 
     psychology was disturbed.  She was taken away and never 
     returned.  They might have released her or killed her. 
 
     - How were you spending time at home? 
     I was doing crossword puzzles.  I also read books in 
     Turkish. 
 
     - Did they buy you books? 
     No.  There was a very rich library on the second floor 
     of the house, including Alexander Dumas, Tolstoy--all 
     the classical works.  I read them. 
 
     - How did you meet your personal and health needs? 
     Once a month, a doctor came.   He not only took blood 
     samples, but carried out the gynecological check up. 
     Indeed we were given a lot of vitamins.  They wanted us 
     to put on some weight.  They told us that Turkish men 
     liked plump women.  When I arrived I was 50 kilograms, 
     now I'm 95.  They did not let us do sports so we 
     wouldn't lose weight. 
 
     - In other words, a doctor would come and see your 
     situation? 
     Yes, he knew everything but did not say anything.  It 
     was not only the doctor but also a hair dresser used to 
     come whenever there was a party. 
 
     - Did they give you money? 
     I never saw any money. 
 
     - Did you ever speak to your family? 
     I called my mother two days ago.  I talked to my 
     younger daughter. 
 
     - What did you talk about? 
     My mother cried a lot.  They actually applied to the 
     Interpol.  They were searching for me.  I talked to my 
     younger daughter.  When I left her, she was 5.  I asked 
     her whether she remembered me and she told me that she 
     loved me a lot. 
 
     - Do you have anything else to say? 
     I suffered a lot but I'll forget all these.  I'm very 
     happy that I'll see my kids.  I also would like to tell 
     my boss Ali Bey that I'm free.  He told me that I was 
     his property.  I want him to read this article.  I say 
     to him that I'm not his property but a human being. 
 
     - Will you come to Turkey again? 
     Never. 
 
     -- 
     Following is the interview with Tuba Dundar of IKGV: 
 
     "TURKEY WOKE UP (realized) LATE" 
 
     - What type of an institution is IKGV? 
     The IKGV was established as a non-profit independent 
     institution in 1998.  It does not have a constant 
     income.  It is an NGO that implements programs if 
     projects that it prepares could get funds from grant- 
     providing institutions. 
 
     - When did you begin to work for foreign women? 
     The Foundation in the past did some work on refugees. 
     We realized there were victims of human trafficking in 
     ¶2002.  We entered the subject fully in 2004.  We signed 
     protocols with the TNP and the Jandarma.  By using EU 
     funds, we provided training to around 200 policemen, 
     judges and prosecutors because human trafficking and 
     human smuggling are mixed up. 
 
     - How? 
     Turkey was a bit late on this issue.  Human trafficking 
     has been discussed at international fora for 
     approximately ten years because the problem now is out 
     in the open.  In the last few years Turkey, too, began 
     to take steps.  There is a task force.  There are 
     meetings held with the participation of the MFA, 
     Health, Tourism, and Finance Ministries, military, 
     police and the IKGV.  Nowadays the IOM, too, is 
     participating. 
 
     - Can we say that the state finally has taken this 
     issue seriously? 
     The U.S. has been issuing a human trafficking report 
     every year.  Countries are evaluated in three tiers. 
     Until two years ago Turkey was in Tier 3.  In other 
     words, in the group that did nothing against human 
     trafficking.  The opening of the shelter was big news, 
     especially abroad.  This report was been pressuring 
     countries that have relations with the U.S. although 
     not very clearly. 
 
     - Are there issued that the Foundation find it hard to 
     cope? 
     There is a difficulty of finding funds.  The 
     metropolitan Municipality pays the rent of the shelter. 
     Phillip Morris covers the expenses for personnel and 
     the all the needs of the 11-people shelter. 
 
     - How may women have you reached as of now? 
     More than 90.  It is not possible to give an exact 
     figure because everyday one leaves and the other one 
     comes.  We work with the police.  Some of the women 
     captured during the raids were involved in prostitution 
     voluntarily.  They are deported.  But those who are 
     victims of human trafficking come here.  We send them 
     to their countries from here. 
 
     - How do the victims come to the country? 
     There are those who come as a tourist and find 
     themselves in the hands of traffickers and there are 
     also those who look for a job opportunity.  There are 
     many women who were deceived by their friends. 
     Compatriots sell fellow women friends. 
 
     - From which countries do they come mostly? 
     Moldova and the Ukraine.  There are many who come from 
     the Russian Republics.  Recently there were some coming 
     from the Turkic Republics such as Turkmenistan, 
     Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Georgia and Azerbaijan. 
 
     - What would you like to say as your last words? 
     There is a mass of clients for these women.  One needs 
     to appeal to them.  Do you know in what kind of 
     conditions these women, with whom you have sex in 
     return for money, live in?   Do you know these women 
     don't get a dime but also live in prison conditions? 
     END TEXT. 
MCELDOWNEY