05ANKARA3839
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JULY 1, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
 
Ahmedinejad was among Hostage-Takers in 1979 - Hurriyet 
US Embassy Says No Handcuffs Used In Incirlik Incident - 
Hurriyet 
Turkish Academician Reveals Armenian Fraud - Hurriyet 
High Tension at the Parliament - Sabah 
Buyukanit: "Certain EU Countries Support the PKK" - Sabah 
Baku Promises Direct Flights and Investment to `TRNC' - 
Sabah 
Direct Flights to Start from Baku to `TRNC' - Milliyet 
Broader Middle East Scholarships from the US - Milliyet 
Government-YOK Dispute Continues - Vatan 
Tensions Rise in Ankara - Aksam 
Edelman: "Turkey's Policy Matches US Policy" - Aksam 
Azerbaijan Extends Brotherly Support to `TRNC' - Turkiye 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
AKP Insists on Infringing the Constitution - Radikal 
Big Gesture from Azeri Administration to `TRNC' - Radikal 
EU Fails to Fulfill Pledges to Turkey - Cumhuriyet 
Harsh Reaction from PM Erdogan to YOK Chief Tezic - Yeni 
Safak 
Edelman: "We had Great Cooperation with Turkey" - Yeni Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Turkey-Azerbaijan Relations:  Papers continue reporting on 
PM Erdogan's visit to Azerbaijan.  "Milliyet" reports that 
Azerbaijani President Aliyev announced that direct charter 
flights from Baku to the `TRNC' would begin soon.  Aliyev 
also confirmed that Turkish Cypriots would be able to enter 
Azerbaijan on their `TRNC' passports once the relevant 
regulations have been amended.  PM Erdogan said that the 
Turkish border with Armenia would not be opened before the 
Nagorno-Karabakh problem is solved, and he called on Armenia 
to remove its troops from the disputed region.  Aliyev 
announced that Azeri companies would open offices in 
northern Cyprus, adding that `we cannot endure the isolation 
of our brothers in Cyprus.  Azerbaijan will fulfill its 
responsibilities on this issue.' 
 
Turkey-EU Relations:  "Cumhuriyet" accuses the EU of not 
fulfilling its pledges to Turkey.  The paper claims that the 
EU presented Turkey with a new condition in its EU roadmap 
on Wednesday.  Ankara was pleased that the framework 
document affirmed that  negotiations with the EU would start 
on October 3, but the Turkish side was disturbed by the link 
made between the Cyprus issue and the accession negotiation 
process. "Cumhuriyet" complains that in 1999 the EU had 
announced that the Cyprus issue would not be a criterion for 
Turkey's EU entry, but the framework document shows that 
Cyprus is `the most important criterion' for Turkey. 
General Buyukanit Accuses EU on PKK:  Land Forces Commander 
General Yasar Buyukanit said yesterday that `there are those 
supporting threats to the territorial integrity of our 
country under the guise of human rights.'  He added that 
`some of these initiatives' are being supported by `EU 
ountries.'  Buyukanit claimed that the PKK has achieved 
`ideal conditions' in northern Iraq, where it is `supported 
by some neighboring countries and members of the EU.' 
 
Ambassador Edelman's Remarks in the US Senate:   "Aksam" and 
"Yeni Safak" cover the remarks by former US Ambassador to 
Turkey Eric Edelman before the Senate Armed Forces 
Committee.  Ambassador Edelman said that while the US had 
been `very disappointed' by Turkey's decision on March 1, 
cooperation between the two countries remains strong in many 
areas.  Edelman said he believes Turkey `shares the same 
goals' as the United States for a stable, politically 
united, and sovereign Iraq.' 
PM Erdogan Comments on Iranian Election Result:  Asked by 
journalists about the Iranian Presidential election result 
during his visit to Baku, PM Erdogan responded as follows: 
`Everyone was expecting a different result, but this is the 
will of the people.  I am not in a position to say `I don't 
like the result so it shouldn't be this way.'  Whether you 
like it or not, everyone who believes in democracy has to 
respect the statement made by the Iranian people.' 
 
Ahmedinejad Accused As Iranian Hostage-Taker:  Most papers 
write about allegations from several of the Americans held 
hostage at the US Embassy in Tehran in 1979 that the newly 
elected President of Iran was among the captors involved in 
the hostages' interrogations. 
 
Tension Between AKP and CHP:  All papers report that the 
governing party AKP stirred new tensions yesterday by 
passing a controversial regulation in the parliament that 
limits debate on specific provisions of draft laws.  The 
move was designed to accelerate the approval of legal 
reforms required by IMF.  "Radikal" notes that the 
Constitutional Court has annulled similar regulations twice 
in the past.  Opposition party CHP deputies say the 
regulation would harm lawmakers' freedom of expression. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Fort Bragg Speech; Iran 
 
"A Pathetic Situation for Bush" 
Fehmi Koru argued in the pro-government/Islamist "Yeni 
Safak" (7/1): "It is hard to imagine how the remarks of 
President Bush could possibly raise the morale of the 
American people, especially at a time when 6 out of 10 
Americans believe the Iraq war as a mistake.  But the neo- 
con writers, columnists, and TV commentators are having a 
good time praising the Fort Bragg speech.  Just watch out 
for those neo-cons in Turkey   Bush talked about the 
pressing need to attack Iraq and topple Saddam.  The 
justification used to be weapons of mass destruction.  But 
this time President Bush gave 9/11 as reason.  He did not 
even bother to draw a link, direct or indirect, between the 
events of 9/11 and Saddam Hussein.  Bush's approach is a 
clear indication that the problems he created for his own 
country and for the world are not going to end in the 
foreseeable future.   President Bush listed the reasons why 
the US should remain in Iraq.  He was hoping that none of us 
would notice that these reasons were all consequences of the 
invasion of Iraq in the first place. . Bush made this speech 
at a military base, where military people constituted a 
majority of his audience.  It was interesting to see the 
many unsmiling faces while he was delivering his remarks. 
The audience, mostly military, gave no applause or any sign 
of enthusiasm.  Given the situation, there is nothing to 
justify high morale.  This is a pathetic situation for 
Bush." 
 
"The Iranian Conundrum" 
Turker Alkan observed in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(7/1): "The new Iranian president talked about the worldwide 
spread of the Islamic revolution.  It is extremely worrying 
if he is serious about `exporting revolution.'  But it 
remains to be seen whether this rhetoric is an indication of 
a shift in Iranian foreign policy or just domestic 
posturing. . Even if Ahmadinejad is serious about exporting 
the revolution, it is probably not an achievable goal.  It 
can achieve nothing but create more trouble and increase the 
international isolation of Iran.  The possibility that 
Ahmadinejad can put Iran on good terms with the US and the 
Western world is very remote.  At least he might present 
himself as a reconciliation figure for a while.  . Turkey 
should watch Iran carefully and evaluate developments there 
in a cold-blooded way.  We should be ready for every 
possibility.  If the Iranian regime moves toward a more 
radical position, it will enhance Turkey's importance in the 
eyes of the US and the EU." 
 
MCELDOWNEY