05ANKARA6480
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Oct 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 006480 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Rice: We Support Muslim World's Search for Democracy - 
Milliyet 
Ankara Discomfited Over `President' Barzani - Vatan 
Barzani: Kurds Do Not Want Partition in Iraq - Milliyet 
Iraqi Sunni Parties Enter into Election Alliance - Milliyet 
Syria Under Pressure to Arrest Hariri Murder Suspects - 
Sabah 
Putin Backs Assad - Sabah 
Ahmadinajad Claims Palestine will Destroy Israel - Milliyet 
Iran Shelters bin-Ladin's Three Sons - Sabah 
Lawyers Quit Saddam's Defense - Aksam 
Shanghai Cooperation Group a Rival to NATO - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara Angered at Barzani Visit to Washington - Radikal 
Ankara Reacts to Washington Over Barzani Visit - Zaman 
Talat Begins US Visit - Radikal 
US to Syria: Cooperation or Isolation - Yeni Safak 
Assad Promises to Catch Hariri Killing Suspects - Radikal 
Assad Vows to Punish Hariri Conspirators - Zaman 
Russia, China Oppose Sanctions for Damascus - Cumhuriyet 
First `War Message' from Tehran - Radikal 
Ahmadinajad: Israel Must be Wiped off the Map - Zaman 
Gitmo Captive al-Odak Demands Euthanasia - Yeni Safak 
Sucide Attack Kills 5 in Hadera - Yeni Safak 
Islamic Jihad Attacks Israel Market: 5 Killed - Zaman 
US to Evacuate Okinawa Airbase - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ankara Discomfited over Bush-Barzani Meeting:  Turkey has 
been disturbed by the 
`Presidential' reception given to Massoud Barzani by 
President Bush, and conveyed its uneasiness to US 
authorities in Washington and Ankara, papers report.  The 
Americans told the Turks that the Bush-Barzani meeting was 
`normal' bearing in mind the fact that the US is working to 
build a democratic, united Iraq.  Ankara also told 
Washington that the Kurdish flag at Habur border crossing 
should be taken down.  On Wednesday, Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) U/S Nabi Sensoy conveyed to US Charge 
d'Affaires Nancy McEldowney Turkey's annoyance over the 
treatment Barzani was given at the White House.  McEldowney 
noted that Barzani is the `president' of the `Iraqi 
Kurdistan region,' adding that the US attached importance to 
Iraq's territorial integrity.  While most Turkish dailies 
claim McEldowney had been `summoned' to the MFA, "Zaman" 
says the request for a meeting came from the Charge, and the 
meeting focused other issues. 
 
US to Establish "Muslim Peace Force" in Iraq:  "Sabah" 
editorialist Fatih Altayli claims today in a front-page 
column that the United States is planning to withdraw from 
Iraq soon, and to establish a "Muslim Peace Force" led by 
Turkey, Egypt, and Pakistan to fill the void left by 
coalition forces.  Altayli claims that PM Erdogan was 
informed about the plan during his visit to Washington in 
June, and that the `main reason' Barzani was invited to 
Washington was to discuss the deployment of the force.  He 
speculates that US officials are telling Barzani that he 
should expect to see Turkish forces in Iraq relatively soon. 
A Foreign Ministry official is quoted is saying that while 
there is not yet a formal proposal from the United States, 
the idea of a Muslim peace force is under active discussion. 
 
Rice Hosts Iftar for Muslims in US:  "Milliyet" reports that 
Daniel Fried, David Welch, and Liz Cheney were in attendance 
along with Muslim guests at a fast-breaking dinner hosted by 
Secretary Rice for Muslim representatives in the United 
 
SIPDIS 
States.  After the dinner, Rice talked about basic human 
rights with references to her childhood in Alabama during 
the time when racial segregation was widespread.  Rice said 
she has participated in many iftar dinners, and felt at each 
occasion the message of peace given by Islam, according to 
"Milliyet." 
 
Talat in US:  The Bush administration sent clear messages to 
the two entities in Cyprus on the eve of Turkish Cypriot 
leader Mehmet Ali Talat's meetings in Washington, "Milliyet" 
claims.  A senior US official told the paper that Talat will 
not be received as a `president,' but will be welcomed as 
the `legitimate leader of a democratic community' and as the 
`most hard-working Turkish Cypriot leader seen so far.'  The 
official said that Talat had been invited in order to 
display US support for the Turkish Cypriots' efforts for the 
reunification in Cyprus.  Several dailies speculate that the 
US Administration also sent a message to Nicosia that the 
Cyprus problem should be resolved on the basis of the UN- 
sponsored peace plan.  Dailies also say that during his 
meetings in the US, Turkish Cypriot leader Talat will ask 
for direct flights from the US to northern Cyprus, the 
opening of a US representation office in northern Cyprus, 
and investments by American companies in the tourism 
industry.  Meanwhile, Talat said that lifting sanctions on 
Turkish Cyprus will contribute to efforts for a settlement. 
`Our policy can be summed up as the reunification of Cyprus 
through a resumption of talks between the two sides under 
the supervision of UN,' Talat said in Ankara prior to flying 
to the US late Wednesday. 
 
Turkey Occupies Part of Cyprus:  Britain's deputy Prime 
Minister John Prescott said after meeting with President 
Papadopoulos earlier this week that Turkey is `occupying' 
part of Cyprus, and warned that Ankara is obliged to 
recognize all EU member countries, Turkish papers report. 
Prescott's remarks have revealed the limits of British 
support for Turkey on the Cyprus issue, according to 
"Cumhuriyet." 
 
Greeks Wiretap Turkish Cypriots:  "Cumhuriyet" claims that 
spying activities in northern Cyprus have escalated since 
Turkish Cypriot authorities opened the border with southern 
Cyprus.  Greek Cypriot intelligence is wiretapping Turkish 
Cypriot officials, and the information acquired is being 
given to the Greek General Staff, according to the report. 
"Cumhuriyet" points to detailed press reports of phone 
conversations between Talat and Turkish officials with 
regard to Turkish military activities in northern Cyprus. 
 
Erdogan on Terror, EU, Turkey/Israel:  Prime Minister Tayyip 
Erdogan, in Yemen on a state visit, responded to press 
questions after meeting his Yemeni counterpart Abd al-Qadir 
Bajamal in Sanaa on Wednesday.  Erdogan said the two 
countries signed agreements on the elimination of double 
taxation and on partnership in environmental projects.  The 
PM said that bilateral trade between the two countries 
should be increased from the current level of 215 million 
USD.  Bajamal stated that Yemen supports Turkey's EU 
accession, and voiced hope that Turkey will be a bridge 
between Europe and the Arab world.  Asked about the 
possibility of Turkish-Yemeni cooperation in combating 
terrorism, and whether the terrorist attacks in Istanbul 
were staged by al-Qaida and Turkish fundamentalists, Erdogan 
said that al-Qaida was responsible for the bombings.  `We 
never accept associating Islam with terrorism.  There cannot 
be Islamic terrorism.  None of the great religions permit 
the killing of people.  Moreover, our religion is a religion 
of peace and love,' Erdogan said.  On the outcome of the 
referendum on the Iraqi constitution, Erdogan said that 
despite some shortcomings, the Iraqi referendum held on 
October 15 is an important democratic step forward.  `This 
constitution should be one that blocks the hegemony of 
ethnic groups or sects against each other.  It should also 
be a constitution that ensures the participation of all 
Iraqi groups in the administration.  Kirkuk should not be 
put under the domination of a single ethnic group.  It 
should be a city where different groups and cultures live 
together.  Otherwise, serious problems will be seen in the 
future,' Erdogan emphasized.  Erdogan moved on from Yemen to 
the UK, where he will attened a meeting of EU heads of 
government at Hampton Court. 
 
Wilson Appointed New US Ambassador to Turkey:  Former US 
Ambassador to Baku Ross Wilson has been appointed as the new 
ambassador to Turkey, "Yeni Safak" reports.  Ankara granted 
`agrement' to Wilson, who is expected to take up his new 
post in Turkey just after the new year after gaining 
approval by the US Senate. 
 
MFA on Iraq's Transition to Democracy:  `Turkey welcomes the 
important phase of the ongoing political process advancing 
toward transition to a democratic structure by preserving 
the territorial integrity and political unity of Iraq,' the 
Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) said in a statement released 
on Wednesday.  The upcoming general election in Iraq in 
December is important, the MFA said, adding that the polls 
should take place in a fair and transparent way, without any 
manipulation.  The statement emphasized that Turkey will 
maintain its support for the Iraqi people in their search 
for peace, stability, and democracy. 
 
MFA Denies Hariri Killing Suspect Hiding in Turkey:  On 
Wednesday, Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) Spokesman Namik 
Tan denied press reports claiming that Ahmad Abu Adess, a 
suspect in the assassination of former Lebanese PM Hariri, 
is hiding in Turkey.  Tan said the UN report on the Hariri 
killing said that four e-mail messages sent by Adess had 
originated not Turkey, but from Damascus and Lebanon.  The 
UN report also said that Syria bears responsibility 
regarding the whereabouts of Adess, Tan noted. 
 
EU Enlargement Report on Turkey Due Out on November 9:  The 
EU Commission's enlargement report on Turkey to be released 
on November 9 will highlight shortcomings in protecting the 
cultural rights of Turkey's Kurds, "Cumhuriyet" reports. 
The EU had been encouraged by Prime Minister Erdogan's 
promises during a visit to Diyarbakyr in August to handle 
the Kurdish issue by `boosting democracy, welfare and 
respect for law.'  The EU report will criticize Erdogan for 
his failure to meet the pledges made in Diyarbakir, point to 
the cancellation of a controversial Armenian conference in 
Istanbul, and criticize charges filed against novelist Orhan 
Pamuk and Armenian-Turkish journalist Hrant Dink. 
Shortcomings in the law on foundations, the press law, and 
abuse of mental patients are also mentioned in the report. 
"Sabah" says that the EU report will call on Turkey to 
remove restrictions on education in mother languages, saying 
that Kurdish schools in southeastern cities had been closed 
due to restrictions rather than a lack of interest.  The 
report lauds Turkish efforts to meet the Copenhagen 
Criteria, and notes that there is a functioning market 
economy in Turkey. 
 
US Official on Pamuk Case:  An unidentified high-level US 
official told "Milliyet" in Washington that the charges 
filed against renowned Turkish novelist Orhan Pamuk was not 
compatible with the democratization steps taken forward by a 
Turkey that aspires to the EU.  `Seeing what Pamuk has been 
facing, it is difficult to talk about freedom of expression 
in Turkey.  It is very difficult to understand the logic 
behind such lawsuits,' the official said.  "Milliyet" says 
that Washington also `took note of' 20 people being fined in 
the southeastern province of Siirt for using Q and W, 
characters not found in the Turkish alphabet, on placards 
during a celebration last year.  The US official said the 
Pamuk case and the penalties meted out for using non-Turkish 
characters undoubtedly pleased those in Europe who oppose 
Turkey's membership in the European bloc. 
 
EU Greens Invite Pamuk to Strasbourg:  The European 
Parliament Greens Group has invited Orhan Pamuk to address 
their general committee meeting in Strasbourg in November, 
papers report.  `Pamuk is not a politician, but a writer. 
Consequently, our discussions regarding the shape and form 
of the meeting to which we are inviting him continue,' said 
Turkish-EU Joint Parliamentary Commission Co-Chairman and 
Green Group member Joost Lagendijk.  Lagendijk noted that a 
five-member EU parliamentary delegation including Cem 
Ozdemir and Daniel Cohn-Bendit from the EP Green Group will 
be in Istanbul on December 16 for the first hearing in 
Pamuk's trial on charges of denigrating the Turkish nation. 
 
Maltreatment of Orphanage Children Cause Widespread 
Resentment:  Beatings and maltreatment of children ages 0-6 
at an orphanage in the eastern province of Malatya sparked 
outrage and prompted the firing of eight workers, Turkish 
media report.  An inspector was appointed to investigate the 
abuse, and three of the child minders have been arrested. 
The incident has caused an uproar all around the country.  A 
group of local residents gathered at the orphanage yesterday 
evening after seeing the footage of children being beaten. 
The parliamentary commission for human rights sent a team to 
Malatya to investigate the scandal.  Press reports 
concerning the beating of orphans came in the aftermath of 
charges of abuse of mental patients in Turkey, "Radikal" 
notes.  A Motherland (ANAP) party deputy from Malatya 
claimed that the abuses began after the AKP Government 
removed professionals from the facility and replaced them 
with unqualified AKP supporters. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq/Saddam Trial/Barzani in the White 
House 
 
"The Backlash of the Saddam Trial" 
Semih Idiz commented in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (10/27): 
"The trial of Saddam has been a cause for joy in certain 
countries such as Israel, Kuwait, and Iran, for obvious 
reasons.  However, a majority of the Arab world does not 
share this joy. . Yemen is a good place to check the pulse 
among Arabs regarding the trial of Saddam.  A recent public 
opinion poll in Yemen gave some interesting conclusions that 
Washington will not be happy about.  The majority of 
Yemenis, regardless of economic class, consider the current 
set-up of Saddam's trial as an insult to the Arab world. 
The only exception is the small intellectual elite of Yemen. 
. The Yemeni example is a good lesson about the serious gap 
between the rulers and the people in this region.  Bearing 
this in mind, Sadam's efforts to turn the court process into 
a stage actually carry a certain logic.  Apparently, Saddam 
Hussein believes that regardless of the court's ruling, he 
will be remembered as being as important as Saladin for 
Arabs." 
 
"Baghdad's Justice" 
Zafer Atay wrote in the economic-political "Dunya" (10/27): 
"One has to accept that even three years after Saddam's 
Baath regime came to an end, the people of Iraq have still 
not gotten rid of the negative effects of this regime.  More 
than 40 witnesses who were called to the court have refused 
to attend because they were too frightened.  One of the 
lawyers has already been killed by supporters of Saddam. 
Right from the first day of trial, debate has been ragin 
over the fairness of the court tha is trying Saddam and his 
men.  As a matter fact, this is the destiny of all courts 
that deal with war crimes.  Because regardless the ruling, 
some people will see a process that was imposed by the 
winners of the war.   . The fact that the chief justice is 
of Kurdish origin and the other members of the court are of 
Shiite origin has cast a shadow over the proces.  The cool 
and respectful attitude of the chief justice was noted by 
everyone.  But during the final stages of the proceedings, 
neither the chief justice nor the prosecutors will be able 
to avoid coming under fire." 
 
"Bush Recognizes Barzani as President" 
Cuneyt Ulsever observed in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" 
(10/27): "Two very important visits for Turkey are happening 
this week in Washington, namely the visit of Talat, 
president of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, and 
the visit of Barzani, president of the Kurdistan Regional 
Administration.  The timing of the visits carries an 
important message regarding the state of Turkish-American 
relations.  Turkey should read this message well. . The 
first visit is about a reality that Turkey is trying to make 
the US to accept.  The other visit is about a different 
reality that Turkey will have to accept. . In the current 
situation, two tribal figures of the old Iraq are now 
sitting in very different positions.  Talabani has become 
the president of Iraq and, now that Iraq's constitution has 
been approved, Barzani has become the president of Kurdistan 
Regional Administration.  This meanst that Kurdistan is a 
reality whether we like it or not.  There is another reality 
about Iraq: with the approval of the constitution, Iraq has 
been psychologically divided.  This may not seem like a 
division based on legal or political considerations, but it 
is very real." 
 
MCELDOWNEY