05ANKARA2193
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Apr 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181437Z Apr 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, APRIL 19, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Tuygan: We Are Sorry That Edelman Will Leave Turkey - 
Milliyet 4/17 
Talat Is Second `President' of `TRNC' - Sabah 
Denktas: New President Must Protect `TRNC' Independence - 
Vatan 
Greek Cypriots Not Interested in `TRNC' Polls - Hurriyet 
4/17 
Talabani, Barzani Disagree Over Northern Iraq Rule - Star 
4/17 
President Bush Wants His Privacy Respected - Sabah 4/17 
Anti-Turkey Cardinal Ratzinger Leads Papal Race - Sabah 
Kissinger: Let's Give the Middle East Back to the Turks - 
Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Rice: Turkey an Example of Islam-Democracy Compatibility - 
Zaman 
U/S Tuygan Returns From US `Empty-Handed' - Radikal 
Tuygan Conveys Turkish Concerns About PKK Activities - 
Cumhuriyet 
KDP, PUK Members Clash After Talabani Takes Iraq Presidency 
- Cumhuriyet 
Nicosia-EU Strengthen Military Cooperation - Cumhuriyet 4/17 
EU Supports US Project of Moderate Islam - Yeni Safak 
Dervis Strongest Candidate to Lead UNDP - Yeni Safak 4/17 
Kissinger Praises Ottomans - Radikal 
Catholics Watch Vatican's Chimney - Yeni Safak 
Anti-Japan Fury in China - Zaman 4/17 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Rice Shows Turkey As a Model Country:  Secretary of State 
Rice presented Turkey as an example that Islam and democracy 
are compatible, Monday papers report.  Rice told The 
American Society of Newspaper Editors that there is no 
contradiction between Islam and the Muslim world, and cited 
examples of democracies in places where Muslims are in the 
majority.  Rice presented Turkey as one such example: `You 
have, in Turkey, for instance, a state that is growing 
rapidly with a strong Islamic party in power,' Secretary 
Rice said.  She added India as another example in which a 
huge muslim population lives peacefully with other groups in 
a democratic system.  Rice concluded that `there has to be 
hope for the Middle East, that you will get moderate 
political forces that find the right relationship between 
Islam and democracy, that find institutions that accommodate 
both, and therefore the democratic process can be tolerant 
of all peoples.' 
 
Tuygan Concludes Meetings in US:  In a press conference held 
after he wrapped up his meetings in Washington,  Turkish 
Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Ali Tuygan said both sides 
had reaffirmed good bilateral ties: `The talks have shown 
that our ties are good.  We told our American friends about 
our expectations from them,' Tuygan said.  He added that the 
discussions had been `fruitful,' and that the two sides had 
established an atmosphere of mutual understanding.  Tuygan 
emphasized that the tension in US-Turkish relations had been 
caused by the ongoing war in Iraq.  `However,' Tuygan said, 
`both sides reaffirmed our strong alliance and decided to 
leave the past in the past.'  Tuygan underlined the recent 
increase in PKK attacks against the Turkish military.  He 
said he had informed US officials of Turkish concerns with 
regard to the PKK, the terrorist organization which is using 
northern Iraq as a `safe haven.'  Tuygan said he did not 
expect the US Congress to pass a resolution on `genocide' 
claims by Armenians.  `If the Congress decides in favor of 
Armenian demands, it will cause disappointment in Turkey, a 
country which has had excellent cooperation and a strategic 
partnership with the US for 50 years,' Tuygan stressed.  On 
Iraq, Tuygan said Turkey wants Iraq to become a peaceful 
country striving for economic development.  Commenting on 
the resignation of Ambassador Edelman from his post in 
Ankara, Tuygan said that `Mr. Edelman is a diplomat for whom 
we have high respect.  We are deeply saddened over his 
decision to leave Ankara.  We are confident that he will 
continue his good ties with Turkey in his new assignment in 
Washington.' 
 
A news commentary in "Radikal" claimed that Ankara was 
disappointed by the `low-level' reception Tuygan had been 
given by the Americans in Washington, and regards it as a 
`negative signal' before possible visits to the US by FM Gul 
and PM Erdogan.  Unidentified MFA officials said that the 
American attitude showed once again the strain in bilateral 
relations.  The officials recalled the top-level reception 
given to former MFA Undersecretary Ugur Ziyal in June 2003 
following the rejection by the Turkish parliament of a bill 
that would have allowed US troops to deploy through Turkey 
to Iraq.  `The two visits were very different.  It seems 
that the US has nothing to say,' one official said.  MFA 
officials do not expect a meeting between Rice and Gul at 
the NATO foreign ministers conference in Lithuania April 20- 
21, according to "Radikal."  Sunday's "Milliyet" reports 
that Ankara has been waiting three weeks for a response to a 
request for a meeting with President Bush by PM Erdogan 
during his upcoming visit to the US.  The US Government 
wants Turkish government officials, particularly Erdogan, to 
make statements stressing the significance of US-Turkish 
relations, "Milliyet" claims.  Monday's "Vatan" claims that 
Tuygan received `guarantees' from US officials that 
President Bush will not use the word `genocide' when he 
addresses the Congress on the Armenian issue on April 24. 
 
Gul on March 1 Decision:  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul 
reportedly told a group of AK Party lawmakers over the 
weekend that Turkey would have suffered great casualties in 
Iraq -- even more than the Americans -- if the Turkish 
parliament had permitted the deployment of Turkish troops to 
Iraq on March 1, 2003.  Turkish troops would have been 
deployed in one of the most dangerous parts of Iraq, Gul 
allegedly said, noting that `from that standpoint, it can be 
said that the rejection of the decree had been for the good 
of Turkey.'  Gul noted that Kurds who had previously been 
working for a Kurdish state in northern Iraq have now turned 
their attention to forming the new government in Baghdad, 
something that Turkey had wanted all along. 
 
Iraq's Neighbors Meeting Postponed to Late April:  A foreign 
ministers' meeting of the neighbors of Iraq, scheduled for 
April 18-19, has been postponed for a week, papers report. 
Iraqi Prime Minister Jafari urged FM Gul to postpone the 
conference due to continuing preparations for a new cabinet 
in Baghdad, according to diplomatic sources.  Gul agreed to 
the postponement. 
 
Erdogan Calls Sharon Before Upcoming Visit to Israel:  Prime 
Minister Tayyip Edogan, who is to visit Israel in early May, 
called Ariel Sharon to praise Israeli security measures 
against groups protesting his Gaza pullout plan, 
"Cumhuriyet" reported over the weekend.  Turkish government 
sources told the paper that Israel will welcome Turkish 
participation in developments in the Middle East. 
Meanwhile, Monday's "Milliyet" reports that the Turkish 
Ministry of Defense is to award the Israeli companies IAI 
and ELBIT a $200 million contract for the acquisition of 
unmanned aircraft before the Erdogan visit to Israel on May 
1-2. 
 
Turkey Condemns `Disrespectful' Act Against Flag:  Turkey 
regrets the `ugly and disrespectful act' committed against 
the Turkish flag at a Greek military academy, where Turkish 
officers were being hosted as part of an exchange program, 
Monday papers report.  On April 12, a crumpled Turkish flag 
with anti-Turkish slogans written on it was placed into the 
room where the Turkish students were staying.  The incident 
occurred while visiting Greek FM Molyviatis was discussing 
ways to enhance Greek-Turkish relations with FM Gul.  The 
Turkish officers returned to Turkey on April 13.  The Greek 
Ground Forces Commander and Defense Minister called their 
counterparts in Turkey to convey their apologies for the 
incident, urging Ankara not to `exaggerate' what took place. 
Turkey, however, has called for an official apology from 
Greece, and has asked that those responsible be punished. 
Greek Foreign Minister Petros Molivyatis said an official 
apology would be issued to Ankara if it can be determined 
that such an incident took place. The Greek Land Forces 
Command promised to dismiss any students found guilty of 
desecrating the Turkish flag. 
 
Turkish Military Operations Continue Against PKK:  33 
terrorists have been killed in Turkish military operations 
against the outlawed PKK in Sirnak during the past two 
weeks.  One other terrorist surrendered to security forces, 
according to a statement released by the Sirnak Governor's 
Office on Friday.  The security forces destroyed large 
amounts of weapons, explosives, and food belonging to the 
terrorist organization, according to the statement. 
 
Anti-US Demonstration in Adana:  A group of members of a 
leftist party, the EMEP, staged a demonstration at the US 
Consulate in Adana in southern Turkey to protest the use of 
Incirlik Airbase by Americans for `imperialist' purposes 
over the past 50 years, weekend papers report.  A statement 
read by the protesters claimed the US wants to use Incirlik 
for attacks against Iran and Syria, and called for the 
closure of the airbase.  Demonstrators later dispersed 
peacefully. 
 
ROK President Visits Turkey:  Visiting South Korean 
President Roh Moo-Hyun discussed with PM Tayyip Erdogan 
possible joint investments on Friday, weekend papers report. 
Erdogan said that Turkey, which is close to the European 
market, is an attractive country for foreign investments. 
During a call on Parliamentary Speaker Bulent Arinc later 
the same day, Moo-Hyun said that the South Koreans would 
never forget the sacrifice of Turkish soldiers who fought 
together with Koreans during the Korean War.  Arinc pointed 
to friendly bilateral ties, and noted that Turkish soldiers 
had died for the freedom of South Korean people. 
 
Thousands of Turkish Girls Cannot Attend School:  Some 
570,000 girls of school age cannot attend schools, according 
to Monday's "Milliyet."  He paper says it is time for Turkey 
to change this picture.  Almost half of those who have no 
access to schools live in 10 impoverished provinces in 
southeastern Turkey, where Kurds form a majority of the 
population. 
 
Turkish Truck Driver Killed by Roadside Bomb in Iraq:  An 
unidentified Turkish truck driver was killed by a roadside 
bomb near Bayji, north of Baghdad, on Saturday, weekend 
papers report. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iraq; US-Turkey 
 
"The Rise of Talabani" 
Kamuran Ozbir wrote in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (4/18): 
"The fact that Talabani is now the president of Iraq 
indicates how much the Iraqi Kurds, who once lived under 
oppression as a minority, are now on the political rise. 
The Kurds supported the US-led operation to topple Saddam 
Hussein in 2003, and now have gained a remarkable political 
status by having won 25 percent of the Iraqi vote.  This 
election victory provided more political clout to the Kurds 
than to the Sunni Arabs, who have ruled the country for so 
many years.  . It is important that Talabani is talking 
about a new democratic and united Iraq.  The Kurds used to 
think about independence, but even then they were aware of 
the fact that such an idea would not be welcomed by the US, 
Turkey, Syria, or Iran.  Now the Kurds have set a different 
goal -- a federal Iraq.  They are seeking to be as powerful 
as possible in the new federaation.  The drafting of the new 
Iraqi constitution will present them the opportunity to 
advance toward this goal." 
 
"Ankara Has Gotten the Message" 
Ali H. Aslan wrote from Washington in the Islamist- 
intellectual "Zaman" (4/18):  "There are three main 
arguments used by Turks to counter claims that Turkey's 
relationship with the United States is not in trouble.  One 
is to point out the historic relationship between the two 
countries, going all the way back to the Korean War. 
Another is simply to claim that there is no anti-Americanism 
in Turkey.  Finally, there are some who insist that Turkish- 
Israeli relations are not as bad as they have been described 
in the public debate.  Almost all Turkish officials visiting 
Washington recently have presented a version of these 
arguments to their American counterparts.  Foreign Ministry 
Ali Tuygan was the most recent visitor, and he was no 
exception.  Yet the Americans, who have been patiently 
waiting for Ankara to `get the message,' finally broke out 
of their diplomatic niceties.  They explained the message 
loud and clear to Tuygan.  Tuygan heard the same same clear 
message from every American official he met with. . It is 
certain that he will convey Washington's message to the high 
levels in Ankara.  The message includes Washington's deep 
concerns about the rise of anti-Semitism and anti- 
Americanism in Turkey, as well as the rapprochement between 
Turkey and Iran and Syria. . Turkey must realize the urgent 
need to repair ties with the US.  The initiative must come 
from Turkey.  If Ankara has understood, it can take the 
first step by making some goodwill gestures, such as giving 
an immediate response to US requests on Incirlik airbase. 
By keeping this decision on hold, it appears that Turkey is 
waiting to see the stance of the US administration stance on 
the Armenian issue." 
 
EDELMAN