05ANKARA680
TURKEY 2004 END USE MONITORING REPORT
Fri Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000680 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AFIN SNAR TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY 2004 END USE MONITORING REPORT 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 611 
     ¶B. 2004 STATE 238640 
 
--------- 
Overview 
--------- 
 
¶1.  Since 1986, the International Narcotics Crime and Control 
(INCC) program has provided approximately 5,500 units of 
equipment and training, valued at over USD 5.7 million, to 
five Turkish agencies with responsibility for Turkey,s 
anti-narcotics programs: The Turkish Grain Board (TMO), 
Turkish National Police (TNP), Jandarma, Customs, and the 
Amatem drug addiction treatment facility.  During calendar 
year 2004, training and equipment valued at USD 43,870 was 
provided.  Generally, the equipment provided since 1986 can 
be assigned to the following categories: Training; 
communication; surveillance; and poppy processing.  However, 
because of the number and types of equipment provided, to 
report by type of resource rather than by project, as 
requested in ref b, is not practicable.  (For example, while 
computers have been provided to all five agencies, they serve 
completely different functions in each agency.) 
 
¶2.  Similarly, because equipment has been assigned to scores 
of locations throughout the country, physical inspection of 
any but a very small portion is a practical impossibility. 
Thus, Post relies upon periodic meetings with supervisory 
personnel in each recipient agency to monitor use.  (It 
appears that all agencies maintain up-to-date physical 
inventories.  The TNP provided us with a 12-page inventory 
ledger.)  Where feasible, Post does, in connection with such 
meetings, also physically inspect some equipment.  No 
physical inspections were carried out this past calendar year 
although Post hopes to inspect some equipment provided to the 
TNP in Istanbul and to visit the Amatem drug rehabilitation 
facility in Istanbul this year.  A report will follow septel. 
 
¶3.  Because of Turkey,s refusal to accept Leahy Amendment 
language contained in the year 2000 Letter of Agreement, the 
INCC program has been winding down.  After purchasing a 
humidity device for the TMO, sending Turkish law enforcement 
officials to an Executive Observer Program (EOP) in the US, 
purchasing surveillance equipment for the Jandarma, and 
providing English language training to customs officials, in 
2004, Post is left with a total of USD 110,650 remaining INL 
funds.  These will be used for a DEA-led Jetway Drug 
Interdiction School in Istanbul and to purchase a truck for 
the TNP.  Our local partners have made many requests for 
additional training and equipment and believe resumption of 
the program will assuredly be of great value to Turkey,s 
anti-narcotics efforts.  In recent meetings, local partners 
expressed their belief that the GOT has been signing 
agreements with the EU which contain similar language to the 
Leahy Amendment as part of the EU accession process and 
expressed frustration that the MFA and the US have not 
resolved the Leahy Amendment problem so that INCC cooperation 
could be resumed. 
 
------------------- 
Turkish Grain Board 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  Starting in 1992 and continuing through 2001, the INCC 
program provided TMO with equipment and training valued at 
over USD 900,000.  All of this equipment is still being used. 
 In December 2004, the INCC program delivered to TMO a 
Humidity Meter Device at a cost of USD 6,500 for poppy 
processing operations.  Post is in the process of ordering 
additional equipment needed to complete the device so TMO can 
begin using it. 
 
----------------------- 
Turkish National Police 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  Starting in 1986 and continuing through 2004, the INCC 
program provided TNP with equipment and training valued at 
over USD 1.2 million.  In September 2004, 4 senior level 
members of the TNP participated in a DEA-led Executive 
Observer Program in the United States.  The participants 
visited the DEA Los Angeles and San Diego offices, the San 
Ysidro Border Crossing, DEA Headquarters in Washington DC and 
the DEA Quantico Training Academy in Quantico, VA, where they 
observed various DEA capabilities and cross border 
operations.  This program, costing approximately USD 15,080, 
strengthened DEA Turkey's already outstanding working 
relationship with the TNP. 
 
¶6.  Econoff met with Alattin Petek, Chief of TNP Logistic 
Section, Department of Anti-Smuggling and Organized Crime and 
his deputy, Erol Keskinkilic.  According to Keskinkilic, the 
set of videoscopes (four scopes in total) and a GPS tracking 
system provided under the INCC program in 2003 and 2000, 
respectively, have been the most useful.  Though some of the 
equipment provided to the TNP is nearing the end of their 
useful lives--such as analog voice recording 
systems--Keskinkilic reported that much of the equipment is 
still in use. (Note: Approximately 200 voice recording 
systems will be retired by year's end since the TNP has 
upgraded to digital systems.)  TNP uses night vision goggles, 
radios, and voice recording systems provided to them over the 
course of the program despite the fact that many of these 
pieces of technology are out of date.  The TNP's in-house 
technical maintenance department apparently does a decent job 
of repairing and upgrading the equipment.  Though last year's 
report indicated that the TNP needed no additional equipment 
at the time, Petek and Keskinkilic told econoff that 
night-vision goggles, cameras, radios, videoscopes, and voice 
and vision transmission systems with more advanced technology 
would be very useful for their search and surveillance 
operations. 
 
--------- 
Jandarma 
--------- 
 
¶7.  Starting in 1998 (when the INCC program was revived for 
the Jandarma) and continuing through 2004, the INCC program 
delivered to Jandarma training and equipment valued at over 
USD 81,390.  In 2004, the INCC program delivered 2 video 
receiving/recording systems and 1 nite-mate 3G night vision 
camera, valued at USD 20,990.  Econoff met with Tayfun 
Albayrak, Director of Investigation and Coordination and 
Cengiz Yildirim, Head of Department, Smuggling and Organized 
Crimes.  As reported in ref a, Jandarma officials believe 
that distributing equipment to the law enforcement agencies 
in "bits and pieces" is not the most effective use of INCC 
program money.  Yildirim suggested that, if in the future the 
program was revived, funds and equipment should be allocated 
more strategically toward specific projects which can produce 
more concrete results.  Furthermore, Yildirim reiterated the 
problem with purchasing equipment from American companies 
that do not have distributors in Turkey.  Maintenance of the 
equipment the Jandarma has received under the INCC program is 
often costly and time-consuming since the products have to be 
shipped back to the US for repair.  Nevertheless, the 
Jandarma officials say they are using the equipment they have 
received over the years and the night vision cameras have 
served the greatest use.  Though they did not specify the 
need for more equipment, Yildirim noted that their growing 
and more sophisticated anti-narcotics unit is in need of 
high-level technical training.  The unit has had a 20% 
increase in cases compared to last year and a 24% increase in 
individuals captured compared to 2003. 
 
-------- 
Customs 
-------- 
 
¶8.  Starting in 1994 and continuing through 2002, the INCC 
program delivered to Customs equipment valued at some USD 
562,000.  No items were delivered in 2003 or in 2004. 
Econoff met with Ender Gurleyik, Head of Department, 
Undersecretariat of Customs.  From 1999 through 2004, the 
INCC program provided English language instruction to customs 
officials to enable law enforcement officers to follow 
international developments more closely and cooperate better 
with Western counterparts if they spoke English.  The INCC 
program provided USD 4,000 worth of course instruction in 
¶2004.  The provision of language instruction was terminated 
starting January 2005 due to lack of INL funding.  Gurleyik 
was highly disappointed at the termination of the program 
citing the importance of customs personnel being able to 
speak a second language, particularly English. 
 
¶9.  Of the equipment previously provided to Customs, ion 
scanners detecting narcotics and explosives are the most 
useful.  In fact, the GOT bought additional ion scanners to 
be used in their most highly trafficked areas.  Gurleyik says 
the fiberscopes which are also very actively used needed to 
be updated.  Customs upgraded these to videoscopes and sent 
the fiberscopes to less active border crossings.  Gurleyik 
told econoff that Customs officers still use the digital 
cameras and night vision pocketscopes which were provided to 
them in 2000-2002. 
 
¶10.  Customs also told econoff that 3 x-ray machines located 
at 3 main border gates installed as part of an EU 
harmonization project have helped Customs detect and seize 
greater amounts of narcotics than in previous years.  In 
2004, customs seized: 2.6 tons of heroin; 484 kg of hashish; 
28 units of morphine; 80 kg of cocaine; 2 kg of opium; 
1,692,500 units of captagon; and 48,852 units of ecstasy. 
 
 
EDELMAN