05ANKARA5210
TFUS01: TURKS RESPOND WITH COMPASSION AND
Wed Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071621Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR HURRICANE KATRINA TASK FORCE 
DEPT PLEASE PASS DHS FOR FEMA/OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR EAID PREL TU
SUBJECT: TFUS01: TURKS RESPOND WITH COMPASSION AND 
GENEROSITY TO KATRINA 
 
REF: A. STATE 163366 
 
     ¶B. ANKARA 5193 
     ¶C. STATE 162270 
     ¶D. STATE 163278 
     ¶E. STATE 163729 
 
¶1. Summary: The GOT and Turkish citizens responded generously 
and compassionately in the aftermath of Katrina, both by 
publicly expressing condolences and by offering assistance to 
the affected region.  Prime Minister Tayip Erdogan rebutted 
some of the commentary in the Islamist-oriented press by 
noting that those who believe that God is causing Americans 
to pay for their actions abroad are expressing ignorance. 
Post issued a press release thanking the Turkish government 
and people for their compassion and generosity and will 
respond to individual letters of condolences.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------- 
OFFERS OF ASSISTANCE 
-------------------- 
 
¶2. On September 5, ADCM spoke with MFA Deputy Director 
General for International Political Organizations, Tunc 
Ugdul.  Ugdul confirmed the GOT offer passed by the Turkish 
embassy to the Department on September 2 to provide a search 
and rescue team.  We understand that disaster relief agencies 
are currently evaluating this offer.  Per ref A, ADCM 
communicated the list of immediately needed items to Ugdul by 
phone on September 5 and sent a hard copy on September 6. 
 
¶3. Separately, on September 5, Turkish businessman Hasan 
Akincioglu offered 1.2 million bottles of US Army VETCOM 
approved water to the relief efforts, which was transmitted 
by Ref B and by e-mail to the Task Force.  Comment:  Post 
believes that this offer of assistance deserves serious 
consideration.  As stated in ref B, the cargo is currently 
located near Incirlik airbase.  As Incirlik is a cargo hub 
with both contract wide body jets coming from the US and 
C-17s rotating in and out, it may be possible to take 
advantage of a scheduled flight to the US to deliver this 
assistance.  End comment. 
 
¶4. In addition to the search and rescue team offered by the 
GOT, on September 7, the Nilufer Search and Rescue Team, a 
Turkish NGO that operates in connection with the GOT Ministry 
of Interior and has previously assisted with other 
international disasters, contacted econoff to offer their 
services and inquire about visa requirements for rescue 
personnel.  Econoff will coordinate with Task Force to 
process this offer of assistance. 
 
¶5. Turkish Red Crescent Society (TRCS) Head of International 
Department Deniz Solen informed econoff that the TRCS is 
working with the International Red Crescent Society to 
determine what type of assistance, either cash or in-kind, 
will be donated.  TRCS is also accepting calls from Turkish 
private citizens who wish to make a donation.  International 
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Regional 
Delegation Disaster Education Officer Ozlem Cook told econoff 
that they are coordinating any assistance with the Red Cross 
Office in Geneva.  They are also providing interested callers 
with the wire transfer information for the American Red 
Cross,s Hurricane Katrina relief fund. 
 
------------------ 
PUBLIC CONDOLENCES 
------------------ 
 
¶6. Turkey,s political leaders have made public statements of 
sympathy and solidarity in the aftermath of Katrina. 
Rebutting some of the commentary in the Islamist-oriented 
press, Prime Minister Tayip Erdogan noted in a September 6 
speech that "Our God is compassionate.  He is merciful. 
Through his compassion, my God shows mercy to all mankind. 
To say that our God has made certain people pay for their 
actions in this way is a weakness ) it is an expression of 
ignorance."  Following the September 6 meeting of the Council 
of Ministers, Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek said "we share 
the pain of the people of the United States, our friend and 
ally.  Our wishes, in the spirit of our customary solidarity 
and cooperation, have been brought to the attention of the US 
Administration."  In addition to these public statements, 
both the PM and Fon Min Gul conveyed letters of condolence to 
their USG counterparts.  President Sezer has also sent a 
letter of condolence to President Bush.  The Mission has 
received numerous expressions of personal condolences. 
---------------- 
EMBASSY RESPONSE 
---------------- 
 
¶7. On September 7, the Turkish dailies widely carried the 
embassy's press release in response to the numerous 
condolences received.  Begin text of press release:  The 
Embassy would like to express its sincere gratitude to the 
Turkish authorities and the Turkish people for the solidarity 
and concern they have shown in the aftermath of Hurricane 
Katrina.  We greatly appreciate the public statements of 
sympathy and support made by Turkey,s leaders in the wake of 
this terrible tragedy, and we are grateful for Turkey,s 
generous offer of assistance for the relief effort.  Many 
non-governmental organizations and private Turkish citizens 
have also come forward to offer contributions for Americans 
in their time of need, and to express their condolences for 
those who have suffered.  We are humbled by this sincere 
desire to help those who have been uprooted in the disaster, 
and the outpouring of concern by the citizens of Turkey.  The 
messages of support coming from Turkey, our friend and ally, 
have been heard and greatly appreciated by the US Government 
and the American people. End text. 
 
¶8. Embassy and Consulates will respond to personal letters of 
condolence. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. PM Erdogan plans to visit the US the week of September 12 
to participate in the UNGA opening meetings.  There is 
speculation (at this point unconfirmed) that he may try to 
visit the affected area during that visit.  Post will 
continue to monitor Turkey's response to Katrina. End comment. 
 
-------- 
POST POC 
-------- 
 
¶10. Post POC is Economic Officer Rebecca Patrick (x.2255 or 
patrickrk@state.gov). 
MCELDOWNEY