05ANKARA6585
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1213
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6585/01 3120557
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080557Z NOV 05
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1022
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 6648
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 8962
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 9915
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 4895
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4597
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1201
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/CDRUSAE IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 006585 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Elections a Democracy Test for Azerbaijanis - Sabah 
Unrest in Baku - Milliyet 
Azerbaijani Opposition Claims Fraud - Sabah 
Aliyev Pledges Reforms - Aksam 
Paris in Fklames - Turkiye 
Paris Unrest Costs 7 Million Euro - Posta 
Tehran to Make Up with Baghdad - Aksam 
Iran, Italy Duel over Israel - Vatan 
Annan Puts Off Iran Visit - Vatan 11/6 
Bush Staff to Take Ethics Training - Sabah 
Carter: Bush Deceived Americans - Vatan 11/6 
Bush Returns from Americas Summit Empty-Handed - Sabah 
Chavez, Maradona Steal Show at Americas Summit - Posta 11/6 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Iran Opens Military Facility to UN Inspectors - Yeni Safak 
Muslim Youth Besiege Downtown Paris - Yeni Safak 
Migrants Furious in France, Europe on Tenterhooks - Radikal 
Tensions in France Spreads - Cumhuriyet 11/6 
French Muslim Community Demands an Apology - Yeni Safak 
US Warns Americans against Traveling to Paris - Zaman 11/6 
Shiite Family Killed in Iraq - Radikal 
Coalition Forces Launch New Operation on Syrian Border - 
Cumhuriyet 11/6 
Support for Bush Sinks to 35 Percent - Cumhuriyet 11/5 
Wilkerson: Cheney Ordered for Torture of Prisoners - Radikal 
11/5 
Taliban Urges Afghans to Join Fight against Americans - 
Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Azerbaijani Elections:  "Cumhuriyet" on Sunday reported that 
opposition parties in Azerbaijan had their offices raided 
and representatives arrested following an election campaign 
that took place in an atmosphere of tension.  `The elections 
in Azerbaijan, where corruption is rife and some 40 percent 
of the population lives in poverty, are being closely 
monitored by international oil companies, the United States, 
and Russia,' the report says.  The article quotes State 
Department Spokesman Sean MacCormack on the importance of a 
fair election which, he stressed, would strengthen ties 
between Baku and Washington.  The Azerbaijani election 
commission told the press on Sunday that the ruling party 
had won more seats than any other party, but added that many 
seats had also been won by independent candidates.  Monday's 
reporting suggested that the new parliament would be 
dominated by supporters of President Aliyev, and highlighted 
opposition claims of voting fraud.  The reports claimed that 
the opposition may call for people to take to the streets on 
Tuesday. 
 
Turkish `Secret Constitution' on Iraq, Iran, Syria, Cyprus: 
"Hurriyet" reported on Saturday that Turkey's National 
Security Policy Document, the so-called Turkish `secret 
constitution' discussed at the latest National Security 
Council (NSC) meeting, includes the following statements 
 
ANKARA 00006585  002 OF 005 
 
 
about Iraq and Iran:  `The protection of Iraq's territorial 
and political integrity is important for all countries in 
the region.  Long-term steps toward the  establishment of an 
independent Kurdish state will cause serious problems. 
Tehran's continuation of its nuclear program beyond 
humanitarian purposes will pose a threat to Turkey.  Iran's 
work on the Shahab 4 and Shahab 5 missiles following the 
production of Shahab 3 with a range of 1000-1300 km is 
noteworthy.'  The Document also says that developments in 
Syria are being `monitored.'  On Cyprus, the document 
underlines the importance of finding a `lasting and feasible 
solution' that will be `acceptable for both sides' on the 
divided island.  The document also states that Cyprus is of 
`first degree' importance to Turkey's security, adding that 
Ankara will not renounce its rights over the disputed 
island. 
 
Edelman Allegedly Involved in the Libby `Scandal':  "Yeni 
Safak" on Saturday carried a story by Turkey's Ihlas News 
Agency (IHA) from Washington, alleging that former US 
Ambassador to Turkey, Eric Edelman, may have met with Lewis 
Libby in 2003, when Edelman was an advisor to VP Cheney, 
about the leaked identity of a CIA operative.  Edelman told 
a Congressional hearing earlier this year that he had no 
involvement in the issue, but the report suggests that 
Edelman's testimony may have been based on advice from 
`other authorities.'  The report notes that there have been 
no accusations made against Edelman. 
 
PKK Opens Office in Baghdad:  The PKK has opened an office 
in Baghdad despite opposition by Iraqi President Jalal 
Talabani and Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Massoud 
Barzani, weekend papers report.  The office, which is 
protected by 15 PKK militants, was opened under the guise of 
the Iraqi Democratic Solution Party.  A grainy photograph 
carried by may papers shows an Iraqi flag at the office 
flying side by side with what is alleged to be a PKK flag. 
 
Greek PM Karamanlis Puts Off Turkey Visit:  Greek Prime 
Minister Costas Karamanlis has put off his visit to Turkey 
that had been planned for November, weekend papers report. 
Citing Greek press reports, the media claims that Karamanlis 
will not visit Turkey in November, but will reschedule his 
visit for `an appropriate time.'  Greek papers speculated 
that the visit was postponed due to Turkey's policy against 
the recognition of Cyprus and statements by Turkish 
officials on that issue.  The Greek press also speculated 
that Ankara's stance against Greek Orthodox Patriarch 
Bartholomew I had been influential in the decision to 
postpone the visit.  Turkish diplomatic sources told 
"Kathimerini" that they still expect the visit to take place 
before the end of the year, claiming that they have received 
assurances to that effect from the Greek government.  The 
sources implied that Turkey would be extremely displeased by 
an indefinite postponement.  Karamanlis would be the first 
Greek Prime Minister to visit Turkey in the last 46 years. 
 
Bryza Reiterates US Support for Lifting of Sanctions on 
North Cyprus:  In an evaluation of Turkish Cypriot president 
Mehmet Ali Talat's visit to the US at a conference at 
Washington's Georgetown University, Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State Matt Bryza said the way forward is the 
 
SIPDIS 
reunification of Cyprus through the removal of sanctions 
against Turkish Cypriots, Turkish wire services report on 
Monday. 
Bryza said that Talat's visit to the US in late October had 
been `a very big step forward.'  Bryza described Talat's 
meeting with Secretary Rice as `constructive, strategic, and 
visionary.'  `Let's move beyond the slogans.  We should do 
 
ANKARA 00006585  003 OF 005 
 
 
our best to integrate the Turkish Cypriots into Europe and 
the world,' Bryza said. 
 
Talat Displeases Ankara:  Weekend papers report that Turkish 
Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat displeased Ankara by 
scrapping the tradition of celebrating the Ramadan holiday 
with a joint reception with political and military 
representatives from Turkey.   Turkish Cypriot Peace Forces 
Commander Hasan Memisoglu declined to take part in Talat's 
program, and held a separate celebration attended by former 
Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktas.  Asked about his 
decision to hold the reception alone, Talat said that "it 
would be wrong to create the impression that this country is 
not actually ruled by elected officials but by others.  This 
would be detrimental to our cause.  We must show the rest of 
the world that there is democracy in Turkish Cyprus.' 
 
Constitution Gives the PKK Asylum Rights in Iraq:  Ahmet 
Muratli, Ankara representative of the Iraqi Turkmen Front, 
wrote a letter to President Sezer claiming that Article 22 
of the recently accepted Iraqi Constitution gives the PKK 
the right to seek political asylum in Iraq, Sunday's 
"Hurriyet" reported.  Article 22 forbids asylum-seekers from 
being forcibly deported which, according to Muratli, 
prevents PKK terrorists from being extradited to Turkey if 
they are captured in Iraq.  Muratli also voiced doubt that 
the Iraqi Turkmen will preserve their identity if an 
independent Kurdish state is formed. 
 
Barzani Flies to US via Turkey:  Friday's "Vatan" reported 
that Iraqi Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) leader Massoud 
Barzani flew to Washington via Turkey after US officials 
decided that Turkey would be the safest route for the 
Kurdish leader.  The report claims that a small plane 
carrying Barzani landed at Incirlik Air Base on October 23, 
and that he was treated as a guest for a short time by 
Turkish soldiers at the base before departing for Washington 
on a largeer US military plane.  The report notes that in 
2002, Barzani refused to attend a gathering of Iraqi 
dissidents held in the United States because he would have 
had to fly via Turkey. 
 
MP Asks If Turkey Handed Over Terror Suspects to the US: 
Ahmet Guryuz Ketenci, a lawmaker from Istanbul, asked Prime 
Minister Tayyip Erdogan in a statement whether some 
individuals were handed over to the CIA without 
interrogation, dailies reported over the weekend.  Ketenci 
said that a report broadcast by Swedish State Radio claimed 
that Turkish security captured terror suspects sought by the 
United States in operations inside and outside of Turkey, 
and turned them over to the CIA without an interrogation. 
`It is known that a CIA plane that took off from Istanbul 
Airport on March 7, 2005 and flew to the US after stopping 
at Copenhagen and Reykjavik.  The plane stayed on the ground 
for 23 hours at Copenhagen Airport.  In addition, "The 
Washington Post" alleged that the US has set up secret 
prisons in some east European countries.  Turkey may face 
very serious charges in international platforms in the 
coming days,' Ketenci said.  Ketenci added that he will 
submit a motion in parliament requesting an explanation from 
PM Erdogan.  Ketenci asks if the CIA plane that landed in 
Istanbul on March 7 picked up any `passengers' from Turkey, 
and if Turkish security agencies acting as `subcontractors' 
of the US captured individuals and handed them over to the 
CIA. 
 
Cicek Criticizes Denmark for Not Banning Kurdish TV: 
Justice Minister Cemil Cicek strongly criticized Denmark for 
not canceling the license of Copenhagen-based Roj TV, the 
 
ANKARA 00006585  004 OF 005 
 
 
Kurdish broadcaster that Turkey claims is a mouthpiece of 
the outlawed PKK organization.  `Denmark has been stalling 
on our request to close a TV station that supports ethnic 
terrorism.  This contravenes EU legislation,' Cicek charged 
during a visit to Stockholm.  Ankara says that Roj TV has 
been inciting hatred and fear by expressing support for the 
PKK in broadcasts that began in March 2004.  A Danish radio 
and TV watchdog ruled earlier this year that Roj TV programs 
did not violate Danish law, but added that it had asked 
police to look into alleged ties between the broadcaster and 
the PKK.  Turkey has previously succeeded in ensuring the 
closure of two other Europe-based Kurdish TV stations 
believed to have links to the PKK.  MED-TV had its license 
revoked in the UK, while France refused to grant a license 
to its successor, MEDYA-TV. 
 
Erdogan on Ethnic Unrest in France:  Monday papers report 
that Prime Minister Erdogan said that unrest in France had 
been triggered by the headscarf ban enforced in French 
schools.  `A year and a half ago I warned the French that 
they were fueling divisions between Christians and Muslims. 
I stressed that Turkey's EU entry is the only way to prevent 
a possible clash of civilizations.  Unfortunately, our 
warning was ignored,' Erdogan said.  Erdogan emphasized that 
the unrest in France has demonstrated the importance of the 
need to build an `alliance of civilizations.' 
 
Report on Displaced People in Turkey:  A report by the 
Turkish Foundation for Economic and Social Research (TESEV) 
said that the number of displaced people in Turkey had 
reached on million, and that many migrant families force 
their children to work for survival, Monday's "Radikal" 
reports.  The academics that prepared the report said the 
population of the mainly Kurdish southeastern cities of 
Hakkari and Diyarbakyr had increased more than two-fold as a 
result of migration, underlining the fact that the cities 
had failed to cope with the rapid increase.  They noted that 
projects seeking to encourage a return to villages are not 
advancing smoothly, and that state support is not sufficient 
to revive life in evacuated villages. 
 
Economic Situation Deteriorating in Southeast Turkey:  In 
2005, 246,000 people requested assistance form the 
Governor's Office in Diyarbakir, the mainly Kurdish 
southeastern province which has been turned into a `city of 
refugees,' "Radikal" reported on Saturday.  Ongoing 
fighting, unemployment, and economic problems in the 
southeast over the last 15 years have forced the people to 
live on public assistance.  A substantial proportion of the 
population of Mardin, Hakkari, Batman, Bitlis, Sanliurfa, 
Adiyaman, Sirnak, and Siirt lives on assistance received 
from governor's offices and municipalities.   Official 
figures indicate the unemployment rate in Diyarbakir is 14 
percent, though other indicators show that the real figure 
is probably closer to 50 percent. 
 
Minority Assets in Turkey:  The EU Commission Accession 
Partnership Document on Turkey to be released on November 9 
contains recommendations that would open the way for 
minorities to claim their properties in Turkey or to ask for 
compensation, Monday papers report.  Papers claim that the 
inclusion of this subject in the accession partnership 
document will constitute a legal ground for Greeks to demand 
compensation from Turkey for confiscated property. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  France 
 
"The Paris Lesson" 
 
ANKARA 00006585  005 OF 005 
 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in the mass appeal "Vatan" (11/7): "There 
is concern that the flames in Paris might create a chain 
reaction and spread throughout all of Europe.  In fact the 
reasons behind the rage felt by minority groups in France 
are equally valid in other European nations such as Germany, 
Belgium, and Holland. . The West, which has caused anger and 
violence in occupied Iraq, is now seeing a similar situation 
erupt in Paris.  As Eric Marliere, a French sociologist, 
noted, a reaction becomes inevitable when no jobs and 
services available and discrimination exists.  The European 
Commission's report on racism has already concluded that 
there is discrimination against immigrants.  In other words, 
the current uprising is not a surprise. . French Interior 
Minister Sarkozy is not responsible for these events, but he 
will be the one who gets the blame if he refuses to step 
down.  A gesture from the French goverment would be 
sufficient to get the immigrant to stop the violence.  If 
the French system isists on protecting Sarkozy, it will 
only hel the radical Islamist organizations that are 
dreaming to abuse the feelings of the Muslim minority." 
 
"Paris and 1968" 
Rahim Er commented in the conservative "Turkiye" (11/7): 
"Paris is not only an international fashion center.  Paris 
can also be a center for events that spread around the 
world, like the events of 1968.  Although Paris is one of 
the major centers of western civilization, this civilization 
is currently producing anger and poverty that speaks to the 
serious economic divide in France.  . Paris has its 
Africans, New York has its blacks, and London has its 
Pakistanis.  This list could be expanded, but it is enough 
to illustrate the gap that exists between glamor and 
poverty.  The West is preparing itself for a conflict of 
civilizations." 
 
"Paris Ablaze" 
Zafer Atay wrote in the economic-political "Dunya" (11/7): 
"The residents of the areas where the unrest began are 
mainly Muslim immigrants from northern Africa and the former 
colonies of France.  The unemployment rate in these areas is 
30 percent -- three times higher than the national rate. 
People live in poorly constructed housing blocks, many 
without running water or heating.  They suffer continuous 
electricity cuts.  Their garbage is not collected.  The 
schools their children attend are far below French 
standards.  The youth in this area have two choices - to 
sell drugs or join criminal gangs.  . While they attack 
Turkey at every opportunity for violations of human and 
minority rights, French parliamentarians haven't even 
stopped by Clicy-Sous-Bois, where the violence started.  We 
don't believe that Madame Mitterand, who criticized Turkey 
so harshly in the past, even knows the way to the suburbs of 
Paris.  Already, some are characterizing these incidents as 
a civil war and expecting the French military to intervene." 
 
MCELDOWNEY