05ANKARA4733
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004733 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, AUGUST 9, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
McEldowney: We Must Find New Methods against the PKK - 
Milliyet 
US Promises to Fight against the PKK - Sabah 
Grossman: Turks Have Captured Ocalan, Not the US - Milliyet 
A New US Delegation in Turkish Cyprus - Aksam 
Turkish Cabinet Discusses Anti-Terror Draft - Aksam 
Israel Warns Nationals: Grave Terror Threat in Turkey - 
Aksam 
Danish PM Suggests Privileged Partnership for Turkey - 
Milliyet 
Lifetime Jail Sentence for Praise of Terror in Britain - 
Hurriyet 
Tehran Pushes Nuclear Button - Sabah 
Oil Prices Set New Record: USD 63.99 - Milliyet 
Famous Anchorman Jennings Dies - Hurriyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Erdogan Asks McEldowney about Terrorist Infiltrations into 
Turkey - Yeni Safak 
McEldowney: US Working to Cut Financial Aid to the PKK - 
Zaman 
US-Turkey-Iraq Agree on Action Framework for Combating the 
PKK - Yeni Safak 
Nicosia Angered at Second US Delegation Visit to North 
Cyprus - Zaman 
Iraq Discusses its Constitution - Yeni Safak 
Iraq, US Forces Block 700 Syrian Trucks from Returning Home 
- Yeni Safak 
Cooperation among Tehran-Damascus - Yeni Safak 
Schroeder-Merkel Coalition Rumor Rocks Berlin - Zaman 
Israeli Army Orders Settlers to Evacuate Gaza - Yeni Safak 
More Than Half of the Israelis Support Gaza Pullout - Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Charge McEldowney Meets PM Erdogan:  The US Charge 
d'Affaires in Ankara, Nancy McEldowney, told the press after 
meeting with Prime Minister Erdogan on Monday that the US 
was determined to continue helping Turkey in its fight with 
PKK terrorism, papers report.  The US condemned the 
terrorist organization PKK, its leaders and its terrorist 
activities, said McEldowney.  McEldowney noted that more 
ways should be found to handle the ongoing PKK attacks that 
claimed innocent lives in Turkey, adding that the US 
intensified efforts to cut the financial flows that come 
from Europe and elsewhere in the world to support the PKK. 
`We will work together with the Iraqi authorities, and with 
the Turks, to stop the PKK attacks that are coming from 
northern Iraq.  In a free and united Iraq, there is no place 
for terrorism,' she stressed, adding: `The goal of 
terrorists is to divide free and democratic nations like 
Turkey and America.  We will not allow the terrorists to 
succeed.  We will not allow them to divide us.'   McEldowney 
said that she had a `wide-ranging and very positive' 
discussion with Erdogan, and called for a `deeper and 
stronger' strategic partnership among the US and Turkish 
governments and nations.  The US fully supported Turkey's 
domestic reforms and EU drive, McEldowney stressed, adding 
that it was determined to end the isolation of Turkish 
Cyprus as well.  The Charge emphasized that the US and 
Turkey cooperated to prevent terrorism everywhere it occurs, 
and underlined that Turkish troops commanded the ISAF 
operation twice in Afghanistan, and worked in the Balkans 
and in other places around the world to achieve common 
purposes of the two countries.  Asked about how the US has 
evaluated the remarks of PM Erdogan with regard to possible 
Turkish cross-border incursions into Iraq, McEldowney said 
that talks between the US and Turkey continued intensively 
both bilaterally and on a trilateral basis between the 
United States, Turkey, and Iraq, Charge McEldowney said. 
"Hurriyet" says that once the Turkey-Iraq agreement on 
extradition of criminals that was signed during the Saddam 
Hussein regime is renewed, the two countries will set up a 
mechanism for a handover of criminals in Iraq. 
 
Grossman Interview With "Milliyet":  The following is a 
summary of the second part of an interview with Marc 
Grossman carried today in "Milliyet." 
 
`It is very difficult to convince the Turks that the lack of 
US security operations against the PKK was caused by 
military reasons and not political ones, as long as ruthless 
attacks such as the bombings in Kusadasi continue.  However, 
the United States is determined to be through with the PKK 
sooner or later.  But such an operation may not be as swift 
as the Turkish nation expects.' 
 
`I hope that Americans will launch more actions against the 
PKK in the forthcoming months.  Meanwhile, the Turkish 
government should do its best to see the Iraqi government 
take action against the PKK.  Now the Iraqis are also saying 
that the PKK is a terrorist organization, and that it cannot 
continue its presence in northern Iraq.' 
 
`If the conditions for Turkey's hot pursuit of the PKK 
militants occur, Turkish military officials should consult 
the US and Iraqi security forces in the region.  I believe 
that whatever is necessary will be done.' 
 
`I have never met anybody in the US government supporting 
the idea of the establishment of a Kurdish state inside 
Turkey's borders.  We have always fully supported Turkey's 
territorial integrity, and we will continue to do so.  With 
regard to Iraq, we are expending our blood and money there. 
We did not risk our blood and money for an Iraq that is to 
be partitioned.' 
 
`There is an important philosophical and historical 
difference between Turkey and Iraq, and that is federalism. 
We are a federal state, Turkey is unitary.  Hence, Turks 
can't quite understand us fully when we say that more local 
autonomy is needed somewhere.  The main issue here is that 
the US must defend Turkey's territorial integrity to the 
utmost.' 
 
`The US Administration probably cannot grasp the indignation 
caused in Turkey over the possibility that Kirkuk may be 
left under Kurdish control.  The Bush Administration's 
vision of Iraq has largely been devoted to suppressing the 
insurgency and implementing the constitutional timetable. 
If a constitution based on tolerance for diversity leading 
to a united Iraq is made, it may ease the resolution of the 
Kirkuk problem.' 
 
`There is no doubt that the US worked hard in the capture of 
Ocalan.  Ocalan was captured by the Turks.  When Turkey 
forced Ocalan out of Damascus, he fled and an opportunity 
arose to capture the PKK's leader.  And we have considered 
it a moral obligation to pursue Ocalan and take him to 
court.  Ocalan's capture has been a great victory for US- 
Turkey cooperation.' 
 
Ereli on US-Turkey-Iraq Security Talks, Cyprus:  US State 
Department Spokesman Adam Ereli is quoted by dailies that 
the three-party Washington talks among the US, Turkey and 
Iraq held last weekend were useful, very open and 
constructive.  Ereli told a daily press briefing yesterday 
that the delegations of the three countries agreed on the 
framework of future activities, and the formation of working 
groups for technical talks.  Responding to a question by a 
Greek reporter, Ereli said that the visit by a US Congress 
delegation to north Cyprus was not against American and 
international laws.  The US Congress delegation is 
responsible for its visits and decisions, Ereli noted, 
adding that the US State Department neither permitted, nor 
blocked the visit.  Ereli also stressed that the US 
supported lifting economic sanctions on north Cyprus.  `The 
American government personnel can fly to north Cyprus and 
this is not against the laws,' Ereli said. 
 
Evidence Proving Links Between the PKK, Kurdish Parties in 
Kirkuk:  "Cumhuriyet" reports that Ankara has presented the 
US with evidence proving organic ties between the PKK and 
`Kurdistan Democratic Solution Party' and `Democratic 
Reconstruction Party' in Kirkuk.  A Turkish intelligence 
file showing that the Kurdish parties' offices in Kirkuk 
have been managed by the PKK leaders Murat Karayilan and 
Cemil Bayik, and that the parties had pledged loyalty to the 
PKK after they were being founded.  The US side said it will 
examine the proofs, says "Cumhuriyet." 
 
US Congressional Staffers Visit North Cyprus:  A seven- 
member delegation from the US Congress and Senate arrived in 
Turkish Cyprus on Monday as the guest of Turkish Cypriot 
Industry Chamber (KTSO), papers report.  The American 
delegation will be received by the Turkish Cypriot leader 
Mehmet Ali Talat and Foreign Minister Serdar Denktas, and 
meet with the leaders of political parties and NGOs before 
leaving the `TRNC' on August 14, say reports.  KTSO said 
that their main goal was to explain Cyprus question to those 
who had `important positions.'  Cypriot Foreign Minister 
George Iacovou claimed that the US State Department is 
keeping a distance with the congressional staffers visiting 
Cyprus' `invaded areas,' government-affiliated "Cyprus News 
Agency" (CNA) reports.  ``The US State Department does not 
know much about the trip, which is not funded by Congress. 
As far as we know, members of the House are not 
participating in this visit,' he said.  Iacovou also said 
that this was not a direct flight to the `illegal' airport 
at occupied Tympou (Ercan Airport) but one through Turkey. 
 
Cicek on Terrorism, PKK, Anti-Terror Law:  Justice Minister 
and Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek said that the Turkish 
government was determined to take all measures against 
terrorism.  Cicek told the press following a cabinet meeting 
Monday that it will not be possible for terrorist 
organizations to survive if there was not any foreign 
support.  Cicek complained that Turkey has not received 
necessary support from the international community in 
efforts to cut the support to terrorist organizations. 
`What we call as terrorists can be seen as freedom fighters 
by other countries,' Cicek said.  Cicek added that an anti- 
terror draft bill would be submitted to the council of 
ministers on September 2.  Evaluating possible US action 
against the PKK's top leadership, Cicek said that Turkey 
expected concrete steps, and would not deem sufficient a 
mere putting of organizations in terror lists.  `We expect 
more cooperation with the US now in countering terrorism. 
Terrorism is not a concern solely for Turkey, it is a crime 
against humanity,' he emphasized.  Cicek added that the 
issue of terrorism will also be raised at the next meeting 
of the National Security Council (NSC) on August 23.  Cicek 
said in response to recent remarks by the Chief of the 
General Staff (TGS) General Ozkok in which Ozkok had 
complained about the curtailed authority of the military in 
fighting terrorists that the government would do all to meet 
the army's requirements. 
 
Erdogan to Visit Diyarbakir:  On Friday, Prime Minister 
Tayyip Erdogan will travel to Turkey's mainly Kurdish 
southeastern province of Diyarbakir, papers report.  The 
mayors of southeastern provinces and representatives of NGOs 
said that Erdogan's upcoming meeting with intellectuals on 
Wednesday would help work out a solution to the problems in 
southeast Turkey.  Diyarbakyr mayor Osman Baydemir lauded 
the intellectuals' efforts for brokering peace, and called 
on Erdogan to take forward steps for lasting peace in the 
region.  Diyarbakyr Bar of Lawyers president Sezgin 
Tanrykulu said that PM Erdogan, who had been discomforted 
with the visits of foreign delegations to the region, should 
issue clear messages for peace in Diyarbakyr.  The head of 
the Diyarbakir chamber of doctors Ilhan Diken joined them in 
asking Erdogan to issue peace messages, and stressed that 
the people in the region do not want to return to the past. 
Papers expect Erdogan to pledge that economic steps would be 
taken to halt terror, that regional people should be treated 
distinctively from the PKK terrorists, and that military 
operations against the PKK would continue.  Erdogan will 
also encourage businessmen to make investments in the 
region.  Erdogan's office said that the Turkish government 
had constructed 980 km of new motorways and opened 20 new 
hospitals in the region in the last 2.5 years. 
 
Israeli Cruise Liners Rerouted from Turkey to Cyprus:  Two 
cruise liners carrying some 1,600 Israeli passengers to 
Turkey shifted to Cyprus on Monday over concerns of 
terrorist attacks, officials said.  Papers cite the Israeli 
press as saying that there were fears that the cruise liners 
could be attacked by smaller boats packed with explosives, 
similar to the attack against the USS Cole in Yemen in 2000. 
On Friday, the Israeli government had rerouted four Israeli 
liners with more than 3,500 passengers on board from 
Turkey's Mediterranean resort of Antalya to Cyprus, citing 
`grave' security threats. 
 
Premature Detonation Kills Terrorists Making Bombs: 
Istanbul Police said on Monday that the explosion which took 
place in a building in the Zeytinburnu district of Istanbul 
was believed to happen while manufacturing `something 
explosive.'  A blast tore through an apartment block in 
Istanbul on Monday, killing two men thought to have been PKK 
terrorists.  Investigation into the incident continues. 
 
PKK Terrorist Killed in East Turkey:  One terrorist was 
killed in a security operation against the PKK in the rural 
areas of Ilic town of eastern Erzincan city on Monday, 
papers report. 
 
Abducted Turks' Company Rejects Having Worked With the US in 
Iraq:  A leading Turkish power transmission company, 
"Usluel" confirmed on Monday that its three workers -- Metin 
Ceylan, Fatih Yigit and Pasa Saglam -- were kidnapped in 
Iraq by an insurgent group called `Al-Fursan Brigades,' 
papers report.  The company said that it halted activities 
in Iraq a year ago.  `We have never dealt with the US-led 
coalition forces while operating in Iraq.  Our workers went 
there to bring back the equipment we had left in Iraq,' 
Usluel said.  Dailies have quoted `Al-Fursan Brigades' as 
saying over the weekend that they have issued a `last 
warning' for the companies working with US-led forces in 
Iraq. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
"Separatism and Religious Fundamentalism" 
Uluc Gurkan commented in the conservative-sensational "Star" 
(8/9):  "The threat of separatism and religious 
fundamentalism lately has grown immensely.  Both threats, 
especially after the US occupation of Iraq, have been 
supported by foreign sources as well.  It is clear that the 
US will not give up its most trusted `Kurdish Card' in the 
region and will not exert any effort to help Turkey to 
eliminate terrorism.  Other than a few comments on the 
issue, no action will come from the US.  For months the US 
wasted Turkey's time on the trilateral summit in Washington. 
The summit has ended without any concrete results.  The US 
told Turkey that they do not consider the PKK presence in 
Northern Iraq a priority threat and moved away from the 
summit leaving Iraq and Turkey face to face.   How should 
Turkey act under these conditions?  Without doubt, Turkey 
cannot continue its `wait and see' policy any longer. 
Turkey needs determination as a united state to fight 
against separatism and religious fundamentalism.  Turkey 
should let its determination be heard internally and across 
its borders through its renewed National Security Policy 
Document." 
 
"The Most Urgent Project" 
Okay Gonensin wrote in the mass appeal "Vatan" (8/9):  "The 
name of the most urgent project Turkey should consider and 
implement is `internal peace.'  The majority of the people 
in Turkey believe that establishment of internal peace is a 
must, and any delay on that could carry the country to 
ethnic conflict.  The first signs of this ethnic conflict 
can already be noticed in several regions of Anatolia.  And 
the growing threat of PKK terrorism is going to carry the 
country to an ethnic war.  Since these terrorist activities 
are going to hurt the Kurdish people more than anyone else, 
it would be expected that the Leftist intellectuals in 
Turkey would support the Kurdish-origin Turkish 
intellectuals in their efforts.  Unfortunately, many names 
in Turkey who could contribute to internal peace positively 
are still under the PKK's influence.  If terrorist 
activities increase in Turkey, this will hurt every single 
citizen of Turkey.  If the people who call themselves 
Kurdish intellectuals are ignorant of this fact and do not 
exert any effort to stop the bloodshed, they will do the 
biggest harm to their own people." 
 
MCELDOWNEY