05ANKARA6259
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 14, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Friday, October 14, 2005 
HEADLINES 
MASS APPEAL 
Anti-Turkey British Author Receives Nobel Prize - Sabah 
Bloody Day in Caucasus -Sabah 
Deadly Bird Flu Virus in Turkey - Milliyet 
US Parliament Urges Erdogan to Drop Case against Orhan Pamuk 
- Milliyet 
Angela Merkel Extends `Olive Branch' to Turkey - Milliyet 
Rice Invites TRNC President Talat to Washington - Hurriyet 
Terror in Russia - Hurriyet 
PKK Supporter Wins the Nobel Literature Prize - Posta 
Bloody Raid of Chechens in Nalchik - Aksam 
Invitation from US to Talat - Turkiye 
Bird Flu Confirmed in Turkey - Star 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
Channel 7 Established with the Support of `Green Capital' - 
Radikal 
Suspicious Death of Syrian Interior Minister - Radikal 
Chechen Terrorists' Bloody Attack - Cumhuriyet 
Bird Flu Virus Proved Deadly - Yeni Safak 
Oyak's French Partner Axa Offers Genocide Compensation to 
Armenians - Zaman 
Merkel Offers Friendship to Erdogan on the Way to EU - Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Avian Influenza Outbreak in Turkey:  All papers and TV 
stations extensively cover the bird flu outbreak in Turkey. 
The World Organization for Animal Health confirmed that the 
H5N1 virus was detected in sick birds in Turkey.  H5N1 virus 
is highly pathogenic and dangerous.  EU Health and Consumer 
Protection chief Kyprianou said at a press conference that 
the EU should be prepared for a possible bird flu outbreak 
and should stock medication.  The EU issued a travel warning 
for Turkey.  International health experts warn that a global 
flu pandemic could occur if the virus develops the 
capability to pass among humans.  Direct contact with 
infected poultry or their droppings is considered the main 
route to human infection.  The Health Ministry announced 
that all necessary measures had been taken to prevent the 
spread of the deadly bird flu virus. 
 
Secretary Rice Invites TRNC President Talat to Washington: 
 
SIPDIS 
"Hurriyet and "Turkiye" report that US Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice has officially invited Turkish Republic of 
Northern Cyprus (TRNC) president Mehmet Ali Talat to 
Washington.  The invitation was conveyed to Talat by Charge 
d'Affaires Jane Zimmerman of the US Embassy in Nicosia.  The 
date for the visit has not yet been set.  "Turkiye" reports 
diplomatic sources as saying that this invitation would 
encourage the moves to end the isolation of the TRNC. 
 
Chechen Terrorist Attacks in Russia:  Papers report that at 
least 63 people died in Chechen terrorist attacks in the 
southern Russian city of Nalchik.  Around 600 terrorists 
tried to take over government buildings and the airport in 
Nalchik yesterday morning.  Most of the attackers were 
killed by security forces.  "Milliyet" reports that Chechens 
claimed responsibility for the terror attacks. 
 
Syrian Interior Minister Committed Suicide:  Syrian Interior 
Minister Gazi Kanaan, who was questioned over former 
Lebanese Premier Rafik Harriri's murder, committed suicide 
in his Damascus office yesterday.  The death of Kanaan comes 
just days before the final UN investigation report on the 
Harriri assassination is due. 
Greek Cypriots Want Share in the Shipment of Baku-Ceyhan 
Oil:  "Yeni Safak" reports that the Greek Cypriots were 
pressing for access to Turkish harbors and airports because 
they wanted a share in the transportation of Azeri oil to 
world markets. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Chancellor Merkel; Avian Flu 
 
"The Merkel Era in Germany" 
Kamuran Ozbir wrote in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (10/14): 
"Merkel is going to be the first female Prime Minister in 
German history.  The world is eagerly watching to see her 
performance in the German government; she is described by 
some as `the iron lady' of Germany.  .. In fact, Merkel had 
to give some concessions to the SPD in order to assume the 
prime minister's chair.  The composition of the cabinet will 
favor the SPD in number.  The new government under Merkel's 
leadership will have to deal with several issues, including 
the rising rate of unemployment in Germany, the economic 
slowdown, and Turkey's EU membership.  The membership is a 
thorny issue, particularly for the coalition members of the 
government.  The SPD is in favor of Turkey's full 
membership, while Merkel's party is advocating privileged 
partnership status for Turkey." 
 
"No Need to Panic, But Let's Handle the Crisis" 
Haluk Sahin wrote in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(10/14): "The EU warning for its citizens about avian flu in 
Turkey is a normal procedure, and we should not interpret 
such warnings as a sign of being anti-Turkish.  Had a 
similar thing occurred in other countries, Turkey 
undoubtedly would have taken the same precaution.  There is 
no need for panic, but we should acknowledge the existence 
of a crisis, and act accordingly.  We should immediately 
establish a modern communication policy based on fairness 
and clarity. China tried to hide SARS when it first erupted 
two years ago, and this policy seriously damaged China's 
international credibility.  . It is no secret that some in 
Europe have a feeling that Turkey may consider doing the 
same.  Instead of creating arguments to counter such 
prejudice, we should take every necessary step to handle 
this crisis and inform the entire world immediately." 
MCELDOWNEY