05BAGHDAD4368
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Sun Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BAGHDAD 004368 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
 
REFERENDUM, NATIONAL RECONCILATION, AMR MUSA, SADDAM 
HUSSEIN'S TRIAL; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, 
National Reconciliation, Amr Musa, and Saddam Hussein's 
Trial were the major editorial themes of the daily 
newspapers on October 23, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Why Musa's Mission Was Easy" (Az-Zaman, 10/23) 
¶B. "No" (Al-Sabah, 10/23) 
¶C. "The People's Tribunal" (Al-Fourat, 10/23) 
¶D. "Lessons of the Referendum" (Al-Ihtijah Al-Akhar, 10/23) 
¶E. "Saddam's Trial and the Referendum" (Al-Ittihad, 10/23) 
¶F. "Neither Victors nor Vanquished" (Al-Fourat, 10/23) 
¶G. "People Want a New Iraq, Stable and Prosperous" (Al- 
Taakhi, 10/23) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Why Musa's Mission Was Easy" 
(Az-Zaman, independent, anti-coalition published this back- 
page editorial by Fatih Abdul Salam) 
 
"If we examine what the media predicted about Musa's visit 
we'll find some strange issues. The media insisted that Amr 
Musa, the Arab League's Secretary General, would face 
difficulties in Baghdad due to the difficult situation in 
Iraq. On the contrary, his visit was easy and most battles 
were over by the time he arrived. He encountered three types 
of Iraqis: 
 
  1)   Iraqis who had died and relinquished power. 
2)   Iraqis who were dying but clinging to power. 
  3)   Iraqis who were dying but still dreaming of gaining 
     power. 
 
"These three types represent the original characteristics of 
Iraqi politicians-force is the common theme among them. Some 
might say the democratic election and referendum has proven 
the opposite but let us not deceive ourselves. We have 
practiced democracy under occupation and although we 
recognize a certain type of it, what will it look like when 
the occupation leaves? Our democracy is protected by foreign 
forces. 
 
"There are poles that Washington used to erect democracy but 
when the occupiers leave we will be under a tent of 
democracy without any poles-though democracy will remain 
because the occupation will not leave Iraq!" 
 
¶B. "No" 
(Al-Sabah, affiliated with the pro-coalition Iraqi Media 
Network, published this front-page editorial by Muhammad 
Abdul Jabbar) 
 
"Those who headed to the ballot boxes on referendum day 
(October 15) and voted `no' to the constitution deserve our 
respect. Yes, they are against the constitution and they 
rejected it but they ensured their participation in the 
peaceful political process and that is the most important 
thing at this decisive stage. They followed civilized 
behavior in dealing with political issues.They did not 
brandish weapons, they did not fire a single bullet, they 
did not throw a hand grenade or detonate a car bomb against 
the voting centers, they did not assassinate people. but 
simply headed to voting centers and voted `no.' Perhaps they 
were not sure that their no-votes would stop the 
constitutional process. They probably did not have time to 
organize an advertising campaign to influence public opinion- 
-perhaps they do not have funds for such campaigns... 
However, they decided to be honest with themselves and with 
others. 
 
"Real democracy needs peaceful political opposition because 
in a democracy there is no political majority (I would like 
to emphasize political, not ethnic or religious sects) 
ruling the country with absolute authorities and without 
effective opposition. Democracy means a state of settled 
establishments and enterprises based on the rule of law; it 
means a vital and effective civil society and qualified 
government capable of securing public services. 
There are many reasons to create opposition against any 
government (inside or out of the parliament) but the most 
important thing about the opposition is that it be peaceful. 
 
"What is important about the opposition is it should know 
the principles of the democratic political game and respect 
it. This will grant and protect the political process from 
all improper struggles. In addition, this is the why we 
respect those who participated by voting `no' to the draft 
constitution. We also have great respect for those who voted 
`yes' because the political process should never marginalize 
other sects and in this way we'll grant credibility to 
democratic process and guarantee our political security 
which will lead to social security and free us from fear." 
¶C. "The People's Tribunal" 
(Al-Fourat independent anti-coalition published this page- 
three editorial by Abdul Zahra Al-Talqani) 
 
"Saddam is not merely an accused person standing trial 
before Iraqi justice, but rather he is a convicted criminal 
who is responsible for committing numerous crimes against 
his people-and this is the people's tribunal against him. 
 
"It is typical that Saddam keep quiet in court, which 
represents the people's will, because what could he possibly 
say about the millions of citizens he sent to death 
throughout Iraq. 
What murders could he deny? How could he defend himself in 
the middle of a sea of blood? But the people have not kept 
silent and have repeated their call for the death of this 
criminal. 
 
"No one escaped from Saddam's sadistic mentality of 
aggression; even those in areas supposedly filled with his 
supporters didn't escape his wrath. He thought he would 
achieve immortality by erecting pictures and statues of 
himself or by the daily commissioning of poems of flattery, 
but all attempts were illusionary and ephemeral. Tyrants 
throughout history have always been dumped into the garbage 
and individuals such as Saddam do not deserve any dignity; 
they must accept their punishment in this life and on the 
Day of Judgment." 
 
¶D. "Lessons of the Referendum" 
(Al-Ihtijah Al-Akhar, weekly, anti-coalition, affiliated 
with the [Sunni] Liberation and Reconciliation Bloc led by 
Mish'an Al-Jabouri, published this page-three unattributed 
editorial) 
 
"There are important lessons learned from the referendum, 
the first being that the percentage of `no' votes in some 
provinces was unexpected; especially on behalf of sectarian 
and religious parties who were surprised by results showing 
that 45% of citizens in Najaf voted `no.' Percentages that 
were similar to those in other central and south-central 
provinces. These influential and tyrannical parties should 
learn a lesson from the voting results of Najaf's citizens 
and face the truth that Iraqis do not want their state built 
on the foundations of a religious and sectarian base. 
 
"The results from Najaf and other provinces have 
disappointed those parties and surely the coming 
parliamentary election will bring more surprises for them. 
The rejecters of the constitution who were ready to topple 
the referendum have suffered division amongst their ranks 
when the Iraqi Islamic Party (IIP) altered its stance due to 
incomprehensible circumstances which created disappointment 
for citizens of the [Sunni] western provinces. Therefore, 
some of them have rejected voting altogether while others 
were confused over how to vote. 
 
"We have mentioned many times that there is no authority for 
the Sunni Arab that can represent their affairs, because 
these groups have been founded according to a secular 
liberal ideology, although they respect the role of 
religious authorities. 
 
"The coming months will prove that a state based on religion 
and sectarianism will never be constituted in Iraq--at 
anytime." 
 
¶E. "Saddam's Trial and the Referendum" 
(Al-Ittihad, pro-coalition, affiliated with the PUK led by 
Jalal Talabani, published this page-four editorial by Abdul 
Moniem Al-A'ssam) 
"There is a strong connection between the referendum on the 
constitution and Saddam's trial--not only in the close dates 
but also because they represent a transition from the non- 
constitutional stage to the constitutional stage-a 
transition from fabricated referendums, which oppose all the 
natural laws of the universe and result in only `yes' votes 
rather than allowing the possibility of `no' votes as 
reflected in the natural world. 
"While Saddam entered his cage and faced accusations about 
his crimes in Dujail, Halabja, Al-Anfal, the mass graves, 
killing of the innocent in torture chambers, the destruction 
of the marshes, and the beheading of groves of date palms, 
the referendum on the constitution represented the 
prosecutor who will not be satisfied until punishing the 
criminal that harmed millions (regardless of the outcome); 
it is the voters who will deliver their justice. 
 
"There was tension among the media when the tyrant stood in 
his cage-it reminded Iraqis of the era of dictatorship when 
they lived at the whim of Saddam's mercy. No one expected to 
ever see Saddam questioned by a judge. Actually, no one 
expected they would live to see the day Saddam faced 
justice. In order to put these two historical events into 
suitable historic perspective we need to comprehend the 
following fact: Saddam's trial is the first legal 
questioning of an Arab leader for the crimes he committed, 
so it's regarded as a trial for all Arab regimes which have 
deteriorated to the lowest standards. On the other hand the 
referendum in Iraq is regarded as a no-go zone throughout 
the region because it can't be controlled by rulers. 
 
"In spite of Saddam's pledge of innocence, and even if he 
had pleaded guilty, his presence in the cage to face crimes 
against humanity (which even monsters do not face) is 
regarded as transition of an era-from the law of the jungle 
to one of justice. The people have broken free of their 
shackles and forced the evil ruler to face his fate." 
 
¶F. "Neither Victors nor Vanquished" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti coalition, published this back- 
page editorial by Dawood Al-Farhan) 
 
"There is synchronicity between the Secretary General of the 
Arab League, Amr Musa's visit to Baghdad on a mission to 
promote inter-Iraqi dialogue and achieve what was called a 
national accord and the first national unity conference in 
Baghdad attended by more than one thousand political leaders 
representing sixty Iraqi parties, Iraqi-Arab political 
movements, and international organizations. Both the visit 
and the conference are attempts to free Iraq and Iraqis from 
the dark tunnel the American occupation put us in since 
April 2003, causing chaos, violence, and doubts, which 
threaten Iraq's unity. 
 
"The draft constitution failed to relieve us from serious 
danger and regardless of the results of the referendum, with 
all the rumors of vote-rigging we should all agree there 
will be no victors and no vanquished. Iraqis went to the 
ballot boxes to express their opinions freely by either 
voting `yes' or `no' to the constitution but both are Iraqis 
and have rights and responsibilities towards their country. 
This is the foundation of a real democracy in Iraq, more 
than one attitude, more than one opinion and the ability to 
speak freely. 
 
"Amr Musa was articulate when he announced that he was 
heading to Baghdad carrying an Arab initiative aimed to 
support Iraq and reinforce Iraqi-Arab dialogue. In addition, 
he will present his initiative to Iraqi political leaders on 
behalf of all Arab countries as the representative of the 
Arab League. His mission is to seek an Iraqi national accord 
as a supplementary part related to the political process 
taking place in Iraq. To what extent Amr Musa will succeed 
in his precise and difficult mission depends on the Iraqi 
government's attitude, the U.S. government's attitude as an 
occupation force and the attitudes of others such as the 
opposition, independent parties, fighters, and civil society 
organizations. 
 
"The Iraqi government will maintain its stance (as they 
usually declare during Arab League meetings) rejecting 
principles of national reconciliation claiming that there is 
no controversy or arguments between different Iraqi sects. 
Amr Musa will hear a lot from others who are not affiliated 
with the Iraqi government--those who are now talking, in the 
first national unity conference, about an Iraqi national 
project to confront the sectarian and ethnic devastation 
that currently dominates our country. 
"After the referendum results, it would be better for the 
transitional government, its National Assembly and the 
Presidential Council to quit their political arrogance and 
build upon the previous election because voters who rejected 
the constitution and voted `no' are more numerous than 
expected in all Iraqi provinces--even in the northern part 
of Iraq. 
The Iraqi government should consider those voters; they will 
significantly influence the next election. The Iraqi 
government should cooperate with Amr Musa's mission 
otherwise they will blow their political message about 
national unity, commitments to the Arab League compact and 
their respect for human rights. In any case, this government 
is on its way out." 
 
¶G. "People Want a New Iraq, Stable and Prosperous" 
(Al-Taakhi, KDP, pro coalition, published this page-five 
editorial by Adil Badir Al-Ryahi) 
 
"The elected national government of our new Iraq is seeking 
to reset the basis for security and stability all over the 
country--in order to be able to build national institutions 
and arrive at a new, stable, secure and prosperous country, 
which would be able to hold a historical and respectful 
position in the world. 
 
"While the enemies (the terrorists) seek to destroy the 
infrastructure and work hard to publicize sectarian and 
ethnic sedition, they overlook the fact that national unity 
and the power of the interior front has made sure this card 
has fallen forever. 
 
"Further, the noble Iraqi people are the only ones making 
decisions; they are looking forward to building a federal, 
new, secure and thriving Iraq--one whose land is shared by 
everyone; one which is not  manipulated by one group or 
another; one in which society achieves construction and 
prosperity by standing  behind the national leadership 
represented by the new government.There also is a national 
accountability shared by all--the cooperation and immediate 
informing about the safe houses of the enemies in order to 
reach them in the early stages, before the situation become 
aggravated and deters security and stability. Concerned 
national institutions also should take into account the 
fields of security, stability and cooperation with 
neighboring countries in order to approve joint security 
treaties and prevent infiltration. 
 
"The prosperity of the country is also the responsibility of 
civil institutions that should engage their pioneering role 
in providing the best essential services for Iraqi citizens. 
They should secure food requirements for all Iraqis by 
getting and providing the items in the food ration cards and 
ensuring fair distribution for all Iraqi families. 
 
"There also is another role to be played by productive 
institutions: one which guarantees that the requirements of 
the local market and imports are covered, as is any surplus 
of Iraqi production outside the country, which would provide 
foreign currency which will help the economy flourish and 
prosper and which may ensure Iraqis happy and affluent 
lives." 
 
SATTERFIELD