05BAGHDAD3459
MEDIA  REACTION:  IRAQI GOVERNMENT,  CONSTITUTION;
Wed Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003459 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ BAGHDAD
SUBJECT:  MEDIA  REACTION:  IRAQI GOVERNMENT,  CONSTITUTION; 
BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY:  Discussions  on  the Constitution  was  the  major 
editorial theme of the daily newspapers on August 22,  2005. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "Constitutional Discussions" (Al-Adala, 8/22) 
¶B.  "Why Are We Afraid of Federalism" (Al-Sabah, 8/22) 
¶C.  "The Disagreement Points are Increasing" (Al-Fourat, 
8/22) 
¶D.  "This Morning" (Al-Sabah Al-Jadeed, 8/22) 
¶E. "Dividing Iraq Away from the National Zeal" (Al-Mashriq, 
8/22) 
¶F. "What is the Argument For the Constitution? (Al-Ittihaad, 
8/22) 
---------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶A. "Constitutional Discussions" 
(Al-Adala Newspaper (Affiliated with The Supreme Council of 
Iraqi Revolution in Iraq - SCRI) in Arabic P 3 Editorial by 
Ali Khalif) 
 
"The current discussions on the constitution among the Iraqi 
politicians represent a very important step in Iraq's 
journey to democracy.  However, it seems as though every 
political group is trying to impose its own agenda on the 
constitution . . . There are some who hold political 
opinions that do not serve the Iraqi national interest. 
For example, those who oppose the idea of federalism in Iraq 
might have accepted it if they had natural resources in 
their own provinces.  If we believe in democracy and freedom 
we must not be afraid of federalism . . . But I think that 
some political groups in Iraq are selfish and because of 
that they try to dominate all other groups. These are the 
groups that accept the idea of Kurdish federalism while at 
the same time refuse the concept of establishing federal 
territories in any other part of Iraq . . . Nevertheless, 
the current constitutional process represents a great 
achievement and the Iraqi politicians who have taken the 
lead in this process must complete the task of drafting a 
constitution that meets the needs of all Iraqi people.  We 
do not like anyone to make use of this achievement to make 
it a platform to launch bombastic slogans.  The Iraqi people 
want to live in peace and they want to enjoy their fair 
share of Iraqi wealth and natural resources." 
 
¶B.  "Why Are We Afraid of Federalism" 
(Al-Sabah Newspaper (affiliated with the Hezbollah movement) 
in Arabic p. 2 Editorial By Sa'eed Abdul Hadi) 
 
"Until yesterday, federalism was an obstacle in the way of 
reaching an agreement on the constitution draft.  As 
everyone knows there is a Shiite-Kurdish agreement on 
federalism. However, the Sunnis call for non-centralism of 
provinces and totally refuse federalism. The Arab Sunnis 
think that federalism will lead to the unfair distributing 
of natural resources among provinces.  We do not know the 
reason behind such fear since the Iraqi politicians 
unanimously agreed on the distribution of natural resources 
. . . The Western media focuses on the positive points of 
federalism and how important it is for Iraq's development. 
The conservative Pan Arab media outlets severely attack 
federalism in Iraq.  We feel that they attack federalism in 
Iraq because they want to defend their own political 
establishment.  Those establishments would be threatened if 
federalism succeeded in Iraq . . . The Arab countries are 
still governed by tyrannical regimes.  Those regimes give a 
very good picture of what is called as the eastern tyranny. 
The so-called progressive Arab press opposes the rights of 
Iraqis to establish their own federalism.  Administrative 
federalism in Iraq is necessary because it would restore the 
confidence of our many ethnic groups.  We must not say bad 
things about each other.  We must not say things like; 
Sunnis refuse federalism because they want to implement a 
nationalist Arab project for the sake of our neighbors or 
accuse the Shiites of being involved in an Iranian plan in 
Iraq.  These accusations come from those who want to destroy 
Iraqi confidence and encourage sectarianism . . . What will 
the Shiites lose if a central government was established 
that represented the majority in Iraq?   What will the 
minority Sunnis benefit from having a central government? 
There must be a national movement in Iraq and honest Arab 
writers must support this move . . . Iraq is moving forward 
and the democratic process will never stop.  Disagreements 
among Iraq's Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds are a healthy point 
in this process." 
 
¶C.  "The Disagreement Points are Increasing" 
(Al-Fourat Newspaper (independent, Anti-Coalition) in Arabic 
P 2 Editorial By Majed Fadhel Al-Zaboon) 
 
"Despite the Constitution Drafting Committee's announcement 
that the political parties working on the Constitution have 
resolved their differences and reached an agreement, it 
seems that there are still arguing . . . In fact they are 
still trying to reach an agreement on sixty-six different 
points.   How did six points of disagreement turn into sixty- 
six points of disagreement? . . . One of my colleagues 
thought that members of the Constitution Drafting Committee 
would not be able to read the constitution articles because 
there is no electricity where he lives.   He lives far away 
from the International Zone so he knows nothing about the 
concrete walls and unlimited electricity. My other colleague 
thought that they should schedule their discussions about 
the disagreement points.  The problem with that solution is 
that Arabs want a schedule according to the Arabic 
alphabetic and the Kurds want the Kurdish alphabetic, the 
same goes for others political groups . . . Ambassador 
Khalilzad, our American brother, suggested that they use the 
English alphabetic. Everyone respects his wisdom and they 
liked the idea.  However, he decided to add more articles to 
the Iraqi constitution draft.  When some of the Constitution 
Drafting Committee members protested, he used his veto 
against them!  He has the right to do so because the United 
States is a permanent member in the International Security 
Council . . . This is why the members of the Constitution 
Security Council accept his very democratic additions. 
They accent the federalism, and fit into the regional 
standards that are right for Iraq.  They were so happy with 
Ambassador Khalilzad that they applauded him." 
 
*Translators  note:  the  author is  actually  sarcastically 
criticizing  the  US  involvement  in  writing   the   Iraqi 
constitution. 
 
¶D.  "This Morning" 
(As-Sabah Al-Jadeed Newspaper (Independent) in Arabic P. 1 
Editorial by Ismael Zayyer) 
"The completed constitution will begin the next stage in our 
country's development.  So, do not worry about Qatar.  Do 
not waste time on others issue or other groups and their 
campaigns against us. Go ahead brothers and ensure our 
children's future . . . This does not mean that you should 
be careless and accept anyone's opinion into the 
Constitution.   But we should stand behind our own opinions 
about this historical document.  It will establish the basic 
elements for the government in the new Iraq . . . It is our 
basic rights to participate in the referendum and vote for 
the constitution. It does not matter what your vote.  The 
most important thing is that we are free to express our 
opinions.  But we should first read the document and 
understand what it means.  We should also discuss the issues 
raised in this document.  Then we are prepared to express 
our opinion toward it . . .If we reject any interference in 
our affairs, and refuse to allow the foreigner to remain on 
our land, we should show the world that we are a nation that 
says what is means and has the courage to express its 
opinions. Casting a vote on the constitution is the first 
step for national, Arab, and international recognition.  It 
is the first step toward reconstruction." 
 
¶E. "Dividing Iraq Away from the National Zeal" 
(Al-Mashriq Newspaper (Independent, Anti-Coalition) in 
Arabic P7 Editorial by Shamil Abdul Qader) 
 
"Some Iraqis have two main ideas about the unity of Iraq. 
One is that Iraq cannot be divided, and two is that dividing 
Iraq would be an attack against the efforts of the United 
States to maintain Iraqi unity.  However, most Iraqis 
believe that Iraq will be divided.  They think that the 
governments of Western and Middle Eastern countries have 
planned all along to divide Iraq for the benefit of Middle 
Eastern forces.  The people who love Iraq and its unity view 
federalism as a step backward under the pretext of 
protecting it from a centralized government . . . The former 
United States Civil Administrator for Iraq Ambassador Paul 
Bremmer repeated many times that he refused federalism based 
on sectarian issues.  He maintained that he agreed with 
geographical federalism. That means that Iraq will be turned 
into 18 federal territories instead of 18 provinces . . . 
All Iraqis understand that Iraq needs a centralized 
government for security.  We wonder if Al-Ja'afari's 
government will give us the centralization of the former 
regime.  Iraqis will destroy the idea of division.  Their 
anger will come down on the heads of Iraq's enemies and on 
the heads of those who are trying to finance its division." 
 
¶F. "What is the Argument For the Constitution? 
(Al-Ittihaad Newspaper (ant-coalition, independent) in 
Arabic P 5 Editorial by Karekar Abdullah Khushanoo) 
"In today's session of the Transitional National Assembly, 
the Constitution will either be decided or refused . . . In 
support of the Constitution, many press statements have been 
issued, and there have been many meetings for the leaders of 
the political blocks.  Everyone is working on the 
Constitution's controversial issues.   The TNA will present 
the results to the Iraqi people.  However, they are bored 
with the issue and do not want to another postponement . . . 
The leaders of the political blocks have issued statements 
about the significant restrictions facing them.  If they are 
able to come to an agreement on the constitution draft, that 
very act will save Iraq.  The completed constitution will 
open up new horizons for the Iraqi people and will kick 
start reconstruction.  The people need a break from the 
their current miserable condition . . . When the Political 
Blocks Leaders complete the draft, it will need the approval 
of the TNA.  If the Assembly does not approve the draft the 
political process goes back to the beginning.  It will be 
destructive to the Iraqi people in many ways.  The 
political, economic, security and social consequences of a 
denial will dishearten the people.  It will also mean that 
after two years of continued suffering, that included a 
dangerous election, they only gained a few benefits . . . 
The elected National Assembly should have finished the 
constitution through the efforts of the Constitution 
Drafting Committee by the first deadline.   But it failed to 
reach an accord.  That fact compelled the president to have 
the political blocks to sit together in order to solve the 
restrictions . . . The statements are continuing, some are 
optimistic and some are pessimistic that the document will 
be finished.  A decision from the TNA decision will remove 
these all doubts that the government is serious about the 
future . . . We still optimistic that the TNA will give us 
our final draft, if we do not get the draft the country will 
sink into chaos and face continued foreign intervention in 
our internal issues . . . Iraqis want a constitution that 
will protect their rights, protect their country, and ensure 
a bright future for their children. We are waiting for the 
National Assembly to decide the constitution, prepare the 
referendum and hold the elections." 
 
 
 
Khalilzad