05BAGHDAD5150
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Thu Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 005150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials were the 
political discussions and conflicts surrounding 
parliamentary elections, the formation of the next 
government, and the Kurdish initiative to bring together 
political groups. 
 
In its front-page editorial entitled "Dukan Resort and the 
Way to Reach a Solution," PUK affiliated Al-Ittihad 
discusses the Kurdish initiative to gather key political 
leaders to reach an agreement on forming the next 
government. The SCIRI-affiliated Al-Adala discusses Abdul 
Aziz Al-Hakim's visit to Kurdistan to meet Kurdish leaders 
in its third-page editorial entitled "Preserving 
Accomplishments"; the editorial emphasizes the importance of 
reaching national consensus to form the new government. The 
first-page editorial of quasi-independent As-Sabah 
spotlights the dearth of funding for public services in 
Baghdad.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Beware of Slipping into the Abyss" (Al-Basaer, 12/28) 
¶B. "Kurdish-American Relations" (At-Taakhi, 12/28) 
¶C. "Can the Kurdistan that Dreams of Separating from Iraq 
Unite the Country?" (Al-Bayyna Al-Jadeedah, 12/28) 
¶D. "Is It a Deal?" (Al-Fourat, 12/28) 
¶E. "White Elections and Red Violations" (Al-Mashriq, 12/28) 
¶F. "This Morning" (As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, 12/28) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Beware of Slipping into the Abyss" 
(Al-Basaer, affiliated with Association of Muslim Scholars, 
published a front-page unattributed editorial about the 
electoral process, violations, and demonstrations throughout 
the country. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"We were not surprised about the fraud in the elections 
because we have already said that any election held under 
the occupation would not be honest, and it would not solve 
Iraq's problems. There are demonstrations in many cities 
supporting the elections. At the same time, we saw rallies 
rejecting this election. The Americans bless both of these 
demonstrations. We warn the Iraqi people of slipping into 
the abyss because the occupier wants to establish 
sectarianism and racism in Iraq through the current 
political process." 
 
¶B. "Kurdish-American Relations" 
(At-Taakhi, affiliated with the KDP, published a front-page 
editorial by editor in chief Dr. Badr Khan Al-Sindi about 
American relations with the Kurds. The editorial reads in 
part) 
 
"There have been many plots developed against the Kurds 
through their history. Recently, U.S. Ambassador Zalmay 
Khalilzad's statements during his press conference in 
Kurdistan concerning the Kurds and the Algeria Agreement 
made the Kurdish community happy. He regarded the agreement 
as a negative point in American-Kurdish relations. He also 
said that the U.S. supports the federal system that is 
ratified in the Iraqi constitution. This makes the Kurds 
confident; they believe that there will be no more plots 
against them in the future." 
 
¶C. "Can the Kurdistan that Dreams of Separating from Iraq 
Unite the Country?" 
(Al-Bayyna Al-Jadeedah, affiliated with the Shiite Political 
Council, published a front-page unattributed editorial about 
the Kurdish initiative to unify quarreling political groups. 
The editorial reads in part) 
 
"Will Kurdistan be the path for uniting Iraqi 
politicians-this place that always dreamt of separating from 
Iraq? I think this question represents a dream for Iraqis 
who suffered from terrorism and the absence of government. 
We believe that there is no use in dividing the country or 
continuing the violence. If we continue distributing the 
government's positions according to sectarian and ethnic 
bases, Iraq will be similar to Lebanon. We hope that all 
winners and losers in the election understand that the 
language of violence and fighting is useless. Only dialogue 
will be able to solve our problems. Politicians should take 
away a good lesson from Saddam, who was toppled, who was 
found in a rat's hole, and whose socialism and nationalism 
are gone for ever." 
 
¶D. "Is It a Deal?" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, published a back-page editorial by 
Dawood Al-Farhan about the establishment of the next 
government. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"We heard that there is a speech about a deal to form a 
`national unity government' in light of the parliamentary 
elections and the accusations of ballot-rigging. I think the 
next parliament should discuss and solve the crisis of 
forming the government. If the coming parliament is not 
formed according to honest and fair bases, the new 
government will find itself controlled by the conditions of 
political deals. The current government was established 
according to these deals, and for this reason it failed to 
accomplish people's demands and [live up to their] 
expectations. The current discussions on forming a 'national 
salvation government' will not solve the main problem 
because the main problem lacks a solution that satisfies all 
parts." 
 
¶E. "White Elections and Red Violations" 
(Al-Mashriq, independent, published a front-page editorial 
by Hamid Abdullah about the parliamentary elections and the 
violations that occurred during elections. The editorial 
reads in part) 
 
"The IECI has divided election violations into red, white, 
yellow, and purple. However, the IECI regards only the red 
violations as the most important, which deserve studying and 
checking. In fact, the IECI was surprised to see the senior 
government's officers violate the period of silence that 
preceded the election. Those officials addressed people, 
saying that Iraqis should go on 'Jihad' by heading for the 
ballot boxes. Those speeches and statements were 
advertisements for specific electoral lists. Some political 
parties believe that elections that are held under violence 
and car bombings can be free and public. I would like those 
political parties to wake up if they were asleep." 
 
¶F. "This Morning" 
(As-Sabah Al-Jadeed, independent, published a front-page 
editorial by editor in chief Ismael Zayyer about the 
expected meeting of Iraqi politicians in Kurdistan to solve 
the current political crisis. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"Today, leaders of the political parties will meet in 
Kurdistan to prepare for the establishment of the next 
permanent government. All Iraqis are looking forward to the 
results of this very important meeting because it will 
decide the future of the next government. The Iraqi 
community considers this meeting an important step toward 
solving all problems in the country. Iraqis are looking 
forward to seeing their dreams come true." 
 
KHALILZAD