05BAGHDAD3130
KIRKUK: MUNICIPAL COUNCILS IN SUB-DISTRICTS
Fri Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003130 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:N/A 
 
TAGS: PGOV ECON IZ
SUBJECT:  KIRKUK: MUNICIPAL COUNCILS IN SUB-DISTRICTS 
VIRTUALLY POWERLESS 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY. Municipal council chairmen for five 
Kirkuk sub-districts expressed frustration July 20 
over the lack of infrastructure in their towns.  They 
asserted that without leverage over budgets, municipal 
councils cannot provide public services to their 
communities.  Although municipal councils meet, their 
credibility with the public has declined.  If they are 
to remain relevant, district councils in places like 
Kirkuk must learn to channel local views through 
effective lobbying with other officials, such as 
provincial council members, TNA members and ministers. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
Councils Unable to Meet Basic Needs 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Municipal council chairmen from five of the 
six Kirkuk sub-districts met with REO Kirkuk PolOffs 
on July 20 in a REO initiative to improve 
communication with local governments. Attendees 
included: Hassan Abid Al-Juburi, Multaqa district; 
Dashti Abdul-Majeed Haseeb, Laylan; Maad Sami Al-Assi 
(deputy chairman), Taza; Rizgar Papilani, Shwan; and 
Luqman Aziz, Qarahanjeer.  (NOTE:  Shwan, Qarahanjeer, 
and Qadir Karam districts receive their funding from 
the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), yet fall into 
Kirkuk sub-district jurisdiction. END NOTE.)  The 
councilmen described their frustration at not being 
able to meet even the most basic constituent needs. 
Inadequate supplies of water and electricity topped 
their list of concerns.  Laylan Council Chairman 
Abdul-Majeed Haseeb noted growing resentment regarding 
the perceived insignificance of reconstruction 
projects in his town.  He said the public expects 
projects that will add noticeable value to the 
ordinary citizen's life.  He noted that, without 
sufficient clean water and dependable electricity, it 
is impossible for municipal councils to focus on 
governance issues. 
 
No Budget and Unresponsive Provincial Government 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The chairmen claimed that their councils do 
not receive a budget through the national budgeting 
process, have no allocation for spending, and council 
members do not receive salaries.  The chairmen 
described their council buildings as dismal and poorly 
furnished.  They worry about security and the lack of 
resources to protect themselves, their families and 
the council meeting places. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) They unanimously voiced dissatisfaction with 
the Kirkuk Governor and Provincial Council in dealing 
with their concerns.  Shwan Council Chairman Rizgar 
Papilani said the sub-districts are forgotten in 
Kirkuk government's higher echelons.  The chairmen 
complained that their requests for meetings with the 
Governor were refused and all agreed that they have no 
interaction with the Kirkuk Provincial Council.  In 
fact, Papilani said he requested meetings on three 
separate occasions with the previous Kirkuk Provincial 
Council Chairman, but was refused each time.  However, 
he noted that he has not recently requested a meeting 
with current chairman, Rizgar Ali Hamajan (PUK). 
 
Losing Credibility at Home 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) There has been project work in Kirkuk 
(Tamim) province - some USD 18 million in IRRF- 
financed projects have been completed, with another 
USD 261 million in projects underway, and up to USD 
141 million more planned.  This funding does not go 
through the district councils, however.   Powerless to 
undertake work independently without a budget, the 
local council chairmen said they continue to hold 
meetings on a regular basis.  However, all agreed that 
it is increasingly difficult to maintain the respect 
of their communities while faced with repeated 
failures to produce visible public service results in 
a constituency that views deliver projects as 
equivalent to power.  The two Arab and three Kurdish 
chairmen at the meeting were united in their concerns 
and all frustrated, regardless of ethnicity - a rare 
sign of unity in Kirkuk.  If they are to remain 
relevant in the current structure, district councils 
in places like Kirkuk must learn to channel local 
views through effective lobbying with other officials, 
such as provincial council members, TNA members and 
ministers. 
 
¶6.  (U) Embassy Baghdad, REO Mosul, and REO Basrah 
minimize considered.