05BAGHDAD4516
BASRAH REGIONAL MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT,
Sun Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 004516 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: BASRAH REGIONAL MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, 
 
REFERENDUM, SECTARIANISM, OIL SMUGGLING, SADDAM TRIAL, 
SYRIA; BASRAH 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Referendum, Sectarianism, Oil 
Smuggling, Saddam Trial and Syria, were the major editorial 
themes of the daily Basrah regional newspapers from October 
20 - November 4, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "No Loyalties Except to Iraq" (Al-Basrah, 10/29) 
¶B. "Arabs, When Will Your Conscience Awaken?" (Al-Samawah, 
10/25) 
¶C. "Different Opinions about Oil Smuggling" (Al-Ashar, 
10/26) 
¶D. "Point of View: Referendum without Blood" (Al-Manarah, 
10/26) 
¶E. "The Last Line of Defense for the Syrian Regime" (Al- 
Manarah, 10/26) 
¶F. "Which Saddam Should Be on Trial?" (Al-Manarah, 10/26) 
¶G. "Observations about the Referendum" (Al-Manarah, 10/26) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "No Loyalties Except to Iraq" 
(Al-Basrah, published by the Basrah Governing Council, 
printed this sixth-page editorial by columnist Jawad Al- 
Saleem, on October 29) 
 
"Above all, Iraqis always pledge loyalty to the Iraqi 
nation. This loyalty comes from a lifetime of suffering and 
sacrifice at the hands of vicious tyrants and their 
governments.  The Iraqis are loyal to their country and have 
been working hard and to rebuild it ever since April 9th, 
¶2003.  We continue our efforts even though there is no 
electricity, no consistent general services, and an 
employment sector rife with nepotism." 
 
¶B. "Arabs, When Will Your Conscience Awaken?" 
(Al-Samawah (Muthanna), independent, published this third- 
page editorial by columnist Najeh Mehdi Saba', on October 
25) 
 
"As before, other Arab nations are ignoring Iraqis' 
suffering while assisting foreign countries suffering from 
natural disasters. Their attitudes toward Iraq are as 
shameful as Amr Musa's, the Secretary General of the Arab 
League, who offered condolences to the Israelis after the 
Sharm Al-Sheikh attack but did not say anything about the 
Iraqis killed at Al-A'ema bridge in Baghdad. Qatar has 
donated $100,000 to the infidel Americans, whom God has 
punished with natural disasters." 
 
¶C. "Different Opinions about Oil Smuggling" 
(Al-Ashar (Basrah), Independent, published this front page 
staff editorial on October 26) 
 
"Authorities from the Oil Production Company said that oil 
smuggling has become the main income for many people 
involved in international trade with Iraq's neighbors. They 
use special areas to hide their containers, some of which 
are buried underground, and their activities are generally 
carried out with the full knowledge of local authorities. 
Smuggling is particularly heavy in Al-Sibah along the 
Basrah/Dhi-Qar border. Drivers come in from Jordan and other 
Arab countries and travel freely through the south, carrying 
illegal oil from Iraqi petrol stations near the border for 
resale. How are they able to enter and move throughout Iraq 
without being challenged?  It is because the security 
authorities are part of the operation?" 
 
¶D. "Point of View: Referendum without Blood" 
(Al-Manarah (Basrah), independent, published this fourth- 
page editorial by columnist - Najah Mohammed Ali, on October 
26) 
 
"Whatever our opinion about the fall of the Saddam regime 
and the current government in Iraq elected last January, the 
referendum of the constitution is a new beginning and will 
assist in solving domestic problems that arose from non- 
participation during the previous elections. The intensive 
security situation that surrounded the referendum has become 
the norm, and this high level of security promotes the 
regulation of security issues and ultimately protects 
Iraqis.  We are thankful that the referendum was bloodless. 
 
"Islamic parties encouraged people to vote for the 
constitution, while a large number of people from Anbar and 
Tikrit voted against it. This reflects the ability of Iraqis 
to establish a democracy that allows everyone to participate 
under one unified Iraqi authority, far away from American 
meddling. 
 
"Most  Shi'a  and  Kurds voted to pass the constitution  and 
most Sunnis refused. Those who refused the constitution were 
former   Ba'athists,  the  followers  of  Saddam,  and   his 
intelligence agents. Those Shi'a and Kurds who voted against 
the constitution were the ones who are afraid of a political 
process that allows change. 
 
"Some people who are against the constitution want to return 
to  the old regime. It is strange that those who are against 
the  occupation are working with the occupiers  and  getting 
support   and  funding  from  occupation  forces.  We   hear 
information about the Americans negotiating with  those  who 
oppose  the  occupation  in order  to  target  civilians  in 
attacks. 
 
"We oppose both the occupation and the former Saddam regime 
and we refuse to participate in elections before we reach a 
national compromise that does not allow criminals and 
killers to get away with their crimes. Today's bloodless 
referendum encourages us to invite everyone who supports 
Iraqis to make a conference for dialogue and national 
compromise to build a new Iraq for Iraqis." 
 
¶E. "The Last Line of Defense for the Syrian Regime" 
(Al-Manarah (Basrah), independent, published this front-page 
editorial by Editor-in-Chief Khalaf Al Munshidi, on October 
26) 
 
"The months-long investigation showed, as expected, that 
there are ties between Lebanese and Syrian intelligence, and 
perhaps the intelligence agencies of other countries that 
want Syria subjected to Security Council sanctions, similar 
to what happened to the Saddam regime. The United States is 
pulling the wool over the eyes of the world community by 
requesting to condemn and sentence the Syrian regime, when 
their real reasons have nothing to do with the Hariri 
assassination." 
 
¶F. "Which Saddam Should Be on Trial?" 
(Al-Manarah (Basrah), Independent, published this front-page 
editorial by Deputy Editor-in-Chief Moafaq Al-Refaie, on 
October 26) 
 
"What occurred to Iraq is terrible. Above all, Iraqis have 
been traumatized both physically and mentally in an Iraq- 
wide genocide. It would be better to put the "Saddam 
phenomenon" on trial, not Saddam personally. This phenomenon 
may be repeated if suitable conditions in Iraq are not 
developed. Saddam has many friends in neighboring countries, 
and they should be on trial too. Those who demonstrated in 
Al-Dujail were not those who suffered from Saddam personally 
but suffered from his dictatorship, and they will demand 
that he be executed." 
 
¶G. "Observations about the Referendum" 
(Al Manarah (Basrah), Independent, published this page- five 
staff editorial on October 26) 
 
"The writing of the draft constitution did not obey 
electoral norms. Writing the constitution draft was done too 
hastily toward the end in an effort simply to satisfy the 
deadlines imposed by the transitional government. People 
voted for the constitution just to put an end to the 
situation." 
 
SATTERFIELD