05BAGHDAD4336
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Thu Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004336 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
 
REFERENDUM, SADDAM HUSSEIN TRIAL; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, and 
Saddam Hussein's Trial were the major editorial themes of 
the daily newspapers on October 19, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "What Follows the Constitution?"      (Al-Ittihad, 10/20) 
¶B. "Speed Up the Procedures" (Al-Adala, 10/20) 
¶C. "Hope In the National Unity Conference" (Baghdad, 10/20) 
¶D. "Let Us Turn the Next Page" (Al-Fourat, 10/20) 
¶E. "Probable Suspicions" (Al-Da'wa, 10/20) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "What Follows the Constitution?" 
(Al-Ittihad, pro-coalition, affiliated with the PUK led by 
Jalal Talabani, published this page-five editorial by Dr. 
Zuhair Abdul Malik) 
 
"Ten million Iraqi voters participated in the constitutional 
referendum on October 15 by voting `yes' or `no' to the 
proposed permanent constitution. This is the major goal we 
have all been looking forward to though supporters of 
terrorism and the former regime have worked hard to cause 
the process to fail. Whatever the results of the referendum, 
the most important thing is that there are no more 
abstainers in the political process 
 
"[Sunni] Politicians sometimes use bizarre words, such as 
their claims that they were forced to abstain from 
participating in the political process. However we believe 
that they either, chose not to participate due to terrorist 
intimidation or, they rejected the idea of replacing 
Saddam's regime which held power over their people-perhaps 
it's their notion of masters and slaves. 
 
"This [referendum] is a new lesson in democracy for Iraqis. 
The referendum results will indicate the majority's decision 
regarding important issues but it does not mean suppression 
of the minority. If Iraqis had realized that, then the 
common expression which states that `government is a 
contract between the people and their ruler' would be 
applicable. We the people have empowered you (our 
government) to operate under our conditions and to govern us 
for a limited period of time. 
 
"Our condition for government is that it works hard using 
all its technical and educational resources to serve us, to 
rebuild our country, to improve public services, to preserve 
our identity and to seek democracy, freedom and peace in 
dealing with all of our neighbors and with the international 
community. However, I wonder if the terrorists will 
understand these results. Personally I do not believe they 
will. Will neighboring governments and their satellite news 
channels realize the meaning of our significant victory? 
 
"I do not think so, because those governments do not believe 
in transparency and they are afraid of human rights which is 
why they do not want freedom and democracy in Iraq. 
Terrorism and violence will not halt us from reaping the 
benefits democracy has brought to our country. Our battle 
today is between democracy and its enemies; between 
democrats and dictators. The [main] message from the 
constitutional referendum is that people and nations have 
decided to fight terrorism and back their democratic 
governments." 
 
¶B. "Speed Up the Procedures" 
(Al-Adala, pro-coalition, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul 
Aziz Al-Hakim, published this front-page editorial by Dr. 
Ali Khalaif) 
 
"Yesterday was the first public trial of an Arab president 
who exercised the worst form of dictatorship against his 
people. Although this trial has come late it has provided a 
sort of comfort to Iraqis who have waited a very long time 
for it. 
 
"What brings us pleasure is that this is the first trial in 
the region of a senior official, and it was honest and just; 
the entire world witnessed the opening session, in which 
neither the tyrant nor his associates were exposed to any 
insults. 
 
"What we are seeing is that the Iraqi people want the trial 
to speed up. The adjournment has caused further pain to 
victims and their families who have already waited for two 
years. People saw the tyrant and his associates lying and 
denying the crimes they committed in Dujail. People also saw 
those demonstrating in support of the former regime, causing 
callous disregard for others' feelings. 
"Therefore, it is not justice that Saddam and his associates 
have been granted more time to lounge in jail. Although we 
are for the establishment of such tribunals in the region, 
we also advocate on behalf of the people and support the 
victims who demand the expediting of this trial and closure 
of this issue before the coming election in order to turn 
the painful page in our people's history and to open a 
shining book for building the new Iraq." 
 
¶C. "Hope In the National Unity Conference" 
(Baghdad, affiliated with the Iraqi National Accord led by 
Iyad Allawi, published this front-page unattributed 
editorial) 
 
"For the first time there is hope for Iraqis; a candle 
lights the way in the darkness by the holding of a national 
unity conference. Efforts by Dr. Iyad Allawi, for the good 
and interests of Iraq, to bring about national unity have 
enhanced the hope for Iraqis that they are able to pass 
through the crisis. 
 
"This conference is a good start and gives hope for the 
future. We should get beyond our wounds in order to build 
our future, and to emphasize for our coming generations that 
decent Iraqi men have gathered and compromised for a loving 
Iraq. Dr. Allawi exerted much effort several months ago by 
encouraging all Iraqi factions to review developments in 
Iraq and appealed to them to join him in saving their 
country. 
 
"Iraqis now have enough time to have intelligent discussion 
about what happened, and to enact plans to save their 
country--no one will save their country but them. This large 
gathering includes bona fide people and is supported by 
decent powers in the world.We congratulate the national 
unity conference for this great historical accomplishment 
and congratulations to Dr. Allawi also." 
 
¶D. "Let Us Turn the Next Page" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti coalition, published this last- 
page editorial by Dawood Al-Farhan) 
 
"The chatty and cheerful demeanor displayed by the 
transitional president, Mr. Jalal Al-Talabani, at the 
National Assembly celebrating the last-minute amendments to 
the draft Iraqi constitution cannot conceal the tense 
situation that blankets the entire country. Talabani wanted 
to inspire Iraqis by demonstrating that disparate political 
groups have reached agreement regarding the disputed 
articles in the constitution. 
 
"The speeches made by other representatives in the 
parliament were similar [to Talabani's] however the Iraqi 
Islamic Party representative tried to justify the change in 
his position, in agreement with the draft constitution, by 
arguing that the amendments will satisfy the party's demands 
for now but that they hope for substantial changes in the 
future. 
 
"Regardless of the president's witty answers to the press, 
telling them the exact number of verses in the Qur'an 
[responding to a previous challenge], what happened inside 
the Green Zone that night is nothing short of deception; 
self-deception and deception of others! Everyone knows that 
there were no meaningful amendments to the draft 
constitution-the changes were like taking Valium to ease 
tension and ensure the referendum would pass easily, and 
with minimal damage. 
 
"If two-thirds of the voters (in three provinces) reject the 
draft constitution it means that sectarian or ethnic 
majorities in Iraq rejected amendments in order to achieve 
their goals outlined in this `premature' draft constitution. 
 
"Now the referendum party is over. The Iraqi government 
demonstrated democracy through its enactment of extended 
military operations against residents in rebellious western 
parts of Iraq in order to pave the way for referendum day. 
They arrested thousands and imprisoned them, especially 
those from rebellious provinces. They intentionall 
conducted random distributon of ballot in reellius 
povices mposed curfes, and created special polling 
centers in Baghdad for residents of Al-Anbar-how were they 
supposed to vote? All kinds of obstacles and barriers were 
placed in front of voters who only wanted to reach polling 
centers to vote. And finally, some ballot boxes were lost 
and others stolen from polling centers. 
 
"Moreover, the security plan to protect voting centers was 
designed by the interior police, which we consider a [Shi'a] 
sectarian militia, who pushed aside the Iraqi Army and 
coalition forces to the outer circles protecting the polling 
stations. In addition, those militias performed precisely as 
directed by their leaders in order to protect the voters and 
later to transport the ballot boxes. 
 
"We are waiting for the referendum results. I am not a 
fortune-teller but I understand the government will ensure 
the constitution's passage no matter what hurdles they have 
to jump. President Bush gambled his reputation (if any 
remains) and political future to make Iraqis sectarian and 
guarantee the draft constitution passes and succeeds. The 
Iraqi government is doing its part to negate any attempts at 
rejection of the constitution. 
They have declared that the draft constitution is the main 
key to providing Iraqis with: security, public services, 
stability, and a flourishing economy; we'll even be able to 
enter the gates of heaven with the same key. 
 
"Can we turn the next page? Yes, do you know why? Because of 
the occupation forces. In any case, we can watch the 
prosperity of the historic achievement they are talking 
about and at the same time those who believe in national 
unity and Iraqi unity and who are against sectarianism 
should prepare for intensive participation in the coming 
parliamentary elections and exercise their presence in the 
political process." 
 
¶E. "Probable Suspicions" 
(Al-Da'wa, no bias, affiliated with the Al-Da'wa Islamic 
Party led by Al-Anzi, published this page-two editorial by 
Jasim Al-Sayid) 
 
"The entire world, including the enemies of Iraq, has 
witnessed the success of the constitutional process in 
accordance with international criteria and public scrutiny. 
Many developed countries have praised the discipline, 
commitment, and security procedures during the referendum on 
the constitution. Some international and official parties 
even described the process as an incredible practice of 
democracy. 
 
"Iraqis, by all good efforts, were directed towards ballots 
peacefully and in a civilized manner that surprised enemies 
and foiled their dirty speculations about sectarianism and 
sedition. Their last chance at that was incinerated by the 
Iraqi people who went to the polls challenging danger and 
omnipresent risks of death. 
 
"We are waiting for the announcement of the formal results 
by the IECI, [Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq] but 
we suspect that there are some groups which have decided 
(even before the referendum) to accuse others of vote- 
rigging. They must understand that the days of publicly 
forging election results and forcing citizens to say `Yes' 
are gone." 
 
SATTERFIELD