05BAGHDAD2616
THE REMAKING OF "AL-IRAQIYYA" - PRIMITIVE BUT
Mon Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002616 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I, NEA/PPD, DRL, S/TT, PA, AND R 
DOD AND NSC FOR PA 
EMBASSIES / CONSULATES FOR PAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL SCUL
SUBJECT:  THE REMAKING OF "AL-IRAQIYYA" - PRIMITIVE BUT 
EFFECTIVE PROGRAMMING 
 
REF:  Baghdad 00928 
 
Entire text sensitive but unclassified - please handle 
accordingly. 
 
¶1.  Summary:  After almost two years of confusion, several 
hundred million dollars in investment, chaotic management, 
and Byzantine internal machinations, "Al-Iraqiyya" -- the 
television component of the Iraqi Media Network (IMN) -- 
shows signs of finding its voice and projecting a populist 
"Iraqi" message, even as technical capabilities deteriorate. 
The network has gained credibility and impact (and audience 
share; it is now the leading broadcaster in the country) 
through its perceived "Iraqi-ization" following the April 
completion of a support contract by the U.S.-based Harris 
Corporation.  Nonetheless, it continues to face serious 
hurdles in management, personnel training, and program 
production.  The Embassy is supporting efforts within the 
ITG to enhance Al-Iraqiyya's long-term viability and 
capability by addressing structural and legal shortcomings 
with the IMN Board of Governors, and is engaging -- largely 
through USAID resources -- on selected program, training, 
and other areas of support.  End Summary. 
 
------------ 
ON THEIR OWN 
------------ 
 
¶2.  By all accounts, "Al-Iraqiyya" continues to suffer 
severe administrative problems, and on a regular basis 
disgruntled Iraqi employees engage American interlocutors 
seeking assistance and "intervention."  There are serious 
questions about the capabilities and "agenda" of Director 
General Habib Al-Sadr (related by marriage to SCIRI leader 
Abdul Aziz Hakim), as well as concerns about the "autonomy" 
of the (supposedly independent) Board of Governors.  Like 
many Iraqi institutions, financial resources, training 
opportunities, and authority are centralized, and regional 
affiliates are often left to fend for themselves. 
 
¶3.  Nonetheless, since the completion of the Harris contract 
just over two months ago, an element of resentment which had 
existed on the part of some towards what was considered 
outside influence has disappeared.  Funded now entirely by 
Iraqi Government funds -- and by all indications none too 
generously -- the station's image has changed from one with 
high production values but considerable foreign programming 
(Lebanese soap operas and game shows, American 
documentaries, etc.) to an "Iraqi" broadcaster -- warts and 
all.  The emphasis is now on inexpensive, local programming 
-- "talking head" public policy programs, "reality TV," and 
the like. 
 
¶4.  Unlike its main rival -- the upscale broadcaster "Al- 
Sharqiyya," which appeals to a more cosmopolitan viewer -- 
"Al-Iraqiyya" carries programming that ranges from the 
pedestrian (live sessions of the Iraqi Transitional National 
Assembly), to the provocative (such as its most popular 
program, "Terrorists in te Hnds of Justice," which puts 
alleged malefactors on camera for a grilling by an off- 
camera Iraqi security officer; see reftel).  The common 
denominator is Iraq-centrism.  "Al-Iraqiyya" also carries a 
prime time weekly economic reform talk show (funded by PA 
Baghdad, through a local NGO) called "Iqtisaduna," and a 
wide spectrum of inexpensive, "man-in-the-street," phone-in 
and talk shows.  Graphic, patriotic spots with up-tempo 
music promoting the Iraqi security forces, ads calling on 
citizens to report terrorists' activities, explanations of 
the electricity shortage, and the promotion of Iraqi 
democracy are ubiquitous.  "Al-Iraqiyya's" frequent paid 
public service announcements promoting Iraqi confidence and 
pride -- produced by outside organizations -- are the 
broadcasters most professional programming. 
 
---------------------------- 
MEN OF THE WOLF LEAD THE WAY 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  One of the most effective local spots is a music video 
produced by the Iraqi Ministry of Interior (MoI) which 
precedes the top rated "Terrorists" show.  Set to 
traditional Iraqi tribal music and called "Men of the Wolf" 
(MoI's Wolf Brigade produces the "Terrorists" program), it 
juxtaposes Iraqi troops training, shooting, dancing, praying 
-- a red-tabbed Iraqi general gently opens and kisses a 
Qur'an -- with the destruction caused by terrorists, 
included damaged mosques and churches, burning oil pipes and 
wounded women and children.  It is quite an effective piece 
of agitprop. 
 
¶6.  In addition to consistently carrying TNA sessions and 
press conferences by Iraqi officials, the station churns out 
locally-produced music videos praising Iraq and its security 
forces.  On Friday, viewers are treated to both ends of the 
new Iraq's socio-ideological spectrum: in the morning a 
religious program offers a unique form of "Sunni outreach," 
with a call-in show featuring four anti-insurgency but very 
conservative salafi Sunni Arab shaykhs, while in the 
afternoon the program "Hawazir" features an attractive Iraqi 
woman conducting random interviews in markets, street 
corners and shops; she approaches total strangers (mostly 
men), makes small talk with them, and asks them a question 
which, if they answer correctly, allows them to select a 
prize. 
 
----------------------------- 
STILL A DIFFICULT WAY FORWARD 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  All recent polling and anecdotal evidence continues to 
show "Al-Iraqiyya" as, currently, the most popular station 
nationwide.  This is no small accomplishment considering 
that Iraqis now have at least 22 local stations plus -- with 
a boom in once-forbidden satellite dishes -- a plethora of 
regional Arab networks to choose from.  The station's 
production values compare poorly with many of its 
competitors, but it offers something they do not (or do not 
wish to): undiluted positive messaging and an image of 
normalcy and self-confidence for the Iraqi people. 
 
¶8.  The ITG has been sensitized to the need to bring "Al- 
Iraqiyya's" Board of Governors to full strength and get the 
new Board approved by the Transitional National Assembly. 
Habib Al-Sadr, an Allawi appointee with family ties to SCIRI 
leader Al-Hakim, is under close scrutiny from sectors within 
the ITG who would like to see him replaced with a Shi'a 
Islamist figure (such as Jawad Talib, Prime Minister 
Ja'afari's media advisor and, prior to 2003, Ja'afari's 
representative in Tehran). 
 
¶9.  Comment:  The key to "Al-Iraqiyya's" continued 
effectiveness and sustainability will be its ability to 
create an effective and efficient management structure, 
including addressing serious personnel issues (especially 
staff training and retention), lack of production 
capability, and dysfunctional administrative practices. 
Embassy Baghdad, both PA and USAID, are engaged in an 
intensive dialogue with the ITG and IMN on how the USG can 
assist "Al-Iraqiyya" in addressing these urgent needs. 
 
¶10.  Ultimately, a competitive media environment, such as 
exists in Iraq, requires excellence for success.  But in the 
Iraq of today, "Al-Iraqiyya" -- with its simple but targeted 
messaging and homespun credibility -- is currently enjoying 
a stay at the top of the competitive media heap.  End 
Comment. 
 
SATTERFIELD