05BAGHDAD3483
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION;
Fri Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ BAGHDAD
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION; 
BAGHDAD 
 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of the daily newspapers on August 25, 2005. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Committed Period" (Al-Bayyan, 8/25) 
¶B. "The Overwhelming Majority" (Al-Fourat 8/25) 
¶C. "A Kurdish Vision for the Iraqi Constitution" (Al-Taakhi 
8/25) 
¶D. "Devils of the Constitution" (Az-Zaman, 8/25) 
¶E. "The Favorable Disagreement" (Ad-Dustoor 8/25) 
¶F. "Money, Power, and the Constitution" (Asharq al-Awsat 
8/25) 
¶G. "Who Wants to Divide Iraq?" (Al-Adala 8/25) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Committed Period" 
(Al-Bayyan published in Arabic a page four editorial about 
the constitution by Zainab Al-Khafaji) 
 
"The National Dialogue Council's position opposing 
concerning the draft constitution may prevent it from wide 
participation in the constitutional process. Initially the 
draft of the constitution was drawn up following an accord 
that was reached by the majority of Iraqi political parties 
that ostensibly represent the people. Therefore, these 
discussions cannot be described as based on ethnic power 
sharing because discussions on the constitution led to an 
agreement amongst politicians.The recent dispute on pending 
issues does not represent a refusal of the draft 
constitution but it is a good chance for political parties 
and blocs to end their disagreements. I think that these 
disagreements are insignificant if we compare them to the 
issue of the Ba'ath Party's destiny in Iraq and the 
distribution of powers.The National Dialogue Council must 
understand that it has to reconsider its attitude especially 
after the Kurdish coalition and the United Iraqi Alliance 
agreed to postpone ratification of the constitution in order 
to grant them more time to settle pending issues. Prime 
Minister Ibrahim Al-Ja'afari said that this resolution is 
necessary and that every thing must be resolved within three 
days because the current period is a decisive and sensitive 
one. Otherwise, the National Dialogue Council will squander 
a big opportunity to actively participate in the upcoming 
constitutional process." 
 
¶B. "The Overwhelming Majority" 
(Al-Fourat published in Arabic a page-two editorial by Majed 
Fadhel Al-Zaboon on the referendum) 
"The technical process for the upcoming referendum still 
remains unclear. The majority of Iraqis say they are unaware 
of the voting procedures, which is the responsibility of the 
Iraqi electoral commission!...Some of the voters think that 
the electoral process involves a simple `yes' or `no' on the 
draft constitution; such a procedure would deprive Iraqis 
the right to explain their opinions about good and bad 
principles and the basics of the draft constitution. The 
Iraqi electoral commission should not render the referendum 
process a generic one because Iraqis must express private 
opinions about their new constitution.If this process is 
difficult to achieve, the referendum process should include 
disagreement points, this is the way our new constitution 
will gain legitimacy. An accepted compromise to satisfy all 
Iraqi sects should be designed to enable us to rebuild and 
to succeed in our political and democratic process without 
any marginalization or neglect for any Iraqi sects. This 
will be the way we can reach our national compact and 
independence and force the occupation forces to leave our 
country.The upcoming constitutional referendum should 
include all Iraqi sects (specifically the opposition) 
because some of the constitution articles should be removed 
and others affirmed. The majority of Iraqis should decide to 
accept the draft constitution, not the minority. And 
everyone must participate in the upcoming referendum process 
to decide for Iraq." 
¶C. "A Kurdish Vision for the Iraqi Constitution" 
(Al-Taakhi published a front-page editorial in Arabic by its 
Editor-in-Chief, Badr Khan Al-Sindi on Kurdish views of the 
constitution) 
 
"The Kurdish Parliament has approved and supported the draft 
constitution. President Barazani said that this draft is a 
great achievement (especially during this period) despite 
the inclusion of some items that do not coincide with 
Kurdish ambitions. Kurdish support comes as a reply to those 
who want to blame the Kurds for attempting to obstruct the 
genesis of the Iraqi constitution.For the second time, the 
Kurds have proved that they are committed to the main 
principles, which were agreed upon with various political 
parties at points earlier. The Kurds want to make this 
constitution successful and they've placed emphasis on the 
principles of reconciliation and the wide participation of 
all Iraqi sects. However, we must not cede our legitimate 
national interests, ambitions, and right to decide our 
destiny. We think that the current draft constitution will 
strengthen the federalist experiment in Iraq in a way that 
reinforces unity without the marginalization of any other 
sect.This is a new Iraq, which must be based on equal 
distribution of resources apart from the control of the 
central government that devastated the country. We do not 
think that the current constitution satisfies Kurdish 
desires. However, we see that there are some chauvinistic 
and dictatorial mentalities trying to impart the 
constitution with tyrannical ideals. Everyone must 
understand that Iraq is moving forward and the federal 
solution is the best way to solve all problems. As we 
approach the referendum, we hope that Iraq will enjoy peace, 
economic prosperity, and deep democratic awareness. We hope 
this awareness will not surprise Iraqis one day when they 
hear that the Kurds want to decide their own destiny." 
 
¶D. "Devils of the Constitution" 
(Az-Zaman published in Arabic a page six editorial by Jihad 
Zayyer about the constitution) 
 
"Today Iraqi politicians, most of whom lack real political 
professionalism and sufficient experience, will discuss the 
draft constitution in the national assembly. At the same 
time, Iraqis will, and perhaps negatively, deal with the 
items of this constitution because they want to know the 
results of politicians' disagreements over pending 
issues.Iraqis have the right to know the details and 
implications of the constitution's articles, which will 
govern their lives. We know that the majority of Iraqis, who 
for instance harbor anti-federalist attitudes, lack 
information on governmental structure especially in 
countries that have ethnic diversity. Hence, they have the 
right to be suspicious of current Iraqi politicians because 
they do not know what the Iraqi people need. Current 
political parties are still distant from the people and 
these parties are ignorant about people's intentions and 
orientations. Current Iraqi politicians speak about 
federalism, the role of religion in government, and the 
equitable distribution of natural resources. On the other 
hand, the government's offices are filled with 
corruption.These politicians want to occupy Iraqi minds with 
complicated political concepts. But, how can a nation that 
was marginalized from real political participation 
understand concepts that may contain devils and disasters? 
Modern concepts and the sound policies of politicians alone 
cannot help Iraqis reveal the true intentions of these 
politicians." 
 
¶E. "The Favorable Disagreement" 
(Ad-Dustoor published in Arabic a front-page editorial by 
Bassem Al-Sheikh about the Sunni rejection of the 
constitution) 
 "The Sunni rejection of the draft constitution submitted to 
the national assembly is a healthy reaction; they initiated 
publicity campaigns to encourage `no votes' in the upcoming 
referendum. Disagreements and different points of view are 
normal in life and dealing with such issues should be done 
in a civilized way; democracy means different points of view 
and more importantly how much influence one can 
wield.Therefore, the responsibility of those who reject the 
constitution is to create an influential opposition and 
enough supporters to back that opinion and then to have the 
influence to change and rule the political process. The 
technical processes are good because it keeps the process 
within the safety margins; public oversights, international 
political scrutiny, and the media have all witnessed the 
birth of the new constitution.Now parliamentary members have 
legitimate authority to discuss every single article in the 
constitution. They will not permit a premature constitution 
to pass and even if they did, the majority of Iraqis will 
say no in the upcoming referendum. This is the Iraqi will 
and public influence in the democratic process. The Sunni 
powers which are protesting through conservatives on the 
draft constitution committee decided that the upcoming 
referendum will be their way to say no to a constitution 
that does not include all their rights and demands." 
¶F. "Money, Power, and the Constitution" 
(Asharq al-Awsat published in Arabic a page nine column by 
Abdul Rahman Al-Rashed about the Iraqi constitution) 
"There are several points of the disagreements inside the 
TNA that postponed the agreement on the constitution.Sunnis 
made a mistake last year by boycotting the election and are 
paying for it now.  Realizing the scope of this mistake, 
suddenly their leaders are now calling for participation in 
the political process. Today, the Shiites and the Kurds 
would be making a grave mistake if they did not grant the 
Sunnis guarantees in the constitution.  Without the Sunnis, 
the large, powerful state of Iraq will turn into a number of 
weak small states.It is surprising that the constitutional 
disagreement has become Shiite-Sunnis or Arab-Kurds.  The 
deepest disagreements are within each team, not among teams. 
The real disagreement is between the Islamists and the 
secularists, within both Sunni and Shiite communities.  It 
will deepen in the future, because the constitution is not 
dealing with the fundamental issues." 
 
¶G. "Who Wants to Divide Iraq?" 
(Al-Adala published in Arabic a page five editorial by 
Zuhair Al-Baghdadi on federalism) 
 
"No one has the right to accuse any Iraqi of not being 
patriotic, because each one of us has his own position about 
the correct path toward a new nation.  We are Iraqis before 
anything else. The argument now is about federalism and its 
implementation in the new Iraq.  On one side, they believe 
that federalism means the division of Iraq into small 
separated states, weak and easily swallowed by neighboring 
countries. As such, it is bad and all Iraqis must reject it. 
On the other hand, there are those who believe that it will 
not result in weakness and division, Iraq will become like 
other federal countries that have one border, one 
constitution, one flag and one identity.the people will 
determine whether accept it or not, they will express their 
opinion through the referendum on the constitution. People, 
not political factions will determine our destiny.  Let us 
stop talking under a particular sect or nationality, we are 
all Iraqis.Some say that the Kurds should have the right to 
implement the federalism, but that the Arabs in the southern 
or the central areas should not, claming that Iran or the 
Gulf States will interfere.  This is unacceptable.  One can 
not claim the right of federalism for one part of Iraq and 
not accept it for another. Federalism is the fair 
distribution of resources, it will speed up the 
reconstruction, and create job opportunities.  Furthermore, 
it will establish security and stability, by granting 
greater authority for the districts and provinces." 
 
 
Khalilzad