05CAIRO8288
STRIFE IN ALEXANDRIA BLAME GAME; PARLIAMENT
Sun Oct 30 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 008288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PD FOR FRANK FINVER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC SY EG
SUBJECT:  STRIFE IN ALEXANDRIA BLAME GAME; PARLIAMENT 
CHANNEL PREMIERS:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA, OCTOBER 24 TO 30 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Commentary on sectarian violence in 
Alexandria on October 21 continued, with many commentators 
condemning the violence and a few blaming religious leaders 
for failing to control their followers.  The editor-in- 
chief of Egypt's leading newspaper, Al-Ahram, was critical 
of the Muslim Brotherhood's alleged role in the violence. 
The Egyptian media continued to have a negative view of the 
U.N. Mehlis report, with many commentators alleging that 
Syria was being "targeted," just like Iraq was, by the U.S. 
An unsigned editorial in large circulation Al-Akhbar asked 
on October 26, "Can anyone do something to stop America's 
plans against Syria?"  The Ministry of Information and 
Egyptian TV (ETV) launched a new channel  the Parliament 
Channel  on October 27 to educate and prepare the public 
for November's parliamentary elections.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Alexandria:  All pro-government newspapers emphasized 
in October 24 news coverage that "calm" had been restored 
to Alexandria, and over 100 arrests made, after rioters 
attacked churches on October 21 after Friday prayers.  A 
columnist writing October 24 in independent daily Nahdet 
Masr (circulation: 20,000) criticized the lack of "rule of 
law" and religious leaders for their "failures" in 
controlling their followers.  Another commentator wrote in 
pro-government Al-Akhbar (circulation: 800,000), "With 
parliamentary elections coming up, is it sheer coincidence 
that this tragedy occurred now  and during Ramadan, as 
well?"  A conservative commentator in ardently pro- 
government Al-Gomhouriya (circulation: 500,000) wrote on 
on 
October 24, "The Copts should be blamed for taking the 
church as their country and feeling discriminated all the 
time," and warned "if [Islamic] fundamentalists were given 
the chance to take over, the Copts would then know the true 
meaning of the word 'discrimination.'"  A columnist writing 
in opposition Al-Wafd (circulation: 50,000) on October 25 
opined that "Egypt is as targeted as Iraq and Syria.  Thus, 
the sectarian strife in Alexandria is part of a plot 
against Egypt."  Osama Saraya, editor-in-chief of leading 
pro-government daily Al-Ahram (circulation: 750,000), 
criticized the Muslim Brotherhood's use of "religious 
slogans for political reasons," which he claimed "was the 
cause of the strife in Alexandria." 
 
¶3.  Syria vs. the world:  Critical commentary in the 
Egyptian media on the U.N. Mehlis report continued this 
week, kicked off by the comments of a magazine editor on 
Nile News on October 24, "The Mehlis committee conducted 
its investigation with the Lebanese, Syrians, and 
Palestinians, but not with Israel  the only party that 
will benefit from Hariri's assassination!"  Nabil Zaki, the 
Editor of opposition, Nasserite newspaper Al-Ahali 
(circulation: 20,000)  and a consistent critic of the U.S. 
 wrote the same day that the U.S. is "besieging Syria, 
instead of siding with it as the victim of Israeli 
occupation."  The themes of "double standards"  Syria 
criticized by the international community while Israel goes 
"unpunished," in the words of one commentator in Al-Ahram 
and the "Iraq model"  Syria being "targeted" by the U.S., 
in the words of several commentators  were prominent last 
week.  "Any sanctions against the Syrian people will be 
unfair and unleash an enormous wave of hatred for the 
U.S.," warned an unsigned editorial in Al-Ahram on October 
¶25.  "Syria is going through the same process that Iraq 
went through," commented a columnist in Al-Ahram the 
following day.  On October 26, the unsigned editorial in 
al in 
Al-Akhbar warned, "The region is heading toward another 
Arab disaster because of Syria's position on the Mehlis 
report.  The question is, 'Can anyone do something to stop 
America's plans against Syria?'" 
 
¶4.  Election coverage:  ETV's Parliament Channel premiered 
on October 27.  (Note:  The channel is broadcast on ETV's 
Channel 10 and is an initiative by Minister of Information 
Anas El Fekki to educate the public for November's 
parliamentary elections.  End note.)  Over the weekend, the 
channel broadcast historical documentaries about elections 
during the Pharaonic, Roman, and Greek eras, as well as 
modern-day elections.  The channel also aired statements by 
leading Egyptian intellectuals and journalists on the 
importance of "participating in elections"; interviews with 
people in the street on what they expect from their elected 
representatives; press round-ups; and around-the-clock news 
bulletins from the government, opposition groups, and NGOs. 
 
RICCIARDONE