05CAIRO5820
UNPRECEDENTED OPENNESS?:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA HAS FREE
Thu Jul 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 005820 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PD FOR FRANK FINVER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC EG
SUBJECT:  UNPRECEDENTED OPENNESS?:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA HAS FREE 
REIN TO SOUL SEARCH AFTER SHARM BOMBINGS 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  A surprisingly large amount of Egyptian media 
commentary critical of Egyptian society and the government 
has appeared since the July 23 Sharm El Sheikh bombings. 
While some commentators continue to blame Israel for 
terrorism in the region, many commentators have pointed 
fingers squarely at their own country  nd in pro- 
government media outlets.  One commentator on Egyptian TV 
on July 27 criticized "a culture gone wrong" in Egypt, 
while others blamed unemployment, poverty, and clerics 
discredited by government interference.  While surprising 
in its directness and openness, the commentary reflects 
criticisms about the government and Egyptian society 
frequently heard by Emboffs from their Egyptian 
counterparts.  The government is likely permitting such 
criticism in order to allow commentators to recover from 
the shock of the Sharm bombings.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  While opposition Al Wafd (circulation: 70,000) and 
several commentators in the independent press continue to 
blame Israeli policies for terrorism in the region, a large 
number of commentaries critical of the Egyptian government 
have appeared in the government-controlled media in the 
wake of the Sharm terrorist attacks.  Characteristic of 
some of the no-holds barred criticism and self-reflection 
was a July 29 column by Abdel Qader Shohaib, the pro- 
government editor of weekly magazine Al-Musawwar 
(circulation: 50,000):  "There is no use in denying it  e 
incited the crime of Sharm El Sheikh," Shohaib wrote.  "The 
bombers are a product of a society that produces extremists 
with fossilized thought.  Regrettably, they are incited by 
mosques, newspapers, and TV images  ll of which are 
controlled by the government."  Several commentators on 
Egyptian TV talk shows the evening of July 27 pointed to 
'faulty' religion, with one independent commentator noting 
on Channel 1's program Halat Hiwar ("State of Discussion") 
that "wrong religious concepts spread when institutions 
such as Al-Azhar lose their credibility and the sheikhs are 
government-appointed."  An Islamic commentator on the same 
program remarked, "Unemployment and poverty spread 
depression among our youth, who then turn into time bombs." 
And a third criticized "a culture gone wrong" in Egypt, 
singling out "poverty, unemployment, and a lack of freedom" 
as terrorism's cause.  On Channel 2's program Bidoun Raqaba 
("Without Censorship") on July 27, a commentator argued 
that "a lack of strong political parties does not allow 
people to express frustrations through legal channels," 
leading some to commit acts of violence. 
 
¶3.  Similar comments critical of Egyptian society, the 
government, and Islamic extremists in Egypt have appeared 
on website bulletin boards and chat rooms  hough again, 
along with some comments critical of Israel for having 
given rise to terrorism in the region.  One mid-level pro- 
government newspaper reporter claimed to sum up the 
feelings of his colleagues to a PA officer on July 26: 
"While U.S. and Israeli actions make people angry, they 
would already be angry without the U.S. or Israel ever 
existing.  Why?  Because we are cursed by an unresponsive 
and corrupt government on one hand and extremists who kill 
Muslims on the other.  People want neither and are starting 
to shout about it after the Sharm attacks." 
 
¶4.  Comment:  This outburst of self-criticism in the 
Egyptian media, though surprising for its openness, is not 
uncommon to Emboffs used to hearing criticism of U.S. 
policies from Egyptian counterparts mixed with criticism of 
their own government and society in private meetings.  The 
shock of Egyptian envoy to Iraq Ehab El Sherif's murder and 
the Sharm El Sheikh terrorist bombings have likely 
encouraged many commentators to vent their frustrations and 
anger publicly, and the government appears to be also 
accepting this criticism in the pro-government media.  End 
comment. 
 
JONES