05DJIBOUTI961
UNHCR CONCERNED ABOUT REVOKED
Thu Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Djibouti
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS DJIBOUTI 000961 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL DJ ET ER SO
SUBJECT:  UNHCR CONCERNED ABOUT REVOKED 
ASYLUM STATUS FOR REFUGEES FROM ERITREA AND 
ETHIOPIA 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary.  On September 20 UNHCR Country 
Representative met with Ambassador and ConOff to raise concerns 
about refugees in Djibouti.  On September 14 refugees in the 
transit camp of Aour Aoussa were allegedly told that they had 36 
hours to leave.  UNHCR was most concerned about Eritrean and 
Ethiopian refugees whose asylum status was suddenly being 
revoked and sought support in opposing Djibouti's decision.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U)  UNHCR Country Representative Collins Asare, 
accompanied by a representative of the World Food Program, met 
with Ambassador and ConOff  to ask for USG support in opposing 
the decision of the Government of Djibouti (GoD) to revoke the 
asylum status for 74 Eritreans and 109 Ethiopians resident in 
Djibouti.  Fifty-one Ethiopians who were given asylum status by 
UNHCR were allowed to stay.  But those that had been granted 
status by the GoD in 2004, had the status revoked and were asked 
to leave. 
 
¶3. (U)  Asare conceded that 80% of the individuals in the camp, 
mostly those of Somali origin, should be resettled.  He said 
UNHCR believes that the majority of the self-proclaimed refugees 
are actually Djiboutians, or ethnic Somalis from stable areas. 
UNHCR has been repatriating thousands of Somalis to northern 
Somalia over the past two years. 
 
¶4. (U)  Asare's concern focused on the GoD's revocation of the 
refugees' status without warning and without consultation with 
UNHCR.  According to Asare, U.N. ordinance number 
77053/P.R/A.E. dictates that the GoD is obliged to consult 
UNHCR before taking such an action except in urgent cases of 
national security. 
 
¶5. (U)  Asare asked for U.S. support to oppose the action of the 
GoD.  He asked that we pressure the government to allow the 
refugees to stay longer until the situation in their countries 
stabilizes.  Alternatively, he suggested that we could simply ask 
the GoD to include UNHCR in the decisions regarding refugees. 
He indicated that he would also approach the French Embassy with 
the same request. 
 
¶6. (U)  Ambassador listened but declined to commit to such action 
given the U.S. interest in early repatriation of many of the Aour 
Aussa refugees who have been established as economic migrants 
vice refugees from conflict.  She asked, however, if any specific 
action had been taken by the Government of Djibouti to enforce 
the directive that Aour Aoussa refugees depart.  Asare responded 
that although the refugees were told they had 36 hours to leave, no 
action has been taken yet to remove them.  Also, no specifics were 
given about what might happen if they did not leave.  It is not clear 
if they will be allowed to remain in one of the other refugee camps 
after Aour Aoussa closes, or allowed to assimilate into Djibouti. 
Embassy will track developments on this issue and provide 
reporting and commentary. 
 
RAGSDALE