05DJIBOUTI259
REPORT OF ATTACK ON U.S. SAILBOATS NEAR YEMEN
Thu Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Djibouti
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS DJIBOUTI 000259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT PHSA KCRM PBTS YM DJ
SUBJECT: REPORT OF ATTACK ON U.S. SAILBOATS NEAR YEMEN 
 
¶1. (U)  ConOff was approached March 10 by an officer 
from CJTF-HOA, informing her that CJTF-HOA had received 
a report that two private American sailboats had come 
under fire while sailing the Gulf of Aden on March 8. 
The source of the report, a third American sailboat, had 
contacted the military requesting guidance and 
information on potential assistance. The text of the 
third sailboat's account follows: 
 
   "Unfortunately, there was a pirate attack on two 
   boats yesterday March 8 at 5pm Yemen time at 
   position: 13 28N 48 07E.  I will repeat the 
   information that we received on our Net this 
   morning. 
 
   Two boats (Mahdi and Gandalf email above) were 
   sailing about 25 miles off the coast of Yemen 
   yesterday, when they were approached by two fast 
   boats earlier in the day, probably as a set-up for 
   the attack. At about 5pm two boats were sitting in 
   the sun and quickly sped up to intercept them.  The 
   description of the boats was: a blue hulled rib cage 
   boat with inboard motors (but we think they were 
   outboards hidden below) with orange tarp over the 
   men, so that when they were within 50 feet of the 
   boats they opened fire.  The sailboats did return 
   fire and think that they may have wounded one of the 
   pirates and Gandalf rammed one of the boats and the 
   pirates left. The boats have bullet holes but are 
   sea worthy and Gandalf has bullet holes in his 
   dinghy and possible damage from ramming the pirate 
   boat. Thankfully, they were not boarded and robbed, 
   no one was injured, and their boats are fine. 
 
   Maydays were made, but no one responded. 
 
   They have been in touch with the Port Captain at 
   Aden and were promised assistance to enter the 
   harbor tonight between 10-12pm; however, we are 
   wondering if they should go into Aden considering 
   that shots were fired. Could it become a very 
   serious and possibly dangerous situation for them 
   there? ." 
 
¶2.  (U) Upon verifying that active hostilities were not 
ongoing, and that the boats were able to make port on 
their own power, the military passed the message to 
Embassy Djibouti for follow up. Embassy Djibouti is 
responding, and will advise the boats that if they 
choose to dock in Djibouti, we will offer any victims 
assistance, and medical care if they request it. We have 
an NCIS investigator at the Embassy who will interview 
them for identifying information about the attacking 
vessels and their crew, which he can pass to regional 
Navies. 
 
¶3.  (U) We have reason to believe the AmCits may arrive 
in Djibouti. They are said to fear reprisal in Yemen for 
shooting one of the attackers and would prefer not to 
dock in Yemen. They reportedly have also been advised 
that diesel and boat repair resources may be limited in 
Eritrea. If the individuals involved contact the 
embassy, we will interview them and provide an updated 
report. 
 
Ragsdale