05DUBLIN1407
LETTER FROM FAMILY OF MARGARET HASSAN
Thu Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dublin
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171643Z Nov 05UNCLAS DUBLIN 001407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR MOPS PTER PINR PHUM PGOV PREL CMGT IZ
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM FAMILY OF MARGARET HASSAN 
 
 
1.(U)  This is an action request.  See Paragraph 3. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Post's Consular Section received today a copy of a 
letter from Mrs. Geraldine Fitzimons Riney, the sister of 
Margaret Hassan, the British/Irish citizen who was taken 
hostage and murdered in Iraq in November 2004, addressed to 
the Irish Prime Minister (Taoiseach), Mr. Bertie Ahern.  The 
verbatim text of the message follows: 
 
(begin quote) 
Killowen East 
Kenmare 
Co. Kerry 
17th November 2005 
 
An Taoiseach 
Mr. Bertie Ahern, T.D. 
Department of the Taoiseach 
Government Buildings 
Upper Merrion Street 
Dublin 2 
 
Dear Mr. Ahern, 
 
As I am sure you are aware, prisoners that were held in 
Baghdad by the Iraqi Interior Ministry are now in the 
custody of American troops.  My family has reason to believe 
that three of the prisoners are men who were held on 
suspicion of Margaret's kidnap and murder.  They were 
arrested on May 1st 2005, because they were in possession of 
Margaret's belongings and admitted to knowledge of her 
kidnapping.  Until now, we have been told that only the 
Iraqi Police could interrogate these men.  As the Americans 
now hold them, and the Iraqi Interior Ministry no longer 
have them in their custody; may I appeal to you to ask the 
American authorities in Iraq to question these men properly? 
Margaret's husband Tahseen has asked me to appeal to you for 
help in bringing pressure to bear on the American Military 
who hold these prisoners.  The men held must know what 
happened to Margaret as they were in possession of her 
belongings. 
My family's dearest wish is to recover Margaret's remains. 
And, I am sure that you like us would like to see those 
responsible for her death brought to justice.  To date the 
only people with information are the men arrested and it is 
imperative that they are questioned as soon as possible. 
We continue to seek justice for Margaret Hassan. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
Geraldine Fitzimons Riney 
 
c.c. Dermot Ahern, T.D. 
Minister for Foreign Affairs (end quote) 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Margaret Hassan murder attracted much media 
attention in Ireland, and, as a result, her tragic death was 
widely followed here.  Ms. Riney's letter was forwarded to 
us by the consular department of the Irish Department of 
Foreign Affairs, without comment.  Although the Irish 
government has not yet asked us to respond to or act on Ms. 
Riney's requests, we request guidance on what we can tell 
the GOI and or Hassan's family directly.  Given the fact 
that events related to  her murder continue to be of high 
interest  to the Irish people and government, as forthcoming 
an approach as possible would be helpful. 
 
KENNY