05FRANKFURT6687
NGO Initiatives to Reduce Demand for Trafficked Persons
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 006687 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KWMN SMIG PGOV GM
SUBJECT: NGO Initiatives to Reduce Demand for Trafficked Persons 
 
REF: A) FRANKFURT 3004, B) BERLIN 0692, C) STATE 89010 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for Internet distribution 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Lutheran Church and other NGOs in southwestern 
Germany report progress in increasing Germans' awareness of the 
issue of trafficking in persons (TIP), particularly among 
potential clients of prostitutes.  There are indications that 
more men are contacting police and NGOs to report suspected TIP 
cases.  Building on successful awareness-raising during World 
Lutheran Day in Hannover, NGOs in the region are planning new 
demand reduction initiatives including a high-profile campaign 
for the 2006 Soccer World Championships in Germany -- although 
they report that funding remains tight and complain that 
terrorism continues to draw police resources away from TIP. 
Nonetheless, law enforcement officials reiterated their 
commitment to fighting TIP.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) The Consul General and U.S. law enforcement 
representatives highlighted the TIP issue during recent meetings 
with senior Hesse and Baden-Wuerttemberg authorities.  Consulate 
staff have also met recently with a number of NGO contacts. 
 
Baden-Wuerttemberg NGOs Report Progress in Awareness Campaigns 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In our meeting with NGOs in Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W), 
the Diakonisches Werk (DW) and the Women's Information Center 
(Frauensinformationzentrum/FIZ) reported progress in increasing 
awareness of TIP among potential clients of prostitutes (ref A). 
In May, Diakonisches Werk and FIZ organized a program on TIP in 
conjunction with World Lutheran Day in Hannover (the German 
Protestant Church's largest annual gathering) at which an 
estimated thousand attendees heard about TIP.  The FIZ used the 
occasion to distribute materials on TIP and is planning broader 
outreach efforts (ref A).  An NGO representative told a Consulate 
representative that while it is difficult to measure success, 
there are indications that more men are contacting police and 
NGOs to report suspected TIP cases.  NGOs reported funding, 
however, is very tight; outreach will focus on flyers and a web 
site (under construction) with limited paid advertising. 
Stuttgart NGOs will take part in a nationwide TIP awareness 
campaign during the 2006 soccer World Cup (see below) and plan to 
approach local soccer stars for endorsements and statements to 
boost awareness of TIP. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Diakonisches Werk and FIZ representatives complained 
that terrorism draws police attention from TIP and called for 
more frequent and aggressive prosecutions in Baden-Wuerttemberg. 
In some other parts of Germany, NGOs benefit from funds 
confiscated during raids against organized crime.  Diakonisches 
Werk and FIZ would like to see that practice followed in Baden- 
Wuerttemberg.  The FIZ voiced concern over the growing 
involvement of women in recruiting TIP victims and concern over 
insufficient protection of women once they return to countries of 
origin.  At a meeting on August 3, B-W Interior Minister Heribert 
Rech told the CG and U.S. law enforcement representatives that 
the state had recently established a task force on TIP, 
reaffirming the issue's importance. 
 
Hesse: Looking for Funds and Planning for World Cup 2006 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶5. (U) Consul General also reemphasized USG interest in TIP at a 
recent meeting with senior Hesse law enforcement authorities in 
Frankfurt.  At the meeting, Hesse Interior Minister Volker 
Bouffier reiterated his support in the fight against TIP. 
 
¶6. (SBU) At the State of Hesse's biannual roundtable on human 
trafficking (attended by a Consulate representative), NGOs 
reported that while prosecutions are on the rise in Frankfurt, 
the NGO "Franka" from Kassel said police in rural North Hesse 
should become more aggressive in enlisting witnesses to 
prosecute.  At that roundtable and subsequent one-on-one 
meetings, women's NGOs recognized the tight budget situation, but 
said the state of Hesse should devote more resources to awareness 
campaigns and victim assistance. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Frankfurt-based NGO "Women's Rights are Human 
Rights" (Frauenrecht ist Menschenrecht / FIM) -- one of Germany's 
leading NGOs on TIP issues -- is leading a network of a dozen 
NGOs that plan to canvass Germany's twelve World Cup venues in 
conjunction with the FIFA Soccer World Cup in summer 2006.  With 
slogans such as "Red Card against Forced Prostitution" and "Men 
Bear Responsibility / Men Can Help", the campaign will include 
billboards, flyers, and other advertising (in multiple languages) 
to raise awareness among potential clients.  FIM chairperson 
Elvira Niesner praised Frankfurt police and city officials for 
their cooperation.  She said, however, the campaign needs 
critical seed funding and FIM plans to approach World Cup sponsor 
companies for support.  By highlighting the issue of forced 
prostitution at this high-profile event, they hope to make a 
lasting impact on TIP awareness. 
 
BODDE