05ISTANBUL422
TURKISH-U.S. BUSINESS COUNCIL PLANS AGRESSIVE PUSH
Thu Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 000422 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE AND E/CBA 
TREASURY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS - RADKINS AND MMILLS 
NSC FOR BRYZA AND MCKIBBEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON EINV TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH-U.S. BUSINESS COUNCIL PLANS AGRESSIVE PUSH 
TO MARK 20TH ANNIVERSARY 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
This message was coordinated with Embassy Ankara. 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary: Turkish-U.S. Business Council (TUSBC) 
leaders outlined an agressive push to expand both their 
business promotion work and their public relations activities 
in support of the bilateral relationship in a March 14 
breakfast with Consul General.  Incoming President Yilmaz 
Arguden, who was elected at the council's February 23 General 
Assembly, noted that these plans include an improved web 
portal, monthly outreach visits to Anatolian cities to 
promote U.S. trade, and delegation to individual executive 
committee members of responsibility for specific sectors.  In 
addition, arguing that Turks' negative attitudes toward the 
United States stem from a narrow focus on Iraq-related 
issues, Arguden said the council will attempt to highlight 
the breadth and depth of the relationship by organizing 
monthly programs that focus on success stories elsewhere 
within it.  These varied initiatives will lead up to two main 
anniversary activities: a June 2 conference in Istanbul with 
the participation of Members of Congress and other 
dignitaries and participation in the annual American Turkish 
Conference June 5-7.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) A New Team: Arguden was elected President of the 
Council at its General Assembly meeting in February, taking 
over the reins from Petrol Ofisi Chairman Vural Akisik, who 
resigned two years before his term would normally have 
expired.  According to some contacts in the Foreign Economic 
Relations Board (of which TUSBC is a part), Akisik had become 
discouraged by the "deteriorating bilateral relationship." In 
his conversations with us, however, Akisik, who has also 
scaled back his business activities, stressed only that it is 
time for the younger generation to take over, noting that he 
is one of only two executive council members who had served 
since its inception 20 years ago.  (Note: Vice Chairman Serif 
Egeli is the other.)  Arguden, a leading Istanbul consultant, 
has previously served several terms as council Vice Chairman 
and has been a leading spokesman for the council for years. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Ambitious Plans: In our March 14 meeting, Arguden, 
who was joined by two of his three deputies, Serif Egeli and 
Ali Koc, and Council Coordinator Basak Kizildemir, outlined a 
full program of activities.  Most notably, he said that in 
contrast to the recent past, when the council was content to 
focus on business activities and leave the "lobbying" in 
favor of the bilateral relationship to other organizations 
such as TUSIAD, it no longer feels that it has that luxury, 
given negative public sentiment towards the United States. 
He blamed that sentiment on specific policy differences 
related to the war in Iraq, particularly vis-a-vis the PKK, 
and argued that what is needed is a "positive news flow" to 
balance these negative stories.  The council, he said, will 
seek to contribute to that flow in two ways: by organizing 
monthly conferences with media participation that focus on 
success stories elsewhere in the relationship (he cited 
Hikmet Cetin speaking on U.S.-Turkish cooperation in 
Afghanistan or a Turkish NBA star sharing his experiences in 
the U.S. as examples of the types of programs he has in 
mind).  Secondly, it will commission papers for U.S. and 
Turkish opinion leaders that seek to put controversial issues 
in broader perspective.  He suggested, for instance, that an 
initial paper may tackle the issue of the groundswell of 
anti-U.S. sentiment in Turkey and attempt to put it in 
broader context. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Business Activities: Arguden's business agenda is 
equally ambitious.  In addition to a newly enhanced web 
portal, which aims to be a first stop for all those 
interested in U.S.-Turkish trade, and which will highlight 
new business success stories each month, Arguden has also 
attempted to put the council on more of a business footing. 
Each vice Chairman will take responsibility for specific 
sectors and oversee four-five board members who are 
responsible for specific areas such as IT, food, retail, 
construction, etc.  Each board member is charged with setting 
goals to improve trade relations in their area, through 
participation in trade fairs, visits to the U.S., or 
informational programs.  Already, for instance, Sabanci Food 
and Retailing Division Chief Haluk Dincer, who handles the 
food sector for the board, has raised with us the possibility 
of arranging an FDA visit to Turkey to enhance understanding 
of U.S. phyto-sanitary standards.  In addition, the council 
is organizing a visit to a different city in Anatolia each 
month, targeting small to medium-sized businesses with 
information about how they can do business with the United 
States. 
¶5. (U) June Festivities: These regular activities are 
designed to enhance TUSBC's effectiveness as it closes in on 
its 20th anniversary celebration at the beginning of June. 
In addition to its participation in the annual ATC gathering 
in Washington June 5-7, the council is also organizing an 
anniversary event on June 2 in Istanbul, with the 
participation of a delegation headed by Congressman Ed 
Whitfield, head of the Turkey Caucus, and other ranking U.S. 
invitees. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Comment: A polished and articulate figure who has 
long been a close Consulate contact, Arguden appears 
determined to bring a new and more businesslike approach to 
the council's business promotion activities.  He has 
assembled an excellent team around him, including 
representatives from Koc and Sabanci and other leading 
Istanbul-based groups.  How those Istanbul groups' outreach 
will play in Anatolia is an open question, but certainly many 
companies have extensive operations throughout the country 
and the effort is one that needs to be made.  The council's 
willingness to again speak up for the relationship and 
highlight its breadth and depth is also welcome, particularly 
given its desire for the message to come from leading Turkish 
voices.  As Arguden noted, while it is not possible to 
"eliminate negative news," it is possible to try to shift 
some attention to the positive, and thus seek to separate 
those who have concerns about specific U.S. policies from 
those who are seeking to exploit the situation to divide the 
two sides.  We made clear our appreciation for the council's 
work and our openness to cooperation, including through 
enhanced communication and joint program activities.  We will 
be meeting with Arguden and selected members of the board 
each month just prior to the full board meeting, in order to 
coordinate views and activities.  End comment. 
ARNETT