05JERUSALEM2911
WB/G SITREP: TWO PALESTINIANS KILLED, SEVENTEEN
Mon Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 002911 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: TWO PALESTINIANS KILLED, SEVENTEEN 
ARRESTED IN WEST BANK: JULY 8-11, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
This is a joint Embassy/ConGen cable. 
 
¶1.    (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, an Israeli security 
guard on July 8 shot and killed a Palestinian teenager near 
Bayt Liqya, west of Ramallah.  The Israeli Police are 
reportedly conducting an investigation of the incident.  A 
second Palestinian teenager on July 10 died from bullet 
wounds received during an exchange of gunfire between the IDF 
and al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades militants in Nablus last week. 
An IDF soldier on July 10 sustained light injuries when an 
explosive device detonated near Shillo settlement, north of 
Ramallah.  A total of 17 Palestinians were arrested during 
various IDF operations July 8-11.  In the Gaza Strip, three 
IDF soldiers sustained light injuries when an explosive 
device detonated north of the Sufa Crossing.  UNRWA reported 
that on July 9 nine Palestinians sustained injuries after a 
mortar that militants attempted to fire at an Israeli target 
exploded prematurely.  Palestinians also fired mortar, 
rocket, and automatic gunfire at Israeli targets July 8-11, 
but no injuries were reported in those attacks.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.    (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: An Israeli security guard on July 8 shot and killed 
a Palestinian teenager near Bayt Liqya, west of Ramallah. 
The security guard told Israeli police that he fired his 
weapon at a group of Palestinians who had thrown stones at 
security personnel guarding the construction of the 
separation barrier.  Palestinian witnesses claimed that the 
dead Palestinian did not participate in the stoning incident. 
 The Israeli security guard has been placed under house 
arrest pending further investigation. 
 
-- Death: A Palestinian teenager on July 10 died from bullet 
wounds he received during an exchange of gunfire between IDF 
soldiers and members of the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades in 
Nablus last week. 
 
-- Clashes/injuries: Palestinian and Israeli protesters threw 
a Molotov cocktail at IDF soldiers during a July 8 
demonstration opposing the construction of the separation 
barrier near the Bil'in village, west of Ramallah.  At least 
20 protesters were injured during the clashes by IDF rubber 
bullets and tear gas inhalation.  The IDF also arrested five 
protesters. (See "arrests") 
 
-- Clashes/injuries: Palestinians on July 9 commenced a 
series of demonstrations in the West Bank to protest the 
construction of the separation barrier.  At least 20 
protesters experienced tear gas inhalation during clashes 
with the IDF in Azzun village, west of Qalqilya. 
 
-- Injury: An IDF soldier on July 10 sustained light injuries 
when an explosive device detonated near Shillo settlement, 
north of Ramallah. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen on July 10 fired gunshots at 
an Israeli vehicle north of Ramallah.  There were no reported 
injuries from this incident. 
 
-- Shooting: Palestinian gunmen in Jenin on July 10 fired 
upon an Israeli settlement inside Green-Line Israel, 
resulting in damage to two homes.  There were no reported 
injuries from this incident. 
 
¶3.    (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on July 9 arrested five protesters during 
a demonstration against the construction of the separation 
barrier near Bil'in village, west of Ramallah. 
 
-- Arrests: The IDF on July 9 arrested six Palestinian 
Islamic Jihad (PIJ) activists in Hebron. 
-- Arrests: The IDF the evening of July 10 arrested two 
Palestinian youths near Azzun village, est of Qalqilya, who 
were suspected of throwing tones at Israeli vehicles. 
 
-- Incursions: The IF on July 10 conducted raids in several 
Palestinan villages in the Nablus, Hebron, and Tulkarm 
dstricts to search for wanted activists.  In Husan vllage, 
west of Bethlehem, the IDF closed all entances and placed 
IDF checkpoints at all entrance into the village. 
 
-- Incursion/Arrests: The ID on July 10 entered the West 
Bank city of Qalqilya and arrested three Fatah activists. 
The IDF withdrew from the city of the morning of July 11. 
 
-- The IDF on July 10 arrested one Palestinian in Hebron on 
suspicion of stealing an Israeli vehicle. 
 
¶4.    (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) member Marwan 
Kanafani (Gaza City) resigned from the PLC July 10 to protest 
postponement of legislative elections and ongoing instability 
in Palestinian-controlled areas. 
 
-- According to Palestinian and Israeli press reports, 
Palestinian Authority (PA) President Mahmud Abbas said July 
10 that he had reached an agreement with Hamas and PIJ 
representatives in Damascus that the National Islamic Forces, 
a Gaza-based umbrella organization composed of various 
Palestinian factions, would coordinate with the PA on the 
Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶5.    (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injuries: According to the IDF, three of its soldiers were 
lightly injured July 8 at 1520 hours when an explosive device 
went off approximately one kilometer north of the Sufa 
Crossing.  According to UNRWA, two Palestinian youths were 
injured near the settlement of Neve Dekalim July 9-10 after 
the IDF opened fire at some youth near the settlement. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported that on July 9, Palestinian 
militants' attempt to fire a mortar from the Al Amal project 
failed and exploded in place, resulting in nine injuries. 
 
-- Injuries: According to Israeli media sources, Palestinian 
militants fired a rocket at construction workers in the 
Philadelphi Strip July 11, lightly wounding one Israeli 
civilian worker. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported that on July 8, mortar shells 
were fired at civilians in Netzarim settlement and about 
seven kilometers west of Morag settlement.  No injuries 
resulted. 
 
-- Mortars: On July 9, according to the IDF, two mortar 
shells were fired at IDF soldiers near Khan Yunis.  No 
injuries were reported.  According to the IDF, a mortar shell 
was fired July 9 at IDF soldiers near Neve Dekalim 
settlement.  No injuries resulted.  Also on July 9, the IDF 
reported that a mortar shell was fired at IDF soldiers about 
two kilometers south of the Erez Crossing.  No injuries 
resulted. 
 
-- Mortars/rockets: A Qassam rocket was fired July 9 at 
Israeli civilians in Kibbutz Nahal Oz, with no injuries 
reported.  The IDF also reported that on July 10, a mortar 
shell was fired at IDF soldiers and Israeli civilians in the 
vicinity of Nahal Oz Crossing.  No injuries resulted. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported that two mortar shells were 
fired at Israeli civilians and IDF soldiers near Neve Dekalim 
Village July 10.  No injuries were reported. 
 
-- Mortars: Two mortars were fired at IDF soldiers July 10 
near Khan Yunis, without resulting injuries. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported three mortar shell incidents 
late July 10: one fired at IDF soldiers and Israeli civilians 
near Netzarim, one fired at IDF soldiers near Kissufim 
crossing, and one fired at Israeli civilians and IDF soldiers 
near Neve Dekalim.  No injuries were reported from these 
incidents. 
 
-- Anti-Tank Missile: The IDF reported that an anti-tank 
missile was fired at IDF soldiers near Neve Dekalim July 8. 
 
-- Explosive devices: Aside from the explosive device noted 
under "injuries," the IDF reported that an explosive device 
was identified July 10 near Israeli civilians at the Dugit 
settlement. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported four shootings occurred July 
8, all targeting IDF soldiers: two near Khan Yunis, one near 
the Sufa Crossing and one near Neve Dekalim. 
 
-- Shootings: According to the IDF, eight shootings aimed at 
IDF targets occurred July 9: one near Neve Dekalim, one south 
of the Sufa Crossing, one north of the Kissufim Crossing, one 
near the Biri Crossing, and three near Rafah. 
 
-- Shootings: UNRWA reported July 9 that IDF soldiers opened 
fire at youngsters near the settlement of Neve Dekalim, 
resulting in two injuries, including an 11 year old who was 
shot in the neck. 
 
-- Shootings: The IDF reported its soldiers were targeted in 
shooting incidents July 10, with no resulting injuries: two 
near Erez Crossing, one near Khan Yunis, and one west of 
Rafah. 
 
-- Shootings: Israeli civilians were targeted in a shooting 
July 10, according to the IDF, west of Neve Dekalim.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
-- Shootings: Four shootings aimed at IDF targets in the 
early hours of July 11 were reported by the IDF: three near 
Khan Yunis and one near Rafiah Yam settlement.  No injuries 
were reported. 
 
-- Incursions: UNRWA reported that the IDF carried out a 
small incursion and search operation east of the Bureij 
refugee camp July 9. 
 
¶6.    (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open July 9-11, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open July 9-11, and 4,728 laborers and 
423 merchants crossed into Israel July 11. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open July 9-11, and 580 
laborers entered the zone July 11. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers July 
9-11, but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open July 9-11. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open for arrivals and departures July 
9-11. 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed July 9-11.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
¶7.    (SBU) Political Developments: 
 
-- The Israeli daily Ha'aretz reported July 11 that there 
have been "an unusually large number of shooting incidents" 
July 10 in Gaza, "and an increase has been evident there in 
recent days." 
 
-- According to Ha'aretz "Palestinian sources announced...the 
appointment of General Juma Ghali, a senior officer of the 
presidential security guard, as commander of the new force 
set up by the PA to guard the Gaza settlements after their 
evacuation...." 
 
-- Israeli radio reported that there are an increased number 
of reports of violence between armed Palestinian groups in 
recent days.  UNRWA reported two violent disputes, one that 
erupted July 9 between two families at its Rimaal Health 
Center, which resulted in injuries, and one July 10 between 
two families in Jabalia Village, in which a house was burned. 
PEARCE