05JERUSALEM3019
WB/G SITREP: TARGETED KILLINGS, ROCKET ATTACKS
Fri Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 003019 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT 
FOR DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG CASC IS
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: TARGETED KILLINGS, ROCKET ATTACKS 
MARK UPSURGE IN VIOLENCE IN WEST BANK AND GAZA STRIP: JULY 
15, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) 
 
 
¶1.    (SBU) Summary: In the West Bank, Israeli helicopters on 
July 15 fired missiles at a vehicle traveling near Salfit, 
killing at least two Hamas activists.  Meanwhile, in the Gaza 
Strip, Hamas and PA security forces have engaged in street 
battles July 14-15, resulting in the deaths of at least two 
Palestinians and as many as 40 injuries, including several in 
critical condition.  Israeli media reported that an IAF 
attack killed up to four Hamas activists in central Gaza. 
Since the evening of July 14, Palestinian militants have 
fired over 70 rockets and mortars at Israeli targets in the 
Gaza Strip and inside Israel.  A Qassam rocket killed one 
Israeli civilian and injured another the evening of July 14. 
In a separate incident, four Qassam rockets near Nahal Oz 
injured three IDF soldiers.  In Gaza City, a large explosion, 
reportedly detonated in the vicinity of PA President Mahmud 
Abbas's residence.  End summary. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.    (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Israeli helicopters on July 15 fired missiles at a 
vehicle carrying Hamas members, killing at least two, near 
the West Bank town of Salfit. 
 
-- Injury: According to Israeli sources, IDF soldiers 
operating in Tulkarm on July 14 shot and wounded a 
Palestinian holding a Molotov cocktail. 
 
-- Clashes/Injuries: According to Palestinian sources, at 
least 10 protesters, including Palestinians, left-wing 
Israelis, and international activists sustained injuries from 
stun grenades and tear gas inhalation during clashes with the 
IDF.  The demonstrators were protesting the construction of 
the separation barrier near the West Bank settlement of 
Immanuel. 
 
¶3.    (SBU) ARRESTS/SECURITY: 
 
-- Arrests: Nil. 
 
-- Settler violence: Israeli settlers on July 14 reportedly 
uprooted and torched olive trees near Qalqilya. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4.    (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: According to the IDF, one Israeli 
civilian was killed and one injured on July 14 when two 
Qassams landed on Nativ Ha'asara.  Three IDF soldiers were 
lightly wounded when four Qassams landed near Nahal Oz. 
 
-- Deaths/Injuries: UNRWA reported 21 PA security forces 
injured, 14 others injured, and two killed in clashes between 
Palestinian security services and Hamas militants (see 
"shootings" below).  Israeli radio reported 18 injuries and 
two deaths from the violence.  The Palestinian Center for 
human Rights reported 43 injuries (23 PA, 14 Hamas and 6 
civilian) -- three critical -- and three deaths. 
 
-- Deaths: The Israeli press is reporting that IDF 
helicopters targeted and killed four Hamas activists in the 
Tel Ahawa area of the central Gaza strip. 
 
-- Injuries: UNRWA reported eight Palestinians were injured 
in attacks by IDF helicopters (see "air-to-ground missiles" 
below). 
 
-- Rockets: The IDF reported thirteen rocket attacks on July 
¶14.  In addition to the attacks reported above under 
deaths/injuries, one Qassam was launched at IDF personnel 
near Sderot, one at civilians in Netzarim, three at civilians 
near Nissanit, and two at the Erez crossing. 
 
-- Rockets: The IDF reported three rocket attacks in the 
early morning hours of July 15: one targeting an IDF outpost 
east of Rafiah Yam and two targeting civilians north of Nahal 
Oz.  There were no known injuries in these attacks. 
 
-- Rockets: UNRWA reported 55 rockets fired overnight: one at 
Ganei Tal, 19 at Neve Dekalim, one at Tel Katif, one near the 
eastern border of the middle of the Gaza strip, eight at 
Netzarim, six Qassams at Israeli villages north to the north 
and east of the Gaza Strip, seven rockets at Sderot, three 
towards the eastern Green Line, three at Nissanit, four at 
Dugit, and two at unidentified targets in the north.  Embassy 
note: many of these are covered in the IDF reports above. 
The disparity in numbers is due to the fact that the IDF and 
UN have different reporting periods.  In addition, the UN 
often includes what the IDF deems to be mortar attacks as 
missiles. 
 
-- Anti-tank Missile: The IDF reported one antitank missile 
fired on July 15 at an IDF outpost west of Khan Yunis.  There 
were no injuries.  UNRWA said the attack took place on Neve 
Dekalim. 
 
-- Air-to-ground Missiles: UNRWA reported that overnight IDF 
helicopters fired a total of eight missiles in Gaza: two at 
the cemetery in Khan Yunis, two missiles at the Al-Rahma 
Center (Hamas community center), one at a car in the Birka 
area, one at a workshop in Deir al-Balah, two at the Al Sahwa 
Center (Hamas community center).  The helicopters reportedly 
also strafed an area north of al-Attra (Khan Yunis). 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported two mortar attacks targeting 
Israeli civilians on July 14, one at Aley Sinai and one at 
Netzarim.  UNRWA confirmed the Netzarim attack.  There were 
no injuries. 
 
-- Mortars: The IDF reported six mortar attacks on June 15, 
one targeting Israeli civilians in Gadid, and five targeting 
IDF soldiers.  The attacks against the IDF occurred northeast 
of Nissanit, seven kilometers northeast of the Kissufim 
crossing, northwest of Khan Yunis, 50 meters south of 
Netzarim, and south of Netzer Hazani.  There were no 
injuries. 
 
-- Mortars: UNRWA reported seven mortar shells fired at Morag. 
 
-- Explosive Device: The IDF dismantled one explosive device 
found on July 14 approximately one kilometer south of Sofa. 
There were no injuries. 
 
-- Explosion: The UN reported that at 1600 a vehicle exploded 
in Gaza city just off Beirut Street on the road to the 
Preventive Security building, located 600 meters from 
President Abbas's house. killing four passengers.  The 
explosion reportedly knocked out power in part of Gaza City. 
 
-- Shootings: UNRWA reported that a major clash between Hamas 
and PA forces began at approximately 1830 on July 14 and 
continues at this point.  According to UN accounts, PA 
security personnel confronted Hamas militants after they had 
fired two Qassams at the northern settlement block.  In an 
ensuing gun battle near Shaykh Zayid city, five militants 
were injured, one critically.  Later on July 14 two vehicles 
belonging to PA security forces were reportedly burned near 
the Bayt Lahia junction.  Violence erupted again when PA 
forces reportedly fired in central Gaza city to prevent a 
Hamas spokesman from holding an interview with al-Jazeera. 
PA forces reportedly deployed at Shifa hospital to intercept 
any Hamas militants wounded in the fight.  The UN reported 
that PA forces moved APCs into Hamas areas on the morning of 
July 15, sparking clashes near the UNRWA building.  UNRWA 
reported that an APC was destroyed and police took cover in 
an UNRWA school, where they fired at crowds who attacked them 
with two explosive devices.  Casualty figures are reported 
above in "deaths/injuries."  Israeli radio reported a riot at 
the Shifa hospital and an attack by Hamas that destroyed a PA 
police station and four vehicles. 
 
-- Shooting: The IDF reported shooting at IDF soldiers on 
July 14 north of the Karni crossing.  There were no injuries. 
 
-- Shooting: The IDF reported shooting on July 15 targeting 
an IDF outpost northwest of Khan Yunis.  There were no 
injuries.  UNRWA reported that the attack was on Neve Dekalim. 
 
-- Shooting: UNRWA reported that IDF troops in Rafah fired 
into the Zarub area.  There were no injuries. 
 
¶5.    (SBU) ARRESTS: 
 
-- Arrests: UNRWA reported that three Palestinians were 
arrested by IDF troops while trying to enter Israel north of 
Sufa. 
 
¶6.    (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS/INTERNAL CHECKPOINTS: 
 
-- No Palestinians except those holding Jerusalem ID cards 
are currently allowed to use the Erez crossing. 
 
-- Israeli radio reported that the IDF has closed roads and 
checkpoints to trisect the Gaza Strip. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was closed. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open on July 14.  No information is 
available on July 15. 
 
-- Rafah Terminal was open on July 14 in both directions 
without age restrictions.  No information is available for 
July 15. 
 
-- No information on Route Four (Salahadeen Road) is 
available. 
 
-- Kissufim Junction, the main entry point to Gush Katif 
settlement bloc, was closed to non-residents July 14. 
 
-- No information on the Toufah checkpoint is available. 
 
-- The Abu Houli internal crossing and the Coastal Road area 
are reported closed. 
 
¶7.    (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- Mortar/rocket and shooting attacks continue.  The UN 
reported additional rockets fired throughout the day into 
settlement blocks and into Israel, resulting in a number of 
injuries (details as they become known in the next sitrep). 
 
-- UN staff were advised not to move due to fighting in the 
streets, but were allowed to move to Erez during midday 
prayers on July 15. 
 
-- The UN reported that some mosques were calling for Hamas 
to take over the streets following midday prayers. 
 
-- The UN reported that Hamas stated that rocket attacks are 
in retaliation for the IDF's entry into Tulkarm in the West 
Bank. 
 
-- The IDF is maintaining a general closure of the Gaza Strip. 
PEARCE