05JERUSALEM2786
WB/G SITREP: JULY 01, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) --
Fri Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002786 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JULY 01, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
FIVE PALESTINIANS AND ONE ISRAELI SOLDIER INJURED DURING 
IDF INCURSION INTO NABLUS; CLASHES CONTINUE AT AL-MOWASSI 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: Five Palestinians and one IDF soldier were 
lightly wounded June 30 in Nablus during an IDF incursion in 
response to reports, ulimately unfounded, that two soldiers 
had been kidnapped.  UNRWA and Israeli media reported that 
disengagement opponents in the al-Mowassi area of Gaza 
attacked Palestinians waiting to cross into al-Mowassi at 
Toufah June 30, and demonstrated on the Kissufim Road the 
same day.  A Palestinian boy age five and another age 14 were 
shot and wounded June 29 when IDF soldiers opened fire in 
response to a mortar attack on Neve Dekalim.  A Gay Pride 
parade in Jerusalem June 30 was interrupted when a 
knife-wielding Orthodox youth attacked marchers.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: On June 30, Palestinian sources reported that five 
Palestinians and one IDF soldier were lightly wounded in 
Nablus during an IDF incursion sent in response to reports 
that two soldiers had been kidnapped.  The IDF later released 
a statement confirming that it no longer believed any 
soldiers were missing. 
 
-- Security Incidents: Palestinian sources reported that a 
taxi overturned after being stoned by settlers in Burin 
village, outside Nablus, on June 30.  Five passengers were 
moderately injured as a result. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian press reported that one Palestinian 
Islamic Jihad member was arrested in Ramallah on June 30. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian security sources reported that five 
Palestinians were arrested in northern Ramallah while 
preparing to throw firebombs at IDF forces on the afternoon 
of June 30. 
 
-- Security Incidents: In Ramadin village near Hebron, 
clashes erupted between protesters against the separation 
barrier and IDF forces.  According to Palestinian media 
reports, seven protesters were lightly wounded when the IDF 
fired on them with rubber-coated bullets and tear gas. 
 
-- Security Incidents: Palestinian security sources reported 
that two members of the PA Preventive Security Organization, 
were jailed last week for shooting at Fatah Central Committee 
member Hani al-Hasan,s bodyguard, escaped from jail June 30. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- The Fatah Central Committee meeting continued in Amman 
July 1.  According to press and local sources, Faruq Qaddumi 
rejected an appointment as deputy chairman of the PLO and 
vice-president of Palestine (the virtual state declared by 
Arafat in 1988).  President Abbas and Qaddumi agreed that 
that both would authorize the appointment of PA ambassadors, 
although the PA would take the lead in the process. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Catch-up Item: Injuries:  UNRWA reported that a 
Palestinian boy age five and another age 14 were shot and 
wounded June 29 when IDF soldiers opened fire in response to 
a mortar attack on Neve Dekalim. 
 
-- Riots/Arrests/Closure: UNRWA and Israeli media reported 
that disengagement opponents in the al-Mowassi area of Gaza 
attacked Palestinians waiting to cross into al-Mowassi at 
Toufah June 30, and demonstrated on the Kissufim Road the 
same day.  No injuries were reported.  The IDF, also on June 
30, forcibly evacuated settlers from a hotel near Neve 
Dekalim, and declared the Gaza Strip a closed military zone 
to non-resident Israelis (Palestinians and internationals 
were still, however, able to move in and out of Gaza).  The 
Gaza closure was lifted for people July 1, but the IDF 
prohibited Israelis from bringing in goods or construction 
materials that might contribute to outpost establishment or 
imply a long-term stay by non-residents.  Israeli media 
reported that IDF construction units were working July 1 to 
repair damage to the formerly-occupied Palestinian home. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: The IDF reported that Palestinian 
militants launched a total of nine mortar shells at southern 
Gaza settlements and IDF outposts overnight June 30-July 1. 
UNRWA reported a total of 14 mortar shells and homemade 
rockets fired at settlements during the same period. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: Israeli media and UNRWA reported that 
militants fired one Qassam rocket at Sderot July 1.  No 
injuries were reported. 
 
-- Explosions: UNRWA reported that IDF soldiers found 
and safely disposed of a 40-kilogran explosive device near 
the border fence with Egypt, to the east of Rafah Terminal. 
Rafah was closed for several hours the morning of June 30, 
until the IED was disposed of. 
 
¶5. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open July 1, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open June 30, and 4,200 laborers and 505 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 30, and 600 
laborers entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers July 1, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open July 1. 
 
-- Rafah was open July 1 for both arrivals and departures. 
Palestinians reported that only 100 or so Palestinians per 
day are allowed to move each way and that there is a backlog 
of some 1,000-2,000 people waiting to cross 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed July 1.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30, except for several hours in the morning when 
settlers attacked a group of Palestinians waiting to cross. 
The IDF brought the situation under control and re-opened the 
checkpoint. 
 
--------- 
Jerusalem 
--------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Injury: The Jerusalem Gay Pride parade on June 30 was 
marred by violence when a Haredi youth stabbed three 
marchers.  Several other gay pride activists were pelted with 
bags of urine and feces. 
PEARCE