05MADRID3609
SECTION 102 (G) PEDOPHILIA CERTIFICATION: WORLD
Fri Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141622Z Oct 05UNCLAS MADRID 003609 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC PHUM SOCI SP UNAUS
SUBJECT: SECTION 102 (G) PEDOPHILIA CERTIFICATION: WORLD 
TOURISM ORGANIZATION (WTO) 
 
REF: SECSTATE 176088 
 
¶1. (U) Per reftel, poloff conducted an investigation into the 
membership of the World Tourism Organization (WTO), based in 
Madrid, to confirm that no members of this organization 
condone or seek the legalization of pedophilia. Based on this 
investigation, post believes that there is no reason to 
suspect that the WTO grants any official status, 
accreditation, or recognition to any organization which 
promotes or seeks the legalization of pedophilia or has 
subsidiaries or member organizations that do. 
 
¶2. (U) Poloff first researched WTO's own programs to combat 
sexual exploitation of children in tourism. The WTO has an 
extensive program under the "Task Force to Protect Children 
from Sexual Exploitation in Tourism, established in 1997. The 
task force's stated aim is "to prevent, uncover, isolate and 
eradicate the sexual exploitation of children in tourism." 
The WTO also has issued various statements on the prevention 
of organized sex tourism, and a joint statement with the 
International Air Transport Association (IATA) condemning 
sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism. 
 
¶3. (U) Poloff contacted the WTO's Task Force to Protect 
Children from Sexual Exploitation in Tourism coordinator 
Marina Diotallevi (also head of WTO's Ethical, Social, and 
Cultural Affairs) to discuss the WTO program to combat sexual 
exploitation of children.  Diotallevi explained that the WTO 
cooperates with various international NGOs working to combat 
pedophilia, especially ECPAT (End Child Prostitution, 
Pornography and Trafficking), with which the WTO works 
closely. (Embassy has a list of NGOs cooperating with the WTO 
on this issue.) 
 
¶4. (U) Emboff also reviewed the list of approximately 308 
"Affiliate Members," which includes a wide range of 
organizations (corporations, federations, airlines, unions, 
government agencies, and NGOs).  A review of this list gave 
no reason to suspect that any of the organizations were 
related with approval or promotion of the legalization of 
pedophilia. Post has a copy of this list. 
 
¶5. (U) Emboff also contacted ECPAT to talk about their 
cooperation with the WTO, and spoke with Camelia Tepelus, 
coordinator of the Code Secretariat (which is dedicated to 
"the protection of children from sexual exploitation in 
travel and tourism").  Telpelus verified a good working 
relationship between the WTO and ECPAT on projects to combat 
sexual exploitation of children in tourism. 
 
¶6. (U) Total staff time dedicated to this project was 
approximately one working day. 
 
¶7. (U) Embassy will pouch related lists and information to 
IO/SHA per reftel. 
 
¶8. (U) Embassy contact for this issue is Polical Officer Rob 
Allison, AllisonRS@state.gov,  34 91 587 2393. 
AGUIRRE