05MANAMA529
ACCREDITED AMCHAM KICKS OFF ACTIVITIES
Sun Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARPI DBERNS AND NEA/PPD 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/MAC/ONE LOUSTAUNAU AND HOFFMAN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR JBUNTIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PREL KPAO BA
SUBJECT: ACCREDITED AMCHAM KICKS OFF ACTIVITIES 
 
¶1.  The newly accredited American Chamber of Commerce 
(AmCham) in Bahrain held its inaugural event April 6, 
generating positive press play on the institution itself and 
on the impending Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the U.S. 
Over 50 business people attended the first meeting.  The 
Ambassador delivered official remarks, as did Bahrain Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry Second Vice Chairman Easm Fakhro, 
and Ministry of Commerce and Industry Assistant 
Undersecretary Ali Rahdi.  The focus of the remarks was on 
the FTA and the positive role it will play for Bahrain and 
U.S. business. 
 
¶2.  Bahraini and regional media coverage of the first AmCham 
in the Gulf highlighted the important role that the AmCham 
will play in revitalizing Bahrain's economy.  CNBC Arabia and 
the Bahrain Satellite Channel repeatedly aired remarks by the 
Ambassador and the AmCham Board during their regular news 
broadcasts and business programs during the Gulf's 
Thursday/Friday weekend when many families watch television 
together.  Bahraini and regional newspapers filled their 
business sections with banner headlines and photos of the 
AmCham Board, and included detailed information about the 
Chamber's proposed programs.  The Ambassador's remarks 
emphasized that the AmCham will assist with developing an 
even closer working relationship between American and 
Bahraini businesses and act as a catalyst for the FTA.  The 
Ambassador went live on Bahrain Radio during the morning rush 
hour on April 6 to announce to commuters that the AmCham had 
been established.  He also responded to questions about the 
benefits of having an AmCham in the country and gave an 
update on ratification of the FTA. 
 
¶3.  Bahraini public opinion leaders are upbeat about the 
establishment of the AmCham.  Al Wasat newspaper, which 
carefully tracks the hot button issue of unemployment in 
Bahrain, carried a column on April 10 which heralded the 
AmCham with further strengthening the commercial bilateral 
relationship between Bahrain and the U.S.  The Head of 
Economic Research at the University of Bahrain and a regular 
columnist on Bahraini business pages credits the AmCham with 
playing a future role in reducing unemployment in Bahrain and 
introducing Bahraini businesses to the U.S. market. 
 
¶4.  The AmCham currently has 20 members and hopes to have 40 
by the end of the year.  It plans to hold monthly breakfast 
and lunch meetings to engage the local business community. 
AmCham representatives announced their intention to conduct 
trade missions to the U.S., assist companies, take advantage 
of bilateral trade and investment opportunities, and arrange 
annual gala events. 
 
MONROE