05MANAMA889
BAHRAIN: REQUEST FOR AMERICAN MUSIC ABROAD
Wed Jun 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

220801Z Jun 05UNCLAS MANAMA 000889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ECA/PE/C/CU (SROUSE) NEA/PD (CWHITTLESEY) 
NEA/ARPI (DBERNS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OEXC SCUL OIIP KPAO BA
SUBJECT:  BAHRAIN: REQUEST FOR AMERICAN MUSIC ABROAD 
PROGRAM 
 
REF: STATE 102369 
 
¶1.  Embassy Manama requests to be included in the FY 2005 
American Music Abroad program.  Post requests that we 
host one of the Latin Jazz Quartets, which we believe 
would resonate very well with Bahraini audiences.  The 
following responses are keyed to questions in para 4 of 
reftel: 
 
¶2.  Desired dates:  Embassy Manama requests three full 
programming days in the mid to end February, 2006, 
timeframe.  Bahrain will celebrate an Islamic holiday in 
early February.  Thursdays and Fridays are the local 
weekend and are not suitable for programming; post 
requests that the three days in Bahrain be during the 
Saturday-Wednesday work week. 
 
¶3.  Post's program goals:  One of post's MPP goals is to 
improve mutual understanding, especially with Bahrain's 
successor generation.  PAS Manama constantly seeks 
opportunities to engage Bahraini youth on social, 
cultural, and educational issues.  The American Music 
Abroad program would reinforce our positive relationship 
with a wide variety of elite and non-elite audiences. 
 
¶4.  Priority audiences:  Post's priority audiences would 
include students at the University of Bahrain, members of 
Bahrain's elected Parliament, representatives from the 
business and finance community, youth groups, and English 
language students at post's affiliated English language 
school (American Cultural and Educational Center).  The 
Embassy would also arrange for a  performance at the 
Bahrain School, post's premiere K-12 American school, to 
highlight the importance of American music and culture to 
a young audience. 
 
¶5.  Anticipated results:  Bahrain has been selected to 
host the Forum for the Future in November, 2005, which 
will bring together many nations of the Broader Middle 
East and North Africa (BMENA) and their G-8 partners to 
advance political, economic, and social reform and 
progress in the region.  Hosting the American Music 
Abroad Program in the period following the Forum for the 
Future will provide post with an opportunity to build on 
the recent successes we have enjoyed in the political and 
economic spheres by showcasing American music and 
culture.  Bahraini audiences have loved recent ECA 
offerings such as Cultural Envoys/Georgetown University 
basketball players Omari Faulkner and Courtland Freeman, 
and the American Pianists Association Classical Music 
Fellow, Michael Sheppard.  Post's contacts have suggested 
that the Embassy offer more cultural events to broaden 
understanding of the U.S., and the American Music Abroad 
Program would greatly assist us with our ongoing efforts. 
 
¶6.  Security concerns:  Post programming will be done in 
close coordination with the RSO.  Security has not been 
an issue with previous visiting American cultural groups, 
and is generally not an overriding concern.  All 
necessary precautions will be taken, and coordination 
with the Ministry of Interior will take place as 
appropriate. 
 
MONROE