05MANAMA901
ARREST: FOLLOW-UP IN CASE OF QADRI, MOHAMMAD AFZAL
Sun Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAMA 000901 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS Leigh Rieder 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP Simone Baer 
DEPT FOR G/TIP Assefe Feleke 
INFO AMEMBASSY LONDON 
INFO AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 
INFO AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 
INFO AMCONSUL LAHORE 
 
E.O. 12356: N/A 
TAGS: BA CASC QADRI MOHAMMAD AFZAL
SUBJECT:  ARREST: FOLLOW-UP IN CASE OF QADRI, MOHAMMAD AFZAL 
- TRAFFICKER-IN-PERSONS 
 
REF:  MANAMA 834 
 
¶1.  This is an action request, please see para 8.  On June 
21, Conoffs visited Mohammad Afzal QADRI in the security 
office at the Bahrain International Airport.  SUBJ was 
arrested on June 9 after switching boarding cards with 
Pakistani national Hamid MEHMOOD (see reftel).  SUBJ was 
taken to court following his arrest and, at the request of 
the public prosecutor, ordered to remain in custody at the 
Airport Security Directorate during the 30 day investigation 
period. 
 
¶2.  SUBJ was in general good health, although he complained 
of "stomach problems" and described experiencing symptoms of 
heartburn.  He said that the authorities allowed him to take 
medication for ongoing back pain, and the officer who had 
transported him from the directorate to the airport told 
Conoffs he would take SUBJ to the clinic after the 
interview.  SUBJ said that he was well-treated by security 
staff.  SUBJ signed a privacy act waiver authorizing 
discussion of his case with his wife, Rehana QADRI (House 
No. 76-B, Street No. 8, Farooq-e-Azam Park, Fall Road, 
Lahore, tel: +92 427116379). 
 
¶3.  During the interview, SUBJ admitted that he had been 
assisting Pakistani nationals to enter the UK illegally 
since August 2001.  He estimates that he has trafficked 
around 30 individuals, however he claims that this is the 
first time he has ever switched boarding passes with another 
individual.  In the past, he claims to have been operating 
solely as an escort - helping people to make their 
connections and "guiding them." 
 
¶4.  SUBJ insisted that he has never assisted any individual 
to enter the United States illegally.  He also said that he 
has never engaged in any type of document fraud or forgery. 
He claims not to know how the people he trafficks enter the 
UK, that part of the operation is handled by someone else. 
He identified his contact in the UK as a British citizen of 
Pakistani descent named Hussain ISHFAQ (cell phone no: 
03004432526, based somewhere outside of London).  SUBJ said 
that he and the individuals he accompanies go separate ways 
after exiting the aircraft in London.  He returns to 
Pakistan, where he is paid 50,000 Pakistani rupees 
(approximately 840 USD) if his charge successfully enters 
the UK.  If the person is refused entry, he receives 
nothing.  Mr. Ishfaq informs him of the results and arranges 
for cash payment in Pakistan.  SUBJ admitted that he is 
unemployed in Pakistan and that trafficking people is his 
only source of income. 
 
¶5.  SUBJ claimed that he doesn't know the Pakistani-Canadian 
who was arrested for switching a boarding card on the same 
flight.  He said that the Canadian did not work for Mr. 
Ishfaq and was not part of their smuggling ring. 
 
¶6.  COMMENT: Both Conoffs and local authorities suspect that 
SUBJ has still not disclosed the full truth of his 
involvement in human smuggling.  Passport stamps indicate 
frequent travel between Pakistan and the UK many years 
before SUBJ admits to engaging in smuggling.  With no job 
and no real career (in the US, he "worked in shops, as a 
messenger, that kind of work"), it is unclear how he could 
afford so much international travel. 
 
SUBJ's claim to have been working as an escort seems 
unlikely as well.  It is unclear how an escort would be 
necessary to such an operation, and it seems logical that an 
organizer would want to keep the ring as small as possible 
to not attract unwelcome attention.  In addition, passport 
stamps show many entries and exits to and from Bahrain.  If 
he were escorting people all the way to London, he would 
transit, but not enter, Bahrain.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶7.  SUBJ will remain in detention until the end of the 
investigation period.  At that time, the prosecutor can 
release him, bring charges against him or request another 30 
day detention to continue investigating.  Because the 
boarding card swap did not take place in Bahrain (Bahraini 
authorities believe the switch happened either in the United 
Arab Emirates or on the plane), it is unlikely that the 
prosecutor will be able to bring any meaningful charges 
against SUBJ.  Authorities speculate that he will be 
deported to the UAE. 
 
¶8.  Post requests guidance from the Department regarding 
CLASS entries for SUBJ and other individuals connected to 
the case.  SUBJ admits to using a US passport to traffick 
people to the UK.  He uses the passport to obtain boarding 
documents to the UK, then passes those documents to aliens 
who are not otherwise entitled to them.  He then uses his US 
passport to obtain visas upon his arrival in UAE and 
Bahrain.   Post believes that this information should be 
documented, but Conoffs are unclear as to where and how such 
information should be entered. 
 
MONROE