05MUSCAT972
OMAN ONLINE: MERCY AND MISSILES
Sat Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Muscat
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MUSCAT 000972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ARPI, NEA/PPD, NEA/P, IIP/G/NEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL SOCI MNUC IR MU
SUBJECT: OMAN ONLINE: MERCY AND MISSILES 
 
REF: MUSCAT 950 
 
¶1. Summary:  The Omani Internet message boards "al-Sablah" and 
"al-Majarra" are the liveliest and most comprehensive Arabic- 
language fora for political and social discourse in the country, 
touching on issues and personalities rarely addressed in the 
conventional media.  While not totally free, nor wholly 
reflective of Omani public opinion, these popular sites 
nevertheless offer a worthwhile window into the hot topics and 
unvarnished views of the day.  This edition of Oman Online 
contains the following topics: 
 
-- Sultan Qaboos' Pardons 
-- Iran's Nuclear Weapons Program 
 
End summary. 
 
--------- 
Pardon Me 
--------- 
 
¶2. Sultan Qaboos' June 9 decree pardoning the thirty-one Ibadhi 
Muslims convicted of belonging to a secret organization and 
seeking to overthrow the government was hailed by Oman's media 
(reftel), and al-Sablah members quickly joined the fray.  Most 
respondents expressed jubilation at the decision; one member 
exclaimed, "We have come to expect this generosity from our great 
leader.  May God protect and save him!" 
 
¶3. Other participants were less exuberant.  One cautious 
contributor wrote, "We should note that this is not a victory 
over the Sultan or over the government.  Rather, it is the result 
of wise politicians, recognizing the divisions that exist in 
Omani society."  Still others felt a sense of vindication, 
including one member who declared, "We knew that the convicted 
shaikhs and scholars were honest.  They are role models for our 
country; how could they possibly endanger their own people?" 
 
----------------- 
Persian Plutonium 
----------------- 
 
¶4. The issue of Iran's nuclear ambitions, sparked by the visit of 
Iran's top nuclear negotiator Dr. Hassan Rohani, produced an 
energetic discussion among al-Sablah members, with many 
individuals voicing their suspicion of American intentions.  One 
writer commented, "Iran is not Iraq, and the Americans should 
think strategically before making a move against Tehran.  But we 
should not ignore the Americans' warnings."  Another member 
argued, "Nobody believes the play-acting between Iran and the 
United States anymore; America has been shaking its fist at Iran 
since the revolution, while Iran dreams of having a larger slice 
of the Arab pie."  There was widespread agreement, however, on 
the dangers of a nuclear-armed Iran:  "We do not want any country 
to build nuclear weapons, but especially Iran because it is so 
close to Omani soil." 
 
BALTIMORE