05MUSCAT1549
MEDIA REACTION: REFERENDUM IN IRAQ
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Muscat
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171035Z Oct 05UNCLAS MUSCAT 001549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ARPI, NEA/PPD, NEA/P, AND INR/R/MR 
 
LONDON FOR TSOU 
PARIS FOR ZEYA 
USCENTCOM FOR PLUSH 
FOREIGN PRESS CENTER FOR SILAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO KMDR OIIP IZ MU
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: REFERENDUM IN IRAQ 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
In Order To Form A More Perfect Union 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶1. "Oman," the government-owned Arabic daily, ran an editorial on 
October 17 entitled "After The Iraqi Constitution": 
 
"An unofficial announcement suggests that sixty-six percent of 
the Iraqi people have approved a constitutional referendum, 
despite overwhelming opposition from Sunni Arabs.  If (as 
declared by Secretary of State Rice) this unofficial result is 
true, then elections in December will replace the transitional 
administration with a four-year parliament and the first 
permanent government since the 2003 invasion.  If Washington is 
serious about Iraq's political process, there needs to be a 
timetable for the withdrawal of all American troops from Iraq. 
We realize that the constitution is not a magic document.  But 
what gives life to a constitution is the political will of those 
who achieve the power to implement its provisions." 
 
--------------------------- 
Ensure Domestic Tranquility 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. The privately owned Arabic daily "al-Watan" published an 
editorial on October 14 entitled "Steps Toward A New Iraq": 
 
"There are a number of milestones that will mark Iraq's progress. 
The first step is the withdrawal of foreign troops according to a 
timetable that should be agreed upon by all parties.  The second 
step is for the public to agree on a permanent constitution that 
satisfies the ambitions and inclinations of all groups in Iraq, 
in preparation for the establishment of a democratic regime.  The 
third step will be to cleanse Iraq of the armed groups that 
target civilians and who seek to impose their will from the 
barrel of a gun.  These steps are the only way for Iraq to escape 
the political deterioration and instability that still cause the 
deaths of many innocent people each day. . .  Clearly, all Iraqis 
should take part in this referendum to lay the foundation stone 
for the construction of a new, independent, and unified Iraq - 
with an Arab identity." 
 
--------------------------- 
Promote The General Welfare 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. "Oman" featured an editorial on October 15 entitled "A 
Decisive Day For The Future Of Iraq And The Region": 
 
"Millions of Iraqis will vote today on the referendum for the new 
Iraqi Constitution.  Despite the hot disputes about some of its 
provisions, in the end the constitution is a formula for 
coexistence between different groups.  This referendum is 
exceedingly important for the future of Iraq, particularly in 
light of the current violent circumstances. . .  It is important 
and necessary that Iraqis vote today for the sake of unity, 
progress, and the re-creation of life.  This shall enable Iraq to 
undermine any evil plans that seek to drive the country into an 
endless dark tunnel." 
 
BALTIMORE