05PARIS7407
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Bush Presidency
Mon Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 007407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Bush Presidency 
Iran International Terrorism - New Delhi International Trade - 
WTO - Europe 
PARIS - Monday, October 31, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Bush Presidency 
Iran 
International Terrorism - New Delhi 
International Trade - WTO - Europe 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Most front pages and editorials are devoted to this weekend's 
outbreak of violence in several Parisian suburbs after the 
accidental death of two teenagers who were allegedly pursued 
by the police. Interior Minister Sarkozy is prominently 
featured after his declarations on national television about 
"zero tolerance" for delinquents and his plans to visit a 
troubled suburb every week. 
 
The economic and financial press devotes its lead to the WTO, 
the persisting disagreement between France and Brussels and 
the latest offer made by Europe, which is considered as 
"serious" by the WTO's Secretary General Pascal Lamy, as 
stated in an interviewed in Le Figaro Economie. La Tribune's 
editorial criticizes President Chirac for his "Double Game" 
with regard to developing nations while Le Monde in its 
editorial concludes that "unless the EU-25 find some common 
ground, Europe will remain paralyzed." (See Part C) 
 
International stories are dominated by the terrorist attacks 
in New Delhi and Iran's President's anti-Israel remarks. 
France Soir and Le Figaro both report that yesterday, 
Ahmadinejad tried to trivialize his remarks on Israel, saying 
in a press release that Iran doesn't have the intention of 
attacking Israel, it is just repeating what Khomeini has been 
saying for the past 27 years.  (See Part C) 
 
The indictment of Lewis Libby leads several commentators to 
write about a "calamitous" situation for the Bush 
administration. Le Journal du Dimanche carries a front-page 
story entitled "Plamegate Threatens the White House."  (See 
Part C) 
 
Nicole Bacharan, Professor at Science Po and an expert on the 
U.S. is interviewed in Le Parisien: "Legally, President Bush 
has nothing to fear. He does not look as though he is directly 
implicated. But politically the consequences could be 
devastating for himself and his administration. The question 
that will be on everyone's mind is whether the Bush team 
knowingly misled public opinion about what was known regarding 
Iraq's WMD. Did it manipulate facts to fit its own ends? This 
is similar to the Watergate. because the most devastating 
issue is that of having hidden the truth." 
 
British Ambassador to France Sir John Holmes pens an op-ed in 
today's Le Figaro entitled: "Securing Iraq, Encouraging 
Democracy." Sir Holmes acknowledges that securing Iraq remains 
a primary concern and that democracy needs security in order 
to advance. But he also says that security will progress when 
the country will have affirmed itself as a democracy. The 
political process in Iraq must be encouraged among all 
communities, "and in this regard France has played a major 
role." Ambassador Holmes concludes with an invitation to the 
international community to continue supporting Iraq's 
reconstruction 
 
Iraq's Ambassador to France Mowafak Abboud pens his own op-ed 
in Le Figaro titled "The Constitution: A Decisive Step" in 
which he allays the concerns of those "who fear that 
federalism might divide the country." The constitution is "a 
democratic success" for the people of Iraq "who needs to be 
applauded for its courage." The international community must 
support this "democratic inroad." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
"A Mortgaged Presidency" 
Gilles Delafon in right-of-center Le Journal du Dimanche 
(10/31): "This is the toughest political challenge that George 
Bush has had to face since going to the White House in 2001. 
Today the President's cabinet is paralyzed. The matter of the 
`leaks' is much more serious than the Clinton lies. With the 
Libby trial, Vice President Cheney's role in the run-up to the 
war in Iraq could be in question. As a result, the Democrats 
are waking up. President Bush is very much alone: He has been 
abandoned by the religious right, and the Republicans in 
office are taking their distance to better their chances in 
the midterm elections. For the next three years President Bush 
will simply try to carry on. A difficult task with an approval 
rate of only 38 percent." 
 
"Under Fire, Bush Tries to Boost His Presidency" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/31): "This has 
been one of the most calamitous weeks in the Bush presidency. 
With an approval rate of 39 percent, The White House will try 
to score some points in the legislature. Several trips abroad 
and the Iraqi legislative elections should help to distract 
the America people's attention, if America does not become 
obsessed with the Libby affair." 
 
"A Mired Bush" 
Bernard Geutta on government-run France Inter radio (10/31): 
"The judges are now going to start dissecting who was doing 
and saying what in the run-up to the war in Iraq. While a 
majority of Americans today believe that it was wrong to send 
troops to Iraq, the conditions in which these troops were sent 
will be under scrutiny and will doubtless lead to a good deal 
of dirty laundry being washed in public. The lies on which 
this war was based will come back to haunt the White House." 
 
Iran 
 
"Ahmadinejad Tries to Minimize His Remarks" 
Delphine Minoui in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/31): "The 
Iranian President's declarations calling for `Israel to be 
wiped off the map' are more a sign of his inadequacy than a 
real threat to Israel. While the destruction of Israel has 
been part of Iran's dogma since 1979, this is the first time 
in years that a high official uses such language. Hence the 
shockwave worldwide. But observers note that the Iranian 
President's remarks need to be put in context. Ahmadinejad 
lacks diplomatic savvy and international experience. He has 
never traveled to Europe and recently discovered the U.S. for 
the first time." 
 
International Terrorism - New Delhi 
 
"A Threat for the Peace Process Between India and Pakistan" 
Marie-France Calle in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/31): "The 
fragile Indo-Pakistani peace process underway since January 
2004 is suffering its true first test with the attacks in New 
Delhi. But in spite of them, on Saturday evening Indian and 
Pakistani officials agreed to open five Kashmir boarder points 
between India and Pakistan. This measure comes somewhat late 
and may not be terribly helpful for the victims of the 
earthquake, but it is symbolically full of meaning. It is 
indeed remarkable that such a humanitarian agreement could be 
reached between New Delhi and Islamabad under the present 
conditions." 
 
International Trade - WTO - Europe 
"Double Game" 
Pascal Aubert in centrist La Tribune (10/31): "How much longer 
will President Chirac be able to keep the illusion alive? How 
long can he go on showing pity for the world's poor and play 
the role of advocate for development, while continuing to 
block every serious advance made on the CAP negotiations at 
the WTO? The moment of truth is fast approaching. The Doha 
Round appears to be seriously compromised. Europe's partners 
are calling for an extra effort. But will the EU-25 be able to 
agree? There is one country, France, which continues to play 
deaf. Farmers elsewhere appear resigned because the industrial 
counterparts are balanced and will benefit everyone. To 
justify its position, Paris is hiding behind the definition of 
the European Commission's mandate. But if Europe stays within 
that mandate, it will be running the political risk of failed 
negotiations. France will have to shoulder its 
responsibilities: a few more concessions in exchange for a 
global trade agreement where it has much to gain, or 
exercising its veto and being remembered as the country which 
torpedoed the `round.' Developing nations are waiting eagerly 
to see which option Chirac is going to choose." 
 
"Europe Paralyzed" 
Left-of-center Le Monde in its editorial (10/31/05 1): 
"Mandelson's latest offer continues to poison the situation. 
France for its part continues to oppose Brussels. After the 
Hampton Court Summit, it appears that boosting Europe is still 
not on the agenda. The divisions that separate the 25 EU 
members are so deep that a new European impetus remains 
doubtful. The European Union is in the midst of a crisis on 
almost every issue, and mostly about the CAP. Even if it 
manages to reach a last minute consensus, it is clear that 
more will be needed if Europe wants to conceive of a 
`strategy' for its future." WHITE