05PARIS8162
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq Alleged CIA Prisons
Thu Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 008162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC 
ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR 
ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; 
MOSCOW/PA; ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq Alleged CIA Prisons 
Israel - Shimon Peres Leaves His Party 
PARIS - Thursday, December 01, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iraq 
Alleged CIA Prisons 
Israel - Shimon Peres Leaves His Party 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The reversal of a controversial decision in a pedophile trial 
and the unprecedented 'mea culpa' from the Prosecutor to the 
falsely accused are today's lead stories in practically every 
outlet, except for the economic and financial press which 
devotes its lead to a decision by the government that will 
allow the national Post Office to compete with commercial 
banks in providing banking services. 
 
Iraq and the President's latest speech where he "rejected the 
idea of a troop withdrawal calendar" is reported in 
Liberation and Le Figaro which also carries an op-ed titled 
"Iraq: A Turning Point in the Fight Against Terrorism." For 
Jacques Amalric in Liberation, "President Bush is a 
revisionist." (See Part C) 
 
Le Figaro carries an interview of Iraqi Foreign Affairs 
Minister Hoshyar Zebari: "The withdrawal of American troops 
is tied to the country's stability. They cannot leave before 
the country is stabilized. And stabilization will depend on 
the training of the Iraqi security forces. I know this is a 
controversial issue. But we need to remain firm and 
determined. The coming months will be critical for Iraq." Le 
Monde also reports Zebari's remarks from his press 
conference: "Because of persisting border crossings from 
Syria, establishing a schedule for the withdrawal of troops 
from Iraq is not pertinent at this time." 
 
Allegations about CIA "secret prisons" lead Le Monde to 
report:  "Washington is expected to give explanations." (See 
Part C) France Soir, which uses the same headline, 
"Washington Will Give Explanations," interviews former CIA 
chief in Paris, Charles Cogan: "I know the Washington Post 
journalist who broke the story. She has assured me that 
everything was indeed true. Physical abuse of prisoners has 
taken place in Guantanamo and Abu Gharaib. We were all 
convinced that there were WMD in Iraq. Including the French. 
But we had no proof. Both these incidents have tarnished our 
reputation. In addition, the invasion of Iraq has triggered 
the fury of the Arab world and is damaging the image of the 
United States." 
 
The televised interview of Interior Minister Villepin on CNN 
Tuesday is the subject of several commentaries. For Le Monde 
Villepin is "explaining France to the Americans." The article 
concludes: "On Iraq, as on the rest, Villepin was not ready 
to tone down his differences of opinion with the Americans, 
which he defended at the UN in February 2003." In La Croix, 
Pierre-Yves Le Priol writes: "This was a delicate exercise, 
in English, one France will have to submit to more and more. 
Behind Amanpour's questions, one could detect to what extent 
France's image was affected by television shots that have 
left a caricature as vision of our country." 
 
Shimon Peres's departure from the Labor Party to join Ariel 
Sharon's new centrist party is widely reported. For 
Liberation "Sharon is made of stainless steel." (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iraq 
 
"Revisionism According to Bush" 
Jacques Amalric in left-of-center Liberation (12/01): 
"Revisionism is in. But no one expected Bush to be among the 
revisionists. In his speech on November 11 he said it as 
'irresponsible to rewrite history about the start of the war 
in Iraq.' A few days later Vice President Cheney also accused 
the Democrats of revisionism. In trying to submit proof to 
support his position, President Bush, like Dick Cheney, is 
exposing himself to the same accusations he is making of 
others: it is somewhat revisionist to claim that the 
Senatorial commission found no proof, when in fact it did not 
have access to the necessary archives. and because it is a 
lie to claim that 'more than a hundred Senators and 
Democrats' had access to the same documents as the President. 
With Congress back in session this week, we can expect new 
revisionists attempts from the President. The U.S. President 
is losing his credibility." 
 
"Bush Defends his 'Strategy for Victory.'" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (12/01): "Just 
like Lyndon Johnson during the darkest hours of the war in 
Vietnam, George Bush now only speaks to the military or to 
his supporters. Yesterday the President, overwhelmed by 
criticism, again chose to speak to a uniformed audience to 
launch his new campaign to explain the war in Iraq to the 
American public. This speech, the first in a series that will 
be given until the elections in Iraq on December 15, did not 
provide new information but marks a turning point in the 
White House's approach. For the first time since the invasion 
of Iraq 32 months ago, Bush is attempting to present a 
coherent strategy, a certain degree of transparency and even 
a measure of modesty to persuade his fellow citizens to be 
patient." 
 
"Iraq: A Turning Point In the Fight Against Terrorism." 
Alexander Adler in right-of-center Le Figaro (12/01): "The 
military operations in Afghanistan and in Iraq do not 
constitute victories for the Americans. they were more 
political than military. In spite of the blows that the 
American army has been able to inflict on the Iraqi jihad 
along the Syrian border, it is in the purely political arena 
that the war against terrorism has taken a turn. The question 
is will Bush be able to come to an understanding with the 
Iranian elite in time to create a favorable political climate 
in Iraq before Congress and the pacifist American 
intelligentsia succeed in completely paralyzing America's 
capacity to carry on the war?" 
 
Alleged CIA Prisons 
 
"Washington Will Give Explanations on CIA Activities in 
Europe." 
Corine Lesnes in left-of-center Le Monde (12/01): "Jack Straw 
wrote to Secretary Rice on Tuesday to ask for clarification 
concerning the 'allegations that the CIA set up terrorist 
camps in Eastern Europe.' The Europeans are waiting for a 
reaction from the American authorities. These have not yet 
formally denied the accusations. The existence of 'black 
sites' where 'phantom' detainees might be incarcerated has 
not been proven to date. But Human Rights Watch has proof of 
the CIA using several European airports for transit of 
aircraft going or coming from Guantanamo. The Europeans 
consider that the stopovers, if they are confirmed, are a 
violation of the EU's founding values." 
 
Israel - Shimon Peres Leaves His Party 
 
"A Stainless Steel Politician" 
Didier Francois in left-of-center Liberation (12/01): "The 
political earthquake triggered by Sharon's departure from the 
Likud has just triggered a mirror reaction in Israel's left 
with Shimon Peres's decision to join Sharon. After much 
hesitation, and seeing that Amir Peretz was not making any 
overtures, Peres has decided to reclaim his freedom of 
action. While he has not formally joined Sharon's new party, 
he has given him his support and signaled his intention of 
'supporting the coalition' for peace. This pacifist support 
for Sharon, coming from an emblematic figure, who has openly 
been supportive of a territorial compromise with the 
Palestinians, will undoubtedly complicate the task of the new 
leader of the Israeli left. while helping Sharon who has 
openly been courting Peres." STAPLETON