05PARIS6478
SURPRISE! FRENCH FARMERS ARE GROWING BIOTECH CORN
Thu Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221301Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 006478 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP AND EUR/WE 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
UDSA/FAS for BIG/SIMMONS/RICHEY/JONES and ITP/WOOLSEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR ECON BEXP FR
SUBJECT: SURPRISE! FRENCH FARMERS ARE GROWING BIOTECH CORN 
 
 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary. This month, the French press revealed - to 
the surprise of many - that 500 to 1,000 hectares 
(approximately 1,000 to 2,200 acres) of genetically modified 
corn was being grown in Southwestern France.  The GOF 
confirmed that French farmers had voluntarily declared 500 
hectares of GM corn.  Separately, another group of anti-GMO 
activists were arrested and sentenced on 15 September; six 
anti-GMO activists were tried for their destruction of an 
experimental plot of biotech corn belonging to French seed 
company Biogemma. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) Pressed by the media, the French Ministry of 
Agriculture revealed on September 6 that French farmers are 
currently growing 500 hectares of biotech corn (1,250 
acres.) in Southwestern France.  This number represents a 
significant jump from 2004 when France had not planted more 
than 18 hectares of biotech corn. The last year of 
significant biotech corn production in France was 1998, 
where 1,500 ha were planted.  However, despite the 
significant increase in biotech corn acreage in 2005, it 
remains miniscule relative to the total area covered by corn 
in France (1.67 million ha). As France is late in 
transposing EU Directive 2001/18 (regulating the 
dissemination of GM crops) into French law, producers are 
actually not obliged to declare the existence of these 
crops.  French corporations such as Biogemma (agricultural 
biotechnology) and Meristem Therapeutics (medical 
biotechnology) have been growing biotech corn at 
experimental test-plots throughout the country.  Currently, 
corn is the only authorized GMO crop in Europe and Spain is 
the only EU country to cultivate it in significant 
quantities. 
 
¶3.  (U) At the same time as the revelation on corn was made, 
six anti-GMO activists were brought before a judge on 
September 14 and 15 to be charged with the destruction of 
experimental plots.  The judge allowed the activists to 
explain their personal reasons for what they allege is civil 
disobedience.  They cited motivations reasons such as 
"battling for humanity" and wanting to keep GMOs out of 
animal feed.  The plaintiffs in the case have demanded six 
million euros in damages and requested four months of prison 
time for the ringleader, Christian Roquierol and parole for 
the others.  Final sentencing is scheduled for November 24. 
 
¶4.  (U) In fact, the French Agriculture Ministry had 
specified that in 2005, cultivation of authorized GMOs was 
legal and could actually be produced without further 
notification to the GOF.  Agriculture Minister Dominique 
Bussereau has recognized a problem of GMO commercial usage 
in France and has confirmed that a proposal will be 
presented this fall to transpose the European Directive into 
national law and establish a clearer position on this issue. 
The future French biotech law, which has been delayed for a 
year, is expected to also include provisions on biotech and 
non-biotech coexistence and to establish a new French 
evaluation committee to authorize GM products. 
 
¶5.  (U) In the OP-ED pages of the Le Figaro on September 6, 
a French scientist suggested that for France, a country that 
defines its national identity through food, opposition to 
GMO's is a way to resist "liberal" globalization.  But he 
maintains that this growing global industry, (44 millions 
acres of GMO crops were harvested last year, up 20% from the 
year before), France must learn to incorporate GMO 
cultivation into its agriculture (thus following the example 
of Spain) in order to remain Europe's agricultural 
powerhouse. 
 
COMMENT:  POSITIVE DEVELOPMENTS? 
 
¶6.  (U) The revelation that French farmers were secretly 
growing biotech corn made the front page of France's leading 
newspaper, Le Figaro.  Meanwhile, the almost-routine arrest 
and indictment of biotech test plot vandals was reported 
inside.  It would be hard to draw any grand conclusions from 
the importance the press accorded these events.  But it is 
clear that perceptions of the issue are moving in a 
favorable direction.  Scientists and potential beneficiaries 
of important medicines that are being tested by biotech 
companies now publicly support stronger sentences against 
activist vandalism.  The GOF has always privately been aware 
of the benefits of biotechnology. The development of GM corn 
production in France is likely to push the GOF to finally 
adopt new biotech legislation. Perhaps as the pro-biotech 
view makes (small) inroads in France, the politicians might 
have more courage to stand up and be counted on this issue.