05PARIS7716
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Azerbaijan Terrorism - Amman
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 007716 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Azerbaijan Terrorism - Amman 
German Coalition Iran 
PARIS - Monday, November 14, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Azerbaijan 
Terrorism - Amman 
German Coalition 
Iran 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Although many front pages continue to focus on France's 
suburban unrest, other stories are also featured. Azerbaijan 
and "its missed" revolution is front-paged in Le Figaro: 
"Putin Takes Over in Azerbaijan." (See Part C) The UN- 
sponsored summit in Tunis on the Internet is "The 
Disinformation Summit" for left-of-center Liberation which 
comments in its editorial: "One has to wonder about the 
absurdity and appropriateness of holding such a summit in such 
a country: a clearer sign regarding freedom of the press could 
not have been sent." In an interview, Reporters Without 
Borders says it is "like choosing Libya to head the Human 
Rights Commission." 
 
Other international stories focus on Iran's rejection of the 
EU compromise (See Part C) and conjecture about the attacks in 
Amman and Jordan's previous attack-free status. Le Journal du 
Dimanche in its report states that Amman provided the CIA with 
a secret prison site. La Croix reports that the four suicide 
bombers responsible for the attack in Amman last week were all 
Iraqis members of Al-Qaeda. The king of Jordan is quoted: 
"Zarkawi has changed strategies. He is now using foreigners to 
carry out attacks. This means that our security services will 
also need to change strategies." (See Part C) The German 
coalition is also the focus of several editorials (See Part C) 
while President Bush's forthcoming trip is noted in Le Figaro 
Economie: "President Bush will be traveling to China in a 
difficult context. The U.S. trade deficit is largely due to a 
trade imbalance with China. The fluctuating Yuan will not be 
the sole point of friction: intellectual property and the 
impact of China's economic growth on world markets will also 
be discussed. But the agreement on textiles will help to ease 
the tension, somewhat." 
 
Secretary Rice's trip to the Middle East was announced this 
 
SIPDIS 
morning in the electronic media and briefly noted in Le 
Figaro: "During her 24-hour visit the U.S. Secretary of State 
will meet with Sharon and later with Mahmoud Abbas." 
 
Popular right-of-center Le Parisien notes that France's 
government spokesman, Jean-Francois Cope is calling a press 
conference with foreign correspondents to "revamp France's 
image" abroad, an image which "has been considerably tarnished 
by the spectacular coverage given by the foreign media." FM 
Villepin, upset by the "sensationalism" and the attacks on 
"France's social model" has mobilized his entire government to 
"bring back tourists and investors." According to Henri 
Vernet's report, FM Villepin may even be considering an 
interview with CNN." The campaign, writes Vernet, "is very 
similar to the one France undertook to improve France's image 
in the U.S. during the Franco-American dispute about Iraq." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Azerbaijan 
 
"Moscow Wants to Thwart Baku Revolution" 
Laure Mandeville in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/14): "The 
inability of the Azeri rebels to pull off a Ukrainian-style 
revolution is due as much to Washington's shy support as to 
Moscow's activism. In the Byzantine-like game being played in 
the Caucasus, Moscow had its eyes on Armenia and Iran, leaving 
Turkey and Azerbaijan to the U.S. But the Russians have just 
proven that they have key players positioned in Baku, 
including inside Aliev's clan." 
 
"Stalled Democracy" 
Alain Guillemoles in Catholic La Croix (11/14): "The 
opposition leaders know they will not be able to count on 
American support. Azerbaijan had indeed established close 
relations with Washington since the construction of a 
pipeline. But Washington, although it has called for `free and 
fair elections' is not ready to support a change of regime." 
German Coalition 
 
"German Cohabitation" 
Jean-Michel Salvator in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/14): 
"Merkel is proposing a courageous program to her country. Her 
diagnostic is both clear-minded and demanding. But her fiscal 
measures, although courageous and willful, are not, when seen 
from France, devoid of danger. The German government is going 
to tax individuals and companies, thus weakening even more 
middle class consumerism. Angela Merkel is in fact going 
against her nature: she is now leading a government calling 
for more taxes and not enough strong reforms. The need for 
more liberal employment rules will have to wait. Merkel's left- 
right coalition is made up of small deals and big compromises. 
What awaits Merkel is a hard and prolonged battle with her 
adversaries. And contrary to French style cohabitation, 
Germany's foreign policy will not enjoy a consensus: the FM is 
pro-Turkey in the EU, while Merkel is not. But the issue has 
been shelved for now." 
 
"German Transition" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/12): "The 
great coalition, to which German voters have condemned their 
country by refusing to choose between the right and the left, 
on Sept. 18, has finally given birth to a very modest common 
government program.  It's a pity.  But it would be naive to 
expect anything else from former adversaries who are obliged 
to get along, just as it would be an error to stop there and 
to conclude that Germany is broken down." 
 
Terrorism - Amman 
 
"Why Jordan Is No Longer Spared" 
Nicolas Henin in right-of-center Le Journal du Dimanche 
(11/13): "People said it was the `Jordanian miracle.' Next to 
her neighbors, Jordan's safety record in terms of terrorism 
was almost insulting. It was partly due to the effectiveness 
of its intelligence services, but also to an implicit pact 
among Jihaddists not to attack their mother country. After 
9/11 that pact was blown apart. Later there was the war in 
Iraq and the collaboration between Amman and Washington in 
security issues: Jordan opened up part of a disaffected 
military base in southern Jordan, Al-Jafr. The base was lent 
to the CIA which turned it into a secret prison. Many Al-Qaeda 
detainees have transited through the prison. This was known in 
Jordan. The date, nine eleven, or November 9, recalls another 
9/11." 
 
Iran 
 
"Iran Rejects European Offer" 
Maurin Picard in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/14): "There 
will be no compromise. Faithful to its hard line, the Iranian 
government has made liars of those who wanted to believe in an 
agreement. The Mullahs have categorically rejected the 
European offer, called the `last chance compromise' by the 
Europeans and the Americans who have been discreetly 
supporting the EU. In Vienna, Iran will be able to count on 
Russia and China, its faithful economic partners who have 
rejected all talk of sanctions against Iran." HOFMANN