05PARIS3488
UNESCO SCIENCE SECTOR OUTLINES POTENTIAL AREAS
Fri May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 003488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIA OPDC PHSA PBTS EAID IHO KSI UNESCO
SUBJECT: UNESCO SCIENCE SECTOR OUTLINES POTENTIAL AREAS 
OF U.S. ENGAGEMENT, NEXT STEPS ON U.S. CAPACITY 
BUILDING INITIATIVE 
 
Reftels  A. Paris 1032  B. Paris 3024 C. Paris 3484 
 
¶1.  Summary:  OSTP Officer Gene Whitney met on April 29 with 
leaders of UNESCO's Natural Sciences Sector.  These 
discussions focused on the new capacity building unit (refs 
A and B), as well as on potential areas for U.S. engagement 
in the natural sciences, as follows: 
 
-- Assistant Director General Erdelen stressed that the new 
capacity building unit in the Science sector should begin 
its work as soon as possible in order to provide a framework 
for U.S. participation in the science sector's programs.  He 
also expressed the need for support for UNESCO's role in 
post-tsunami reconstruction. (paras 2-4) 
 
-- Basic and Engineering Sciences Director Nalecz cited two 
Trieste-based organizations as potential partners for 
capacity building efforts:  The International Center for 
genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) and the Third 
World Academy of Sciences (TWAS).  He also outlined progress 
made in establishing the International Basic Sciences 
Program (IBSP).  (paras 5-7) 
 
-- Earth and Ecological Science Director Ishwaran briefed on 
the impact of the incorporation of Earth Sciences into his 
division.  He described his division's work with the USGS to 
enhance the responsiveness of geological sciences, and in 
particular the International Geosciences Program (IGCP), to 
the needs of society.   Noting the priority placed on water, 
disaster reduction, and remote sensing in the proposed 
UNESCO budget, Ishwaran stressed that continued USG funding 
for the IGCP is key.  (paras 8-12) 
 
All of Whitney's interlocutors highlighted the secondment of 
U.S. experts to the science sector as an important vector of 
cooperation.  (Whitney's meeting with IOC Executive 
Secretary Patricio Bernal is reported ref c.) EEnd Summary. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
ADG Erdelen: Capacity Building Key to U.S. Engagement 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2.  In his meeting with Assistant Director General for 
National Sciences Walter Erdelen, OSTP Officer Whitney 
focused on priority areas of U.S. engagement.  Erdelen 
evoked the possibility of a "mapping exercise" to identify 
appropriate partnerships.  These might take the form of 
secondments (leading to ongoing "virtual" cooperation); 
strengthened scientific outreach among institutions, 
including possibly category II centers; and science-related 
networks.  The goal would be to ensure that the expertise of 
U.S. scientific institutions benefits developing countries. 
 
¶3.  Whitney stressed the desirability of private sector 
involvement, and the important role of the U.S. National 
Commission for UNESCO.  In response, Erdelen cited 
industrial research in Africa and the International Basic 
Sciences Program Centers of Excellence as examples of 
potential areas of private sector involvement.  But to 
achieve these and other goals, he stressed the importance of 
the new capacity building unit in the Science sector; it is 
critical that this be functional as soon as possible (refs A 
and B).  Implementation will require new conceptual 
approaches, as well as establishing timelines and rigorous 
monitoring of outcomes.  Strong U.S. support will be 
critical.  Erdelen and Whitney agreed on the importance of 
strengthening institutional networks, Erdelen positing that 
U.S. institutions would be well placed to assess and assist 
existing networks in Latin America in the basic sciences. 
 
¶4.  Erdelen expressed the need for support for UNESCO's work 
in the field of post-tsunami reconstruction.  He and Whitney 
agreed that UNESCO's Jakarta field office would contact 
Whitney to inform him of ongoing efforts, particularly 
relating to reconstruction and the environment. 
 
Basic Sciences/Engineering:  Partners for Capacity Building 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶5.  With Director of Basic and Engineering Sciences Maciej 
Nalecz, Whitney focused on capacity building; the new 
capacity building unit will be housed in this division. 
Nalecz cited two potential partners for the unit, both based 
in Trieste:  The International Center for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) and the Third World 
Academy of Sciences (TWAS).  The ICGEB is an international 
organization dedicated to advanced research and training in 
molecular biology and biotechnology, with special regard to 
the needs of the developing world.  Nalecz had been 
impressed by the quality of several TWAS activities in which 
he had recently participated.  In addition, TWAS has 
recently concluded an agreement with the Italian government 
that would provide annual funding of 6 million USD, Nalecz 
reported.  Whitney stressed that creating strong research 
institutions in the developing world is key to capacity 
building.   Nalecz responded that TWAS had identified 100 
institutions as centers of excellence; he had been impressed 
by the Nairobi-based International Center for Insect 
Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE), with its focus on insects, 
bacteria, and viruses.  Working with TWAS would not 
necessarily entail whole-scale adoption of its network of 
partners. 
 
¶6.  Whitney queried Nalecz on the role USG technical 
agencies could play in programs within his purview. Nalecz 
highlighted the importance of the International Basic 
Science Program (IBSP), explaining that it would have a 
capacity building component. Nalecz explained that the 
initial call for proposals - which mandated partnerships 
between developing and developed countries - triggered 400 
proposals.  Based on defined criteria -- capacity building, 
relevance to development, extent of international 
partnership, funding potential, societal implications, 
endorsement by National Commissions - the IBSP Scientific 
Board selected 40 projects.  Six of these involve a U.S. 
partner.  Although virtually all of the projects submitted 
were in basic research, projects in training and scientific 
exchanges were eligible.  UNESCO has 1.5 million USD to fund 
these proposals, with each of the 40 requiring an average of 
100,000 USD.  Although partners were required to obtain some 
funding from national sources, additional funding is 
required to close this funding gap.  Nalecz added that 
another useful form of USG support is secondment of experts; 
this also helps build a network of Americans with UNESCO 
experience.  Financial assistance is also useful in that it 
entails an evaluative process that can help improve UNESCO's 
work, Nalecz reflected. 
 
¶7.  Whitney queried Nalecz on the disaster reduction 
component of his division.  The focus is on monitoring and 
modeling earthquakes, Nalecz explained, based on analysis of 
a few factors.  His division has developed a manual used to 
train local people.  Constructing new housing to higher 
safety standards, for example, would be costly; in the 
absence of this, it is possible to provide training on 
construction of shelters and emergency procedures.  The new 
focus on tsunamis will entail collaboration with 
oceanography, hydrology and earth sciences, Nalecz 
concluded. 
 
Ecological/Earth Sciences:  Enhancing Geology's "Relevance" 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶8.   In his meeting with Whitney, Ecological and Earth 
Sciences Division Director Natarajan Ishawaran described the 
recent reorganization of the Natural Sciences sector; this 
reshuffle resulted in "75-80 percent" and six staffers of 
the Earth Sciences division being incorporated into his 
division.  The rest of the Earth Sciences division, a unit 
dealing with natural disasters (two staffers) was 
incorporated into the Basic and Engineering Sciences 
Division.  Ishwaran and senior program specialist Robert 
Missotten said that this decision was in keeping with "an 
organizational push for interdivisional work." They also 
cited ties between the Fresh Water Thematic Area and the 
International geosciences program (IGCP); given the 
determined priority placed on water, it will be difficult to 
continue work in geology that is not interdisciplinary. 
 
¶9.  Pointing to a challenging budgetary context, Ishwaran 
reported that funding for earth sciences is projected to 
remain the same over the next biennium; but this would mean 
cuts for geology, with enhanced funding for natural disaster 
reduction and remote sensing (the latter due to the 
importance of GEOSS).  In this context, Ishwaran reported, 
one goal will be to attract increased extra-budgetary 
funding for the IGCP; in the meantime, USG extra-budgetary 
funding for the program is critical to its survival. 
Missotten and Ishwaran expanded on UNESCO's work with USGS 
Director Groat to ensure that the IGCP is "a modern, 
interdisciplinary program in line with UNESCO's priorities." 
They reported that UNESCO is planning to bring together next 
fall the leaders of the geological agencies of the U.S., 
Germany, Canada, - and possibly the IUGS - to discuss the 
IGCP program and means of enhancing the social relevance of 
the geosciences. 
 
¶10.  When Whitney evoked oil companies as a potential source 
of funding for geological sciences, Missotten reported that 
one had in fact expressed interest.  He pointed to the 
International year of Planet Earth as an excellent means of 
translating scientific findings into applications with 
developmental impact, and expressed the hope that funding 
would be available.  Another program in need of funding is 
earth science coursework offered by 20 institutions in the 
developed world to students from developing countries.  The 
UNESCO investment is minimal, but 10 of these programs are 
threatened due to budget constraints. 
 
¶11.    Regarding ecological sciences, Ishwaran stressed that 
the division's activities are not limited to the Man and the 
Biosphere program.  He asserted that while MAB is often 
equated with Biosphere Reserves, it is in fact comprised of 
13 projects related to ecosystem research.  He said that 
MAB's national committees should focus more on economic 
development and research, not just conservation and 
protected areas.  He expressed interest in dialogue on 
modalities of land-use planning and the role of science that 
would include the private sector.  Carbon trading poses 
challenges and opportunities for environmental science. 
 
¶12.  On potential areas for U.S. engagement, Ishwaran 
underlined the importance of secondments, including those 
envisioned under the UNESCO-USGS MOU, and the need for 
UNESCO to recruit young U.S. experts for posts vacated by 
retirements.  Ishwaran and Misotten highlighted the 
importance of the NASA-UNESCO MOU in making remote sensing 
applications available to other scientific communities. 
 
OLIVER