05PARIS3151
FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE
Tue May 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 003151 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/DTCC - BLUE LANTERN COORDINATOR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KOMC FR
SUBJECT:  FRANCE: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END USE 
CHECK ON APPLICATIONS 05-949555 and 05-912669 
 
REF: STATE 33797 
 
¶1.  As requested reftel, post reached out to the French entities 
Zodiac Aerazur and Aerazur Superflexit, both of whom responded 
to our questions on May 6.  Both confirmed that they are two 
divisions of the same company, Aerazur. 
 
¶2.  Mr. Trontin of Aerazur Superflexit confirmed that his 
company had placed an order for the items listed in reftel, 
para 4B.  He explained that these parts related to electric 
"harness" and cable systems, which communicate information to 
the pilot for the "EFA" Eurofighter program.  Trontin said that 
the equipment is currently with their client, Liebherr 
Aerospace.  According to their web site (www.liebherr.com), the 
Liebherr Group is a family business based primarily in Germany, 
with a Swiss holding company, Liebherr-International AG. 
Liebherr Aerospace is one of several divisions.  Liebherr is 
"one of the world's leading manufacturers of construction 
machinery .. (and) an acknowledged supplier of technically 
innovative user-oriented products and services in numerous other 
fields."  During our conversation with Mr. Trontin, he promised 
a more complete response by letter. 
 
¶3.  Post blue lantern action officer also spoke with Philippe 
Dore of Zodiac Aerazur, who said that his company has been 
placing three orders per year for 30 years for this kind of 
safety foam from U.S. supplier company Foamex.  The foam is used 
in the manufacture of fuel tanks to minimize risk of accidents 
or leaks.  Mr. Dore faxed us a copy of the most recent actual 
orders (faxed to PM/DTCC on May 10), which had been sent to 
Foamex:  one for 30 buns of orange safety foam (for October 22, 
2004, delivery) and another for 180 buns of blue safety foam 
(for January 18, 2005, delivery).  For the Type I orange safety 
foam, the order specifies a bun of 40" x 80" x 5", while the bun 
for the Type IV blue safety foam is 2300mm x 469mm x 250mm. 
 
¶4.  In both cases, the Aerazur purchase orders say "The 
commodities that are the subject of this purchase order 2014- 
2171789 will be used in connection with the manufacture of fuel 
tanks for military vehicles and racing cars."  The order forms 
also went on to say "The following statement shall be 
incorporated as an integral part of the bill of lading, and the 
invoice: 'These commodities are authorized by the U.S. 
Government for export to FRANCE for Zodiac - Aerazur.  They may 
not be resold, diverted, transferred, transhipped, or otherwise 
be disposed of in any other country, either in their original 
form or after being incorporated through an intermediate process 
is not other end-items, without the prior written approval of 
the U.S. Department of State.'" 
 
¶5.  Mr. Dore said that these orders are for helicopters for 
Eurocopter and other companies.  This was explained further in 
the order forms, which specified: 
 
(quote) 
The end use and end user: 
Foam for Fuel Cell Tank of Obussier Tank for Rheinmetall Company 
in Germany. 
Foam for Fuel Cell Tank of Wiesel Tank for Rheinmetall Company 
in Germany. 
Foam for Fuel Cell Tank of Microturbo military car for 
Microturbo in France. 
Foam for Fuel Cell Tank of Tiger helicopter for Eurocopter 
Company in France. 
(end quote) 
 
After giving mailing addresses for each of the three companies 
listed above, the order form notes that "For the point no 4 the 
French and German governments can sold (sic) to another European 
government" which appears to refer to fuel tanks provided for 
the Tiger helicopter, but this seems to conflict with the 
earlier citation concerning prohibition against resale or 
transfer to "any other country" without prior written approval 
of the U.S. Department of State.  We will inquire further about 
this apparent contradiction, when Mr. Dore returns from vacation 
in mid-May. 
 
¶6.  Both Zodiac Aerazur and Aerazur Superflexit confirmed that 
they were separate divisions of the same company, Aerazur. 
However, only one, Aerazur Superflexit, confirmed that their 
order was related to the Eurofighter program.  Zodiac Aerazur's 
order for safety foam is part of a long-standing relationship 
with Foamex as its supplier for the manufacture of fuel tanks 
for military vehicles and racing cars, or more specifically in 
this case, for helicopters.  Post will attempt to further 
corroborate these findings with appropriate French government 
officials. 
WOLFF