05PARIS8677
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Ukraine Bush Administration
Thu Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 008677 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Ukraine Bush Administration 
PARIS - Thursday, December 29, 2005 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Ukraine 
Bush Administration 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The cold wave passing through France and its socio-economic 
consequences is one of today's major front-page stories. The 
videotape claiming responsibility for the kidnapping of the 
French hostage in Iraq, Bernard Planche, and threatening to 
execute him, is featured on the front page of Le Figaro, while 
the story is extensively reported in all other outlets. Le 
Figaro points out that "it will be difficult to give in to the 
requests of the kidnappers, considering that France has no 
troops present in Iraq. The demand could just be a front for a 
ransom demand." Liberation notes: "The French government has 
reiterated that all French journalists, businessmen and 
humanitarian workers try to avoid Iraq." In regional 
l'Independant du Midi the editorial comments: "Every foreigner 
present in Iraq today knows that he can, at any moment, become 
a negotiable merchandise. The French government will be 
involved in secret negotiations of which we will know 
practically nothing. As was the case for Aubenas, Malbrunot 
and Chesnot." 
 
The launching of Galileo continues to elicit commentaries 
praising Europe's technological capabilities and lamenting its 
inability to stand united politically. In regional La Provence 
Gilles Dauxerre writes: "Europe, which has so much trouble 
functioning on earth, has succeeded in the skies." Regional 
L'Alsace comments in its editorial: "The Americans tried in 
vain to keep Europe from implementing Galileo, which proves 
the strategic importance of the project." Le Figaro carries an 
interview with FM Douste-Blazy: "This is a historic moment for 
Europe. demonstrating the capacity for individual nations to 
cooperate. Europe is proving it can innovate when it goes with 
its ambitions. Galileo is the symbol of an independent Europe, 
which is no one's vassal. With Galileo, Europe has freed 
itself from the dependency it had on the U.S. and its GPS." 
 
Catholic La Croix devotes its lead story and editorial to 
Pakistan. The headline reads "It Is Time to Help Pakistan" 
while the editorial calls on international solidarity so that 
"the Pakistanis might feel they count for the rest of the 
world. We must not leave the Pakistani government alone to 
deal with the victims of the earthquake. The needs are huge, 
the donations insufficient. International aid proved less 
generous for Pakistan than for the Tsunami victims." 
 
Stories continue to abound on the tension between Moscow and 
Kiev over energy resources. The editorial in Le Monde asks: 
"Will Putin execute the threats he has made and cut Ukraine's 
gas supply?" Le Figaro carries an analysis titled: "Why the EU 
Must Get Involved in Ukraine." (See Part C) 
 
Also in Le Figaro, Washington correspondent Philippe Gelie 
reports on the refurbishing of the White House pressroom, 
commenting that "the conditions of the room possibly reflect 
the waning power of the Bush administration." (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Bush Administration 
 
"Scott McClellan and the Wear and Tear of Power" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (12/29): "The 
temporary physical move of the White House pressroom could 
accentuate the tension between Scott McClellan and foreign 
correspondents whom he tries to both influence and keep at a 
distance. The rundown pressroom has come to reflect the wear 
and tear of power in the Bush administration. The White House 
spokesman is moving his lectern temporarily across the street, 
unless he decides to give up all together. More than for the 
President, the year has been an annus horribilis for the 
administration's spokesman. The list of difficult incidents 
and events is long: violence in Iraq, the loss of support for 
the war, doubts about the justification for going to war, the 
calamitous management of Katrina, the misstep of the Harriet 
Myers nomination, the leaks in the Valerie Plame affair, and 
the indictment of Lewis Liby. The long list of bad news could 
have broken the bravest of servants. It has left its mark on 
McClellan who appears to have lost a few hairs. In a country 
where official lies can bring down an administration, Scott 
McClellan's image has taken a severe blow. The mistrust 
between the seat of power and the press goes way back to 
Watergate. The attitude of the besieged adopted by the Bush 
administration has contributed to keeping the press at a 
distance, communicating by way of propagandistic releases and 
a `no comment' approach, leading the Washington Post to call 
McClellan `the man with no answers.'" 
Ukraine 
 
"The EU Must Get Involved in Ukraine" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (12/29): "The 
Kremlin will do all it can to bring Ukraine into the fold. The 
war over gas supplies launched by Moscow is part of the 
strategy. It is Putin's way of influencing Ukraine's voters 
and making them believe their interests have been compromised 
by their President's pro-western stance. The fate of Ukraine 
and Russia are intimately tied to one another. While Kiev is 
calling on Washington, Europe cannot turn its back on such a 
serious crisis, if only because of its own energy needs. And 
because, if Ukraine succeeds in its democratization, it will 
be a form of guarantee that Russia can also evolve peacefully 
towards more harmonious relations with the EU." STAPLETON