05PARIS549
FRENCH RESPONSE TO GROSSMAN LETTER ON CARTAGENA
Fri Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 000549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PGOV PREL SNAR ECON FR CO
SUBJECT: FRENCH RESPONSE TO GROSSMAN LETTER ON CARTAGENA 
CONFERENCE 
 
REF: STATE 14571 
 
¶1.  DCM delivered reftel letter to MFA Political Director 
Stanislas de Laboulaye on January 26.  Below is an informal 
translation of his response, received January 28.  (Original 
French being faxed to EUR/WE) 
 
¶2.  BEGIN TRANSLATION OF LETTER: 
 
Dear Marc, 
 
As you underline in your letter, President Uribe has obtained 
a considerable improvement in security conditions in two and 
a half years, facilitating the economic revival of his 
country.  We support the policy seeking to restore the 
authority of the state on the whole of Colombian territory, 
conforming to the London declaration of July 10, 2003, to 
which we attach the greatest importance. 
 
France is, however, preoccupied by the conditions in which 
the process of demobilization of the paramilitaries -- which 
we support in principle -- is unfolding.  Today, there is no 
judicial framework that permits the guarantee that the 
principles of justice, truth, and reparations in this process 
of demobilization be respected.  We should among other things 
remain vigilant as to the growing influence of paramilitaries 
in the life of the country, including at the political level. 
 It thus appears premature to us to implicate ourselves in 
this process.  This position was expressed by the EU in the 
conclusions of the General Affairs Council dated December 13. 
 
We equally attach the greatest importance to the situation of 
the hostages.  Like the United States, France is directly 
concerned by this question.  Our countrywoman Ingrid 
Betancourt has been held captive by the FARC for three years 
now, as have three American citizens.  In this regard, France 
favors the conclusion of a humanitarian accord.  We believe 
that the Colombian authorities must strive to apply 
international humanitarian law and to respect their 
international engagements in this domain 
 
Finally, France feels that if some efforts have been achieved 
by the Colombian authorities in making contact with the 
paramilitaries, and, to a lesser degree, with the ELN, no 
progress is visible with regard to the FARC.  It is certainly 
difficult to establish a dialogue with this guerrilla group, 
but we believe that no effort should be spared in the search 
for an agreement and we hope that the Colombian authorities 
will involve themselves more on this path. 
 
The Cartagena conference of February 3 and 4, 2005, will be 
the opportunity to discuss all these difficult questions. 
France will be represented at this conference by Mr. Daniel 
Parfait, Director of the Americas and the Caribbean at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
 
Faithfully Yours, 
 
Stanislas de Laboulaye 
 
END TRANSLATION OF LETTER 
Leach