05ROME858
U.S.-ITALY INVESTIGATION INTO DEATH OF ITALIAN
Mon Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rome
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ROME 000858 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS IT IZ PHAM IRAQI FREEDOM
SUBJECT: U.S.-ITALY INVESTIGATION INTO DEATH OF ITALIAN 
OFFICIAL CALIPARI IN IRAQ 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 1082 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1. (SBU) By exchange of letters dated March 12, the Embassy 
concurred with the Terms of Reference (TOR) for the subject 
investigation as proposed by the GOI.  The Italian letter 
containing the proposed TOR follows the text reported in para 
7 of reftel and was signed by Undersecretary in the Prime 
Minister,s Office Letta (a more precise translation of 
Letta's letter is in para 2).  Based on telephonic and e-mail 
instructions from Department, Embassy responded with the 
following letter from the Ambassador: 
 
Dear Undersecretary Letta: 
 
We have read the Italian proposal for Terms of Reference for 
the investigation, presented in your letter of March 12, and 
have consulted with our military investigating authorities. 
We concur with your proposal. 
 
With best regards, 
 
/s/ Mel Sembler, Ambassador 
 
¶2. (SBU) Following is English text of Letta's incoming letter 
to Ambassador as translated by U.S. Sending State Office Rome. 
 
Mr. Ambassador, 
 
As there is the desire to jointly ascertain the dynamics of 
the episode which took place in Baghdad on 4 March 2005, in 
which the SISMI officer Nicola Calipari died and both the 
Italian journalist Giuliana Sgrena and another official of 
SISMI were injured, I propose the following method of work: 
 
¶A. The participation of officials designated by the United 
States Government and by the Government of the Italian 
Republic to jointly ascertain the dynamics of the episode 
which happened in Baghdad on 4 March 2005, in which the SISMI 
officer Nicola Calipari died and both the Italian journalists 
Giuliana Sgrena and another official of SISMI were injured, 
is foreseen. 
 
¶B. Documentary, testimonial and technical investigations will 
be carried out with reference to the previous paragraph. 
 
¶C. The officials mentioned in paragraph D will have the duty 
to participate in all the investigative fact-finding and to 
preserve all the relevant documentation. 
 
¶D. The officials representing Italy are: 
 
Brigadier General Pierluigi Campregher 
Minister Plenipotentiary Cesare Maria Ragaglini 
 
¶E. Respective national regulations for protecting classified 
information will apply. 
 
¶F. For execution of their functions, these officials can make 
use of the support of their respective diplomatic and 
military delegates we well as their competent government 
authorities. 
 
¶G. The officials will be required to keep sec ret all the 
gained classified information. 
 
¶H. A final joint report will be presented on the 
investigative results of the aforesaid officials. 
 
End Text of Letter 
 
¶3. (SBU) Based on this exchange of letters and following USG 
requests for rapid Italian involvement in the investigation, 
GOI officials Ragaglini and BG Campregher were to have 
departed for Baghdad at 0600 on Sunday March 13. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Embassy delivered courtesy copies of BG Vangjel,s 
questions for survivors Carpani and Srgena (contained in 
paras 9 and 10 of reftel) to Ragaglini,s home and 
Campregher,s office the evening of Saturday March 12, before 
their departure for Baghdad. 
 
minimize considered 
 
SEMBLER 
 
 
NNNN 
	2005ROME00858 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED