05SANTIAGO1681
A/S DESUTTER'S AUGUST 18-19 VISIT TO CHILE:
Wed Aug 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Santiago
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTIAGO 001681 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR VC, WHA/BSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PARM EAID MARR HA VE CI SOFA
SUBJECT: A/S DESUTTER'S AUGUST 18-19 VISIT TO CHILE: 
SCENESETTER 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Following a successful run on the international 
stage, Chile is shifting its focus to domestic issues and its 
December 11 presidential and congressional elections.  Former 
Defense Minister and ruling coalition candidate Michelle 
Bachelet is the favorite to succeed President Lagos.  Chilean 
chief executives are legally barred from seeking re-election. 
 All three main presidential candidates are likely to keep 
the country and our relationship on track.  Chile's economy 
is robust and stable.  Chile continues to play a leading role 
in Haiti, and is cooperating with us on Venezuela.  Military 
relations are growing, and President Lagos has expressed 
interest in strengthening relations as an element in 
modernizing the role of the Chilean military.  Chile 
continues to partner with us on non-proliferation and 
counter-terorism issues of shared concern.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
FROM APEC TO COMMUNITY OF DEMOCRACIES 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Minister of Interior Jose Miguel Insulza's May election as 
OAS Secretary General capped a successful six-month run on 
the international stage for Chile.  During this time, Chile 
hosted two high-level international meetings (APEC Leaders' 
Week and Community of Democracies Ministerial), concluded (in 
December 2004) a productive two-year term on the UNSC, and 
maintained a leadership role in Haiti peacekeeping efforts. 
Throughout, Chile generally proved to be a reliable and 
rational partner for the U.S. 
 
-------------- 
DOMESTIC SCENE 
-------------- 
 
¶3. Chile will hold presidential and congressional elections 
on December 11, 2005.  This will be Chile's fourth 
presidential election since the end of the Pinochet era in 
¶1989.  The previous three elections were judged free and 
fair, and there is no reason to expect otherwise for the 
upcoming one.  There are currently four presidential 
candidates: the Socialist Party's Michelle Bachelet 
(representing the ruling Concertacion coalition); the 
Independent Democratic Union's Joaquin Lavin; the National 
Renewal's Sebastian Pinera; and the Communist Party's Tomas 
Hirsch.  (President Ricardo Lagos, who is riding high in the 
polls, as incumbent is constitutionally barred from serving 
consecutive terms.)  Bachelet, the Concertacion's 
presidential candidate and former defense minister, is 
leading in the polls.  She would become Chile's first female 
president if she wins.  Half the seats in both the Senate and 
the Chamber of Deputies are also up for election on December 
¶11.  The new president and members of Congress will take 
office on March 11, 2006. 
 
¶4. In recent years, Chile has taken a number of significant 
steps to strengthen democratic institutions and deal with the 
human rights abuses of the past.  In November 2004, the 
National Commission on Political Prisoners and Torture 
(Valech Commission) issued a landmark report on human rights 
abuses during the Pinochet era, and the judicial system 
continues to investigate and prosecute a number of human 
rights cases.  In June, a historic, country-wide judicial 
reform went into effect in Santiago, the last of the 
municipalities.  In July, Congress passed a number of 
constitutional reforms designed to increase civilian control 
over the military. 
 
------- 
ECONOMY 
------- 
 
¶5. Chile's economy is the main reason behind President Lagos' 
70 percent approval rating.  The Chilean economy grew at an 
impressive 6.1 percent in 2004 -- almost double the rate in 
2003 -- and may do even better in 2005, due in large measure 
to a boom in global copper prices.  Bilateral trade increased 
over 30 percent during the first year of the U.S.-Chile Free 
Trade Agreement, and related cooperation on labor and 
environmental protection is going well.  Chile's inadequate 
protection of intellectual property rights remains a 
significant sore point, and both sides are anxiously awaiting 
better, new market access for beef and poultry.  The U.S. 
remains Chile's most important source of foreign investment, 
although Spain surpassed us in 2004 as the number one 
provider of foreign direct investment.  Since 1990, U.S. 
firms have invested over USD 16 billion in Chile, with a 
concentration in the energy, telecommunications and mining 
sectors.  U.S. companies generally praise Chile's mostly 
transparent but close-knit business climate. 
 
--------------- 
Regional Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶6. Chile has been increasingly willing to assume leadership 
roles in recent years.  Former Minister of Interior Jose 
Miguel Insulza was elected OAS secretary general in May.  In 
Haiti, Chile responded positively to the USG's request for 
support in February 2004, and self-deployed a battalion to 
Haiti within 48 hours.  Chile currently has approximately 600 
troops deployed there as part of the UN Mission, and a 
Chilean civilian serves as UN Special Representative.  In 
May, the Chilean Congress voted to extend Chile's troop 
deployment for six months to December 2005, with a provision 
that the Government can extend the deployment for an 
additional six months to June 1, 2006.  On Venezuela, despite 
its center-left political orientation, the governing 
Concertacion coalition is wary of President Chavez.  The GOC 
shares our frustrations with the Venezuelan leader's 
behavior, particularly his non-democratic ways, and is 
concerned that his rhetoric and actions (especially regarding 
Bolivia) could prove destabilizing for the region.  FM Walker 
met with the Venezuelan opposition group SUMATE in Santiago 
on August 9. 
 
----------------- 
NON-PROLIFERATION 
----------------- 
 
¶7. Chile shares many of our non-proliferation and disarmament 
objectives.  The GOC supported a number of U.S.-sponsored 
initiatives during its tenure on the UNSC and its 
chairmanship of APEC.  It recently co-sponsored the OAS 
MANPADS resolution.  The GOC has expressed general support 
for PSI, observed Operation Chokepoint in November 2004, and 
attended both PSI anniversary events.  However, the GOC has 
stopped short of endorsing PSI -- either privately or 
publicly.  The MFA has doubts about its ability to engage in 
interdictions given its other treaty obligations.  It is 
seeking a recommendation from the Defense Ministry, as there 
are also Navy operational issues.  The Defense Ministry is in 
general agreement with the purpose and intent of PSI, but has 
expressed concern over its implementation with respect to the 
sovereignty of foreign-flagged vessels and particularly the 
interdiction and boarding of vessels outside Chilean 
territorial waters but within their economic exclusion zone. 
 
¶8. Chile is a signatory to the IAEA additional protocol. 
Chile enforces the United States Coast Guard's International 
Ship and Port Facility Security Code (ISPS).  Chile is not a 
signatory to the Container Security Initiative (CSI) or the 
Megaports Initiative.  The GOC is considering seeking 
membership in the MTCR, the Australia Group, and the 
Wassenaar Group. 
 
-------------------- 
MILITARY COOPERATION 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. President Lagos has expressed interest in strengthening 
U.S.-Chile military relations as an element in modernizing 
the Chilean military's role and establishing its appropriate 
place in Chilean society.  There is no Status of Forces 
Agreement (SOFA) between the GOC and USG and, due to 
political realities, there is little chance of negotiating 
one until after the new Chilean administration takes over in 
March 2006.  That said, the GOC provided limited yet adequate 
protections to DOD personnel involved in the seven military 
exercises that took place during 2005. 
 
¶10. The GOC will begin taking delivery in January 2006 of ten 
F-16 fighter aircraft -- the first major purchase of U.S. 
equipment since our cut-off of military sales during the 
Pinochet era.  The Army and Navy are also considering 
significant purchases of U.S.-manufactured systems.  The U.S. 
has also provided over $1 million to Chile's topnotch 
military training facility for peacekeeping, and has been 
working to increase the GOC,s global peacekeeping role. 
Chile has contributed small contingents to missions in 
Cyprus, Bosnia and Kosovo, in addition to the 600 troops and 
engineers in Haiti. 
 
---------- 
ARTICLE 98 
---------- 
 
¶11. Chile has signed but not ratified the Rome statute.  The 
governing coalition supports ratification, but does not have 
the votes in Congress.  Ratification is not likely until the 
composition of Congress changes in March 2006, at the 
earliest. 
 
----------------- 
COUNTER-TERRORISM 
----------------- 
 
¶12. Chile remains on the terrorists "least desirable" list in 
the hemisphere.  The GOC has been supportive of U.S. 
counter-terrorism policies, particularly during its time on 
the UNSC.  Chile is a signatory to all 12 UN anti-terrorism 
conventions and protocols, and the UN International 
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. 
 
KELLY