05SANAA178
U.S. SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY REPORT
Mon Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANAA 000178 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM ELAB PGOV PREL KDEM YM MEPI DEMOCRATIC REFORM HUMAN RIGHTS
SUBJECT: U.S. SUPPORTING HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY REPORT 
2004-05 
 
REF: SECSTATE 267453 
 
¶1. (U) Paragraph 2 contains Post's input for the 2004-05 
edition of Supporting Human Rights and Democracy as requested 
in reftel.  Post's input conists of updates of the 2004 
report of on-going as well as new programs. Submission will 
also be sent via e-mail as a tracked changes document. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin Text 
 
The 2004-2005 U.S. human rights and democracy strategy for 
Yemen addresses the need for the Government to strengthen its 
human rights record, continue to enact social reforms, 
improve the administration of justice, increase the strength 
of civil society, give women a greater voice in their 
government, and further the process of democratic 
development.  The United States continued several long-term 
projects addressing these issues, including programs aimed at 
expanding Yemen,s political parties, improving election 
administration, increasing voter participation, strengthening 
civil society and improving the country,s human rights 
record. 
 
During 2004, there was a marked increase in limits on freedom 
of speech and of the press. Security forces continued to 
arbitrarily arrest, detain, and torture persons. The 
Government in many cases failed to hold members of the 
security forces accountable for abuses, although the number 
of security officials tried for abuses increased for a second 
consecutive year. Prison conditions remained poor, although 
the Government took some steps to alleviate the situation. 
Despite constitutional constraints, security officers 
routinely monitored citizens' activities, searched their 
homes, detained citizens for questioning and mistreated 
detainees. Prolonged pretrial detention, judicial corruption 
and executive interference undermined due process. The 
Government at times limited freedom of assembly, imposed some 
restrictions on freedom of religion and placed some limits on 
freedom of movement. Violence and discrimination against 
women remained problems. Female genital mutilation was 
practiced on a limited scale. There was some discrimination 
against persons with disabilities and against religious, 
racial and ethnic minorities. The Government imposed 
restrictions on labor unions. Child labor remained a problem. 
 
 
Yemen is a republic with an active bicameral legislature. An 
elected President, Ali Abdullah Saleh, an elected 301-seat 
House of Representatives and an appointed 111-member Shura 
Council shared Constitutional power. 
 
In Fiscal Year 2004, the United States provided $1.1 million 
in International Military Education and Training assistance 
for the Yemeni military, part of which addresses awareness of 
international norms of human rights and fosters greater 
respect for the principle of civilian control of the military 
and the rule of law. The program had 25 participants in 
Fiscal Year 2004.  In compliance with the Leahy amendment, 
U.S. officials work closely with the Ministries of Defense 
and Interior to vet units for U.S. training. The Defense 
Department Counter-Terrorism Fellowship funds a training 
program for Yemeni military officers on the importance of 
respecting human rights. The project is available to Ministry 
of Interior and Defense civilians and security forces.  The 
project has been highly successful and is on-going.  This 
program trained one participant in 2004 and anticipates two 
participants in FY 2005. 
To achieve the necessary reform in rule of law, human rights 
and political freedom, the United States more actively 
engaged non-governmental organizations in 2004 in the hope of 
galvanizing civil society organizations to take a lead in 
reform of their country,s political and social institutions. 
 The USG also encourages the Government directly to 
strengthen its human rights record and enact social reforms, 
tackle corruption, and further the process of democratic 
development. 
 
In Yemen, the judicial system coexists with traditional means 
of dispute resolution, such as tribal mediation.  Where the 
court system is involved, there are numerous problems 
including excessive executive branch tampering, corruption, 
inefficency of court administration, lack of access for women 
to the court system, and the failure of authorities to 
enforce rulings. The government has taken some preliminary 
steps to improve the situation.  In December 2004, the 
government announced an overhaul of the judiciary in order to 
counter judicial corruption.  The Minister of Justice is 
introducing a ten-year reform project to promote a more 
efficient judiciary. In January 2005, an American Bar 
Association delegation, in conjunction with the Middle East 
Partnership Initiative (MEPI), visited Yemen for two weeks to 
conduct an extensive assessment of Yemen,s judiciary in 
order to initiate programming to galvanize reform in Rule of 
Law and Women and the law issues in Yemen. 
 
The Embassy supported various NGO projects in 2004. One 
project teaches children about participation in government 
and has proven very successful in raising democratic 
awareness.  Another project aims to raise capacity of local 
NGOs and community groups in a rural, underdeveloped 
governorate to allow for economic development.  Several 
projects aimed to improve women,s rights.  Yemeni women have 
traditionally been politically and socially marginalized, 
with limited political representation in parliament or local 
councils despite high voter participation, restricted access 
to healthcare and education, as well as widespread reports of 
domestic abuse, and some instances of female genital 
mutilation.  Under a USDA program, the Embassy established a 
project to build and furnish new primary schools for girls in 
isolated, rural areas to broaden girls, access to modern 
education and to facilitate their inclusion within society. 
 
The United States has been urging the Government to enact 
social reforms, encourage respect for human rights and foster 
democratic development at the highest levels. For example, 
National Security Council officials raised democracy and 
human rights with the Foreign Minister in February 2004. The 
Ambassador and other senior-level officials engage frequently 
with the Ministry of Human Rights to improve the Government's 
ability and willingness to redress specific human rights 
abuses. U.S. officials have raised the issue of corruption at 
the highest levels, particularly as it relates to 
qualification for the Millennium Challenge Account. 
The United States continued several long-term National 
Democratic Institute (NDI) and International Foundation for 
Election Systems (IFES) projects aimed at strengthening 
Yemen,s political parties, improving election 
administration, increasing voter participation, fostering 
civil society and improving the country,s human rights 
records. 
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) 
reopened its offices in Yemen in 2003. The USAID program 
focuses on strengthening democratic institutions among other 
areas. In 2004, the Embassy increased programming designed to 
strengthen democratic institutions, decentralize authority 
and resource management, and expand opportunities for civil 
society in decision-making.   In 2005, USAID anticipates 
expanding its programming in election assistance, 
anticorruption, and strengthening NGO support and capacity. 
The Middle East Partnership Initiative, MEPI, the 
Administration,s primary mechanism to support a forward 
strategy for freedom in the Middle East, is currently working 
with Yemen on a variety of programs including legislative 
strengthening and civic education. For example, a $2 million 
MEPI-funded program aims to address the 67 percent illiteracy 
rate among women and girls. MEPI is also continuing its work 
on election assistance in Yemen. In addition, both government 
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) from Yemen have 
participated in numerous MEPI regional programs. 
 
In 2004, MEPI and USAID began funding for two programs to 
support democracy and human rights in Yemen.   The 
Strengthening Parliamentary Institutions program is designed 
to strengthen core skills of Parliamentarians including 
constituent outreach and executive oversight functions.  The 
program also anticipates the establishment of a parliamentary 
resource center to provide information to allow for more 
responsive legislation.  The US contribution to the 
Parliament program is $800,000 over two years.  USAID and 
MEPI are also contributing funds toward the United Nations 
Development Program to Support Decentralization and Local 
Development in Yemen.  This $1.6 million two year program 
will improve the capacity of local councils and work at the 
central level to promote decentralization.  In February, 2004 
nine Yemeni women attended the Regional Women's Campaign 
Initiative, a  MEPI regional program, to encourage women's 
political party participation.  NDI Yemen is also working 
with women under the MEPI "Democratic Strengthening" grant to 
encourage appropriate legal reform and to ensure women's full 
participation in government. 
 
In 2004, the International Visitor (IV) Programs adminstered 
through the US Embassy's Public Diplomacy office, brought 22 
NGO activists, government officials and other leaders to the 
United States to gain skills and knowledge in such areas as 
NGO management, youth leadership, women,s leadership in the 
political process, rule of law and judicial reform, and 
government accountability. 
Comprehensive reform in human rights and democratic 
development is a choice that ultimately lies with Yemenis. 
The US embassy will continue to work with willing actors in 
political parties, civil society and the government to foster 
respect for human rights, freedom of speech, equality and 
rule of law in a country with great potential. 
(End Text) 
¶3. (U) Addendum: Programs that support literacy and/or 
renovation of educational facilities are also considered to 
be human rights projects because they concentrate on women 
and girls (as mandated by USAID) and help alleviate poverty 
and promote equality and democracy. 
 
¶1.    Support for Reform Minded Yemeni Parliamentarians 
      $800K (MEPI) 
 
¶2.    Support to UNDP Local Council Program 
      $1.59 mil ($1.2 mil MEPI and $390K USAID ESF funding) 
 
¶3.    Yemen Adult Life Skills program for literacy 
      $2 mil (MEPI) 
¶4.    Renovation of Schools and Educational facilities 
      $33.3 mil (USDA) 
 
¶5.    Renovation of School in Saada 
      $200K (DoD) 
 
¶6.    Rehabilitation and construction of schools and teacher 
training/ literacy among            women and girls $10 mil 
(USAID) 
 
Krajeski