05SANAA2891
RAMADAN 2005 PD ACTIVITIES
Tue Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 002891 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/PPD, R, IIP, PA, AND DRL/IRF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIRF KPAO PREL COUNTER TERRORISM DOMESTIC POLITICS DEMOCRATIC REFORM
SUBJECT: RAMADAN 2005 PD ACTIVITIES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 166527 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  Ramadan celebrations in Yemen are typically 
hosted within families and, while Yemenis generally prefer 
to remain at home and close to family during the month, 
Embassy Sana'a has planned to participate in Ramadan in a 
variety of ways.  End summary. 
 
¶2. Ambassador will host well-positioned contacts, including 
ROYG officials, media representatives, academicians, and USG 
program alumni at a local restaurant for an iftar on October 
¶11.  Ambassador will deliver brief remarks to the assembled 
guests alluding to Ramadan as a time of introspection and 
highlighting the USG's history of religious and cultural 
tolerance.  A PowerPoint slideshow about Muslim life in the 
United States will run throughout the iftar event on a large 
screen.  Guests will receive a business card handout listing 
IIP's Arabic-language websites sites on BMENA issues, Muslim 
life in America, and combating terror. 
 
¶3.  The political section will also meet throughout the 
month, after iftar mealtime, in casual settings with 
contacts.  During these informal sessions, emboffs will 
engage in active listening and will produce reporting cables 
on major themes raised by contacts.  Emboffs will use these 
events to advance USG policy goals related to 
counterterrorism, regional security, democratic and economic 
reform by discussing issues resonant in Yemen such as: 
- upcoming presidential elections; 
- recent parliamentary session; 
- effectiveness of ROYG efforts to reform those with 
extremist views; 
- effects of terror on innocent victims of terrorist 
incidents; 
- and, public opinion among Yemenis regarding terrorist 
acts, terrorist organizations, and USG policy. 
 
¶4. Public Affairs, in cooperation with the local NGO Al Sada 
Charitable Association, will provide a weekly iftar dinner 
during the month for a marginalized group of Yemenis known 
as "akhdams" (members of this minority typically encumber 
only the lowest paying jobs).  Public Affairs staff and 
volunteers from among the Muslim-American Embassy staff will 
be available to assist in serving the guests and to engage 
guests in dialogue. A banner indicating the Embassy's 
sponsorship will be hung.  At the end of the meal, children 
will receive bookbags containing foodstuffs for their 
families. 
 
¶5.  CLO is collecting donations of money and foodstuffs to 
prepare Ramadan baskets for less privileged Yemenis. 
Delivery will be accomplished through a local NGO. 
 
¶6.  Public Affairs will send press releases and post 
official USG Ramadan greetings online as well as forward 
Ramadan-related IIP materials to the local media. 
 
KRAJESKI