05TELAVIV6970
SUMMARY OF ISRAELI MINISTRY OF DEFENSE SEMINAR ON
Fri Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 006970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/SWADDY/DJOHNSON 
USDOC FOR 3131 CS/OIO/ANESA/GLITMAN 
USDOC FOR 520/ITA/ANESA/CLOUSTAUNAU/NWIEGLER 
ROME FOR CUSTOMS ATTACHE 
STATE FOR EB/ESP 
US CUSTOMS HQ FOR STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
STATE FOR NEA/IPA (MAHER), PM (RUGGERIO), NP/RA, PM/DTCC 
PENTAGON FOR OSD (JAMES ANDERSON) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ETTC ETRD IS MILITARY RELATIONS GOI EXTERNAL
SUBJECT: SUMMARY OF ISRAELI MINISTRY OF DEFENSE SEMINAR ON 
UPCOMING EXPORT CONTROL REGIME. 
 
¶1. On December 1, 2005, the Ministry of Defense (MOD) held 
an export control seminar for the local high-tech and 
defense industries.  The seminar, "Export Controls for 
Category 6 Technologies of the Wassenaar Arrangement," 
attracted over 200 participants, among them many Israeli hi- 
tech exporters (defense and civilian).  It was the second in 
a series of outreach events on export controls organized and 
held by the Israeli Ministry of Defense and the first one on 
Israel's new dual use export control regulations.   The 
speakers included MOD and Ministry of Industry & Trade 
(MOIT) officials and Bernie Kritzer, Director of the Office 
of Strategic Trade and Policy Controls, U.S. Bureau of 
Industry and Security. 
 
¶2. After an initial two-year period, the licensing 
responsibility for dual-use items will be shared between the 
MOD and MOIT.  In the interim, MOD will administer export 
controls for dual use items through a new division that will 
be dedicated to this program.  MOD stated that it expects 
the GOI to adopt the entire Wassenaar Arrangement list by 
the end of 2007.  The MOD and the MOIT plan to submit a 
joint proposal for the required legal amendment to the GOI 
at the beginning of March 2006. 
 
¶3. Seminar Speakers and Topics: 
Meir Shalit, Sr. Deputy Head, SIBAT, MOD - Introduction 
Ram Raviv, Legal Dept., MOD - Legal Framework for New Export 
Control Regulations 
Dr. Shlomo Levine, TAU, former MOD - Background and 
Technological Explanations 
Ohad Orenstein, MOIT - MOIT Role in Export Licensing 
Yoram Ziflinger, MOD Head of Licensing Division - Licensing 
Procedures 
Bernie Kritzer, Director, U.S. Bureau of Industry & 
Security, Office of National Security & Technology Transfer 
Controls 
 
a. Meir Shalit gave a short introduction in which he stated 
that Israel's new dual use export control regulations came 
into effect on October 18, 2005 and that the MOD has 
responsibility for the licensing and control functions to 
ensure implementation and compliance.  According to Shalit, 
the Ministry of Industry and Trade will take over the 
administration of export controls for dual use technologies 
for the civilian market at the end of 2007.  Shalit 
explained that Israel is not a signatory to the Wassenaar 
Arrangement, but has voluntarily agreed to adopt the export 
restrictions that are part of the Arrangement.  This is 
similar to the arrangement Israel has with the Australia 
Group (AG), the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and the 
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR).   Shalit stated 
that in the beginning of March 2006, the MOD and the MOIT 
plan to submit a proposal for a broadening of the dual-use 
export control law to include the remaining categories of 
the Wassenaar Arrangement.  He expects  implementation of 
the law by the end of 2007.   Mr. Shalit emphasized the need 
for training within industry, in order to ensure compliance 
with the new regulations. 
 
b. Ram Raviv explained the legal framework for the dual-use 
export controls.  The new dual use regulations came into 
effect on October 19, 2005 after the Knesset adopted the 
amendment to the 1986 Control Act of Items and Services 
(munitions equipment and defense know-how).  He indicated 
that the reasons for the GOI's adoption of a dual use export 
control regime were national security and foreign affairs 
interests, the desire to prevent the proliferation of 
sensitive technologies and the need for Israel to adopt 
universally accepted standards.  According to Raviv, the 
Israeli list of dual-use items is similar, but not identical 
to, the Wassenaar Arrangement Category 6 list. 
 
c. The MOD has not yet decided whether licensing of dual-use 
technologies will be subject to the double license process 
(separate license for negotiations and sales), currently in 
use by MOD, or whether it will adopt a single license 
approach.   According to Raviv, it is essential to ensure 
that the export control system cause the least possible 
damage to Israel's exports.  Fines and incarceration may 
result from violations of the export control regulations, in 
addition to the cancellation of licenses.  With regard to 
the division of responsibilities for licensing controlled 
technologies, the MOD is responsible for the control of 
defense equipment and know-how.  Control of satellite 
technologies and equipment is shared by the MOD and the 
MOIT.  Chemical, biological and nuclear items are controlled 
by the MOIT.  The licensing process includes consultations 
between the MOD, the MOIT and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. 
 
d. Shlomo Levine of Tel Aviv University (a former MOD 
official) gave a presentation explaining the implications of 
the new regulations on local industry.  He presented 
examples of items that would be controlled, and explained 
the reasons behind these controls. 
 
e. Ohad Orenstein's presentation dealt with the MOIT history 
of export licensing.  He explained that the only export 
restrictions that remain in Israel are the ones the GOI is 
committed to in the framework of the Basel and Vienna 
conventions on trade in drugs, export of chemical, 
biological and nuclear items, and now category 6 items of 
the Wassenaar Arrangement.  He pointed out that the 
licensing authority is with MOIT's Environment and Chemical 
Directorate. 
 
f. Yoram Ziflinger's lecture was a hands-on presentation of 
the proposed MOD licensing process.  He ensured the audience 
that the licensing process would be short (approximately 
three weeks).  The request for a license must be submitted 
prior to negotiations with the potential buyer.  Export of 
sensors and lasers for defense end-users or for defense- 
related end-use will be granted under two licenses; one 
prior to negotiations and another prior to the sale.   The 
exporter must attach a detailed letter to the license 
application, explaining the nature of the item to be 
exported, details about the consignee, the end-user and the 
end-use, and a purchase order/contract.  In the event that 
the item is shipped via an agent, an ultimate end user 
statement is required.  This is also required for all 
exports to China.  Upon granting the export license, MOD 
will notify the Customs authorities accordingly. 
 
¶4. In subsequent conversations with MOD, MFA and MOIT 
officials, CS Tel Aviv learned the following: 
 
a. MOD and MOIT: GOI has decided that MOD and MOIT will 
share the responsibility for dual use export licensing and 
control.  Since MOD currently has an export control 
administration in place, it will administer, on an ad 
interim basis, the export licensing and control system for 
dual use technologies in both the civilian and military 
markets.  MOIT has two years to assume responsibility for 
the dual use controls licensing procedures for civilian 
applications.  Based on the MOIT presentation and on 
conversations with MOD and Orenstein, the MOIT appears both 
unprepared and uneager to take upon itself the role of 
export licensing authority.  Orenstein emphasized the 
importance that his Ministry gives to the free-flow of 
trade.  He indicated that two years is a long time to 
prepare a licensing system.  He also mentioned that MOIT had 
been unable to identify more than two-dozen companies that 
may require export licenses. 
 
b. Additional MOD-Sponsored Outreach Events: Two additional 
seminars will be held in January 2006.  The first will deal 
with Missile Technology Control Regime-related issues, and 
will include detailed licensing instructions.  The second 
event will be held for senior GOI officials and will focus 
on the implications of the Wassenaar Cat. 6 for MOD, MOIT, 
MFA, MOF, Customs and MOJ.  It will include presentations 
dealing with the current status of the regulations and their 
implementation, the GOI's commitment to the USG, a legal 
presentation, the division of responsibilities and an action 
plan. 
 
c. MOD Licensing Division: MOD will set up a new division 
outside of its export branch, SIBAT, to deal with export 
control licensing of dual use technologies.  Currently, 
SIBAT deals with licensing and the Security Directorate 
(MALMAB-DSDE) with controls.   As far as CS Tel Aviv can 
ascertain, the export controls will remain in MALMAB-DSDE. 
However, there was mention about merging the two functions 
into the new division.  MOD is considering the introduction 
of a one-phase application process, in which the exporter 
applies for a license prior to the sale of a product.  This 
differs from the regulations in place for defense exports, 
which require the exporter to obtain two licenses -- one to 
conduct negotiations, and a second to sell the technology. 
According to MOD, the license processing time will average 
three weeks. 
 
d. Re-Export:  During the presentations and the subsequent 
Q&A session, all parties, including the BIS representative, 
avoided referring to the issue of re-exports of U.S. 
controlled technologies integrated into Israeli systems. 
 
e. The MOD has established a new website dealing with export 
controls: http://www.exportctrl.mod.gov.il. The website 
requires significant updating to incorporate the new 
regulations. 
 
Cretz