05TELAVIV2642
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 002642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Iran: Nuclear Program 
 
¶2.  Syrian-Lebanese Track 
 
¶3.  Vladimir Putin's Visit to Israel, April 27-28 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media (banner in Ha'aretz) reported that 40,000 to 
90,000 people, depending on the sources, attended a 
rally in the Gaza Strip's Katif Bloc Wednesday to 
protect the disengagement plan.  National Union MK 
Arieh Eldad called for civil disobedience, which 
prompted left-wing politicians to demand that he be put 
on trial.  Talking on Israel Radio, Knesset Speaker 
Reuven Rivlin (Likud), an opponent of disengagement, 
condemned Eldad's remark. 
 
Yediot, Maariv and Jerusalem Post led with issues 
related to Russian President Vladimir Putin's visit to 
Israel.  Maariv quoted Israeli defense sources as 
saying that Putin, who talks about peace while 
supporting Syria and the Iranian nuclear plan, is 
playing a double game and assisting Israel's enemies. 
Yediot quoted senior GOI sources as saying that Israel 
will not take part in Putin's initiative to host a 
conference on the Middle East.  The newspaper also 
quoted sources in the U.S. administration as saying 
that the U.S. believes that an international conference 
should be convened, but not at this time.  Jerusalem 
Post and Ha'aretz write that PM Sharon is likely to 
raise with Putin the issue of Russian plans to sell 
military equipment to the PA.  In a press conference 
carried over by Israel Radio this afternoon, Putin 
reassured Israel that the missiles Russia sold Syria 
cannot be used by terrorists, while President Moshe 
Katsav emphasized the threat posed to Israel by Syria, 
and the risk that those missiles could make it harder 
for Israel to combat terrorism.  Putin said that Russia 
is cooperating with Iran in the development of peaceful 
uses in the nuclear domain, but that it is opposed to 
Iran's plans to procure nuclear weapons. 
 
All media continued coverage of the forthcoming arms 
sale by the U.S. of GBU-28 bombs to Israel.  Recalling 
Sharon's promises that Israel has no plans to attack 
Iran and citing Vice President Dick Cheney's warning in 
January that Israel could in the future try to attack 
Iran's nuclear installations, the media extensively 
speculated on the matter.  Speaking on Israel Radio 
this morning, a former senior official in Israel's 
defense industry said that Israel already has similar, 
locally made weapons. 
Israel Radio quoted PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud 
Abbas as saying that the PA will stop mortar and Qassam 
rocket attacks against Israel even if the use of force 
is needed.  The radio quoted PA Information Minister 
Nabil Shaath as saying in an interview with the East 
Jerusalem newspaper Al-Quds that there have been 
contacts between the PA and Egypt regarding the issue 
of control of the Philadelphi route.  Shaath was quoted 
as saying that the PA is also discussing the issue, as 
well as "safe passage" between Gaza and the West Bank, 
with Israel and the U.S. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Quartet's special envoy to 
the disengagement plan, former World Bank president 
James Wolfensohn, is due to arrive in Israel this 
weekend for his first visit in his new role. 
Wolfensohn will meet with Vice Premier Shimon Peres to 
discuss coordination of various civilian aspects of the 
planned withdrawal from Gaza and the northern West 
Bank.  The newspaper reported that Vice Premier Shimon 
Peres met Wednesday with A/S David Welch.  According to 
Ha'aretz, Peres called for encouraging American private 
sector investments in the territories, and described 
the economic and security problems raised by the 
opening of the Palestinian port in Gaza.  Peres 
emphasized the importance of preserving the unified 
customs umbrella over Israel and the PA.  Ha'aretz and 
Jerusalem Post say that Peres told Welch about his 
efforts to get the Netherlands to market flowers grown 
by farmers in Gaza. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the PA will set up special 
courts that will determine the ownership of land to be 
evacuated by Israel. 
 
Maariv reported that the IDF has recently decided to 
set up a wall in Hebron to divide between the 
Palestinian and Jewish residents of the city. 
 
Leading media cited a Rand Corporation study that 
proposes to lay the groundwork for long-term 
development of a Palestinian state.  The study 
recommends linking major Palestinian cities in the West 
Bank and Gaza, mostly through a high-speed railway 
line.  The estimated cost for the first 10 years of 
operation is about USD 33 billion, with USD 6 billion 
of that amount to build the rail and roads. 
 
Yediot cited a Washington Post report as saying that 
Syrian intelligence agents in Lebanon have moved to 
other addresses and continue to intervene in that 
country's economic and political matters. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) 
has come out against Haifa University Prof. David 
Bukay, who has allegedly denigrated Arabs and Muslims. 
 
-------------------------- 
¶1.  Iran: Nuclear Program: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Military correspondent Amir Rappaport wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "The ... message [of the United 
States' forthcoming sale of bombs to Israel] is 
directed thousands of kilometers eastwards -- at Iran." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"A Clear Message to Tehran" 
 
 
Military correspondent Amir Rappaport wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (April 28): "The Pentagon's 
announcement Wednesday that it has decided to sell 
Israel 'bunker-busting' bombs is meant for Congress, 
which is supposed to approve the sale.  The real 
message is directed thousands of kilometers eastwards - 
- at Iran.... The Iranians are supposed to understand 
those are bombs that can indeed hit underground 
commands and nuclear installations.  But they also 
know, perhaps better than anybody, that it is doubtful 
whether they will grant Israel a military option to 
eliminate their nuclear program in a preemptive 
strike.... Fascinating moves will undoubtedly occur in 
the chess game that will end either with an Iranian 
renouncement of the bomb, or, heaven forbid, in a 
nuclear bomb that will threaten Israel.  Meanwhile, 
another important lesson can be drawn from the present 
U.S. move: security and strategic interests between the 
two countries remain strong, despite the cooling of 
relations between the Pentagon and the Israeli Defense 
Ministry.... In this case, basic interests have 
prevailed over poor relations at the personal level." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  Syrian-Lebanese Track: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "Even 
if there is some logic in the American position, which 
asks that Israel not save the shaky Damascus regime 
through negotiations, Israel cannot wait for foreign 
initiatives." 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Withdrawal From Occupied Territory" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (April 
28): "The Syrian evacuation [of troops from Lebanon] is 
the victory of a surprising and rare awakening of 
public opinion in the region, and the continuation of 
the reverberations being felt for the last two years in 
the region, ever since President George W. Bush 
launched a war that toppled Saddam Hussein's regime in 
Iraq.... Lebanon will now face a triple challenge: 
electing a president, who for the first time in years 
will not be a Syrian puppet; putting an end to the 
military character of the Hizbullah and turning it into 
a political movement; and sending troops to the 
Lebanese-Israeli border to foil terror.  If Lebanon 
succeeds in these challenges, it will change the entire 
character of the northern arena.  If indeed the 
Hizbullah threat is removed and the policies -- in 
effect, the regime -- of Damascus change, Israel will 
have to prepare for negotiations with Syria on the 
basis of UN Security Council Resolution 242 for the 
return of the Golan Heights.  Even if there is some 
logic in the American position, which asks that Israel 
not save the shaky Damascus regime through 
negotiations, Israel cannot wait for foreign 
initiatives.  When there is a new regime in Damascus, 
Israel will be one country closer to completing the 
ring of peace around it -- an external ring that will 
also require an end to the conflict with the 
Palestinians.  The spirit of the times sweeps aside all 
those who try to hold onto occupied territories." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶3.  Vladimir Putin's Visit to Israel, April 27-28: 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "The Russian president's visit to 
Israel is indeed historic, dramatic and important, but 
it is also dangerous." 
 
Correspondent Ilya Krichevsky wrote in conservative 
Russian-language Vesty: "Relations between the Russian 
President and the Israeli Prime Minister will obviously 
remain cordial, but in actual fact, relations between 
their countries will probably not improve after this 
historic visit." 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Doctor Vladimir and Mr. Putin" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (April 28): "Outwardly Ariel Sharon 
will show a great deal of respect for Doctor Vladimir, 
but inwardly he is very critical of Mr. Putin.  The 
Russian president's visit to Israel is indeed historic, 
dramatic and important, but it is also dangerous.... 
Perhaps history will indeed repeat itself and Russia 
will soon revert to what it once was: the official arms 
supplier for the Arab and Muslim world, hardly to 
Israel's benefit.  On the other hand, the current 
relations between Israel and Russia are the best that 
the two states have ever had.  The missile deal with 
Syria was changed under pressure from Israel and the 
shoulder-fired missile deal was cancelled.  There is 
considerable chemistry in the relationship between 
Putin and Sharon.  In general, the Russians support 
Israel's struggle against terrorism.  Economic 
cooperation between the two countries is growing apace, 
so the cup is also half-full, perhaps more than half. 
Apart from that everything is as usual.  Behind the 
scenes a drama has been unfolding.  It is not simple 
and it is much more interesting than the official 
ceremonies.  A quarter of the population of Israel 
speaks Russian. Recently Putin has been leading an 
effort to stop Russian immigration to Israel by 
improving the conditions of the Jews in Russia, 
creating the semblance of freedom, openness, a 
flourishing of Jewish culture and a war on anti- 
Semitism." 
 
II.  "A Friendship Without Conferences" 
 
Correspondent Ilya Krichevsky wrote in conservative 
Russian-language Vesty (April 28): "Relations with 
Russia are very important to Israel. ... Putin's visit 
has been called historic ... without ... exaggerating 
the significance of the event.  This is the first 
official visit of a Russian leader to Israel.... 
However, the question about its outcome is still open. 
Israel does not hide its disappointment with Russia's 
foreign policy -- arms sales to Syria and the ongoing 
participation of Russian experts and facilities in 
executing Iran's 'peaceful' nuclear program.  Should 
Ariel Sharon succeed in using his exceptionally cordial 
relations with Vladimir Putin in order to balance this 
policy, this brief visit by President Putin could be 
dubbed historic from two aspects -- from the point of 
view of protocol as well as the improvement of the 
situation in the region.  But ... there are not many 
chances for such a development....  Putin's image and 
relations with Americans and Europeans are ...  rather 
a secondary issue for the Israelis; it's much more 
important to explain Israel's position to [Russia] as 
one of the Middle East peace process's co-sponsors and 
to neutralize activities which might harm Israel's 
security.  A personal friendship may not suffice to 
achieve this goal. ... Relations between the Russian 
President and the Israeli Prime Minister will obviously 
remain cordial, but in actual fact, relations between 
their countries will probably not improve after this 
historic visit." 
 
KURTZER