05TELAVIV2145
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 002145 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Maariv and Ha'aretz cited Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice in an interview with AP as saying that 
Israel should not raze the houses in the settlements 
that it evacuates unless the PA asks for it.  Maariv 
noted that the interview was mostly critical towards 
Israel and that Rice promised that the U.S. would 
assist the PA in rehabilitating Gaza.  Ha'aretz added 
that since President George Bush wishes to hold a 
festive meeting, he will not raise controversial issues 
with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. 
 
Yediot Aharonot leads with a report from a meeting 
Prime Minister Sharon chaired in his office that was 
attended by Defense Minister Mofaz and other officials 
involved in planning the practicalities of 
disengagement.  Mofaz presented some of the specifics 
of the Defense Ministry's work plan for disengagement, 
whereby the evacuation of settlements in the Gaza Strip 
would last three weeks only, and not four as previously 
planned.  Maariv reports about a separate meeting that 
was held yesterday by the directors-general of the 
various government ministries, also to discuss 
practical aspects of disengagement.  Sharon instructed 
the security establishment to allow the public to visit 
Gush Katif during Passover in order "to say goodbye to 
the settlements." This is contrary to recommendations 
by security officials to close Gush Katif to visitors 
before the holiday, out of concern that thousands would 
try to remain in the settlements with the purpose of 
preventing the evacuation. 
 
Maariv added that the settlements Nissanit and Elei 
Sinai have decided to "disengage" from Gaza, as 
residents there claim that the land of the two 
communities was never under Egyptian control but rather 
was a demilitarized zone under UN control. 
 
Yediot Aharonot reported that, prior to the prime 
minister's visit to Washington, Agriculture Minister 
Yisrael Katz yesterday spoke out openly against the 
American position which rules out construction in the 
settlements: "The government of Israel and the Likud 
will continue to build and develop Jewish settlement in 
greater Jerusalem, Judea and Samaria, the Jordan Valley 
and all the security areas, even if this results in 
disagreements with the US." 
 
Ha'aretz related that senior officials in the 
Palestinian Authority have presented a plan to American 
and Israeli officials for coordinating the 
disengagement from Gaza and the northern West Bank.  A 
source involved in the contacts told Ha'aretz yesterday 
that the plan includes coordinating the handover of 
overall security responsibility in the areas the Israel 
Defense Forces leaves, to the PA's National Security 
force; a complete cease-fire during the evacuation 
process; and a Palestinian commitment to take all 
necessary steps to prevent shooting at Israeli targets 
outside the Strip.  However, the Palestinians condition 
the plan on Israeli agreement to it and on Israeli help 
in equipping the Gaza security forces with weapons and 
other equipment necessary for imposing law and order in 
Gaza. 
 
Maariv reported that yesterday, Foreign Minister Shalom 
held his first working session with Jordanian 
Ambassador Ma'aruf al-Behayt who asked that Israel 
release Jordanian prisoners held in Israel.  Shalom 
said he believes this would happen after the PM's U.S. 
visit. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the police yesterday announced 
plans to close the Temple Mount compound to Jews on 10 
April, when a right-wing extremist group called Revava 
was planning to hold a mass rally there.  Police fear 
the activists might clash with Muslim worshipers. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Nationalist writer Uri Dan commented both in popular, 
pluralist Maariv and conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post: "Those who thought that Bush's letter 
would be enough were mistaken from the very beginning. 
What is really needed is an unceasing, tenacious and 
bitter struggle for the borders of the Jewish State -- 
borders that will give us maximum security as we 
struggle under difficult domestic and international 
conditions.  Only Sharon, there in Texas, and 
afterwards, can carry out this impossible mission." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Arik's Mission Impossible" 
 
Nationalist writer Uri Dan commented both in popular, 
pluralist Maariv and conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post (April 7): "The time has come to realize 
the understanding between Bush and Sharon.  It is clear 
that both leaders will have to turn words into deeds. 
Sharon will once again have to convince Bush why he 
regards the plan to establish continuity of settlement 
between Jerusalem and Ma'aleh Adumim on the way to the 
Dead Sea as vital for Israel's defense, and how he 
regards the other Jewish blocs of settlement, without 
harming the course of the road map.  In other words, 
there is a chance that after the summit in Texas 
Israelis will better understand that the Jewish State 
will receive a tangible, long-term return for the 
earthquake in the Gaza Strip planned for the summer. 
This will be while the Palestinian enemy is re-stocking 
its arsenal for continuing the war, as reported by the 
U.S. intelligence services.  Those who thought that 
Bush's letter would be enough were mistaken from the 
very beginning.  What is really needed is an unceasing, 
tenacious and bitter struggle for the borders of the 
Jewish State -- borders that will give us maximum 
security as we struggle under difficult domestic and 
international conditions.  Only Sharon, there in Texas, 
and afterwards, can carry out this impossible mission." 
KURTZER