05TELAVIV2874
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 002874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Democracy in Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Leading media reported that Israel has informed the PA 
that it will not release the next tranche of 
Palestinian prisoners until the PA takes concrete 
measures against terror organizations.  Israel Radio 
reported that Hamas is threatening to break the cease- 
fire with Israel if it does not release more prisoners. 
Ha'aretz quoted senior Hamas officials as saying Sunday 
that the lull was in danger due to what they said was 
"Fatah's attempt to wreck the local elections." 
 
On Sunday, Maariv quoted PA Chairman [President] 
Mahmoud Abbas as saying that a meeting between him and 
Sharon is needed to push the peace process forward. 
 
On Sunday, Jerusalem Post quoted an IDF officer as 
saying that the army will consider launching an 
operation in the Gaza Strip if the security situation 
continues to deteriorate. 
 
Leading media (banner in Ha'aretz) reported that on 
Sunday, Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz signed an 
administrative detention order against Neria Ofan, a 
right-wing activist who resides in the West Bank 
settlement of Yitzhar.  The media say that such orders 
are expected to be meted out to dozens of other right- 
wing activists before the disengagement move. 
 
On Sunday, leading media (lead story in Ha'aretz) 
reported that despite the Fatah movement's technical 
victory in PA local elections held Thursday, Hamas 
scored unprecedented victories and now controls at 
least 48 local authorities in the territories. 
 
Vice Premier Shimon Peres was quoted as saying in an 
interview with Jerusalem Post that he is still not 
convinced the disengagement plan will be carried out. 
Peres said he could envision a "couple of things" 
blocking the moves, one of them being a decision to 
destroy the homes in the settlements to be left behind. 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz reported that PM Sharon is inclined 
not to modify the decision to destroy those houses. 
 
On Sunday, Yediot reported on a rift among the 
leadership of the Katif Bloc (Gush Katif) settlers 
regarding the proposed relocation to Nitzanim. 
 
Leading media reported that the ministerial committee 
for legislation Sunday approved changes in the 
Citizenship Law that will allow dozens of mixed Israeli- 
Palestinian couples to continue or begin family 
unification procedures to acquire Israeli citizenship 
for the Palestinian partner. 
 
Leading media reported that hundreds of Israeli Muslims 
intend to visit the Al-Aqsa Mosque today following 
rumors that activists of the far-right group Revava 
intend to come to the Temple Mount.  Israel Radio 
reported that around 200 Palestinians clashed with 
police in East Jerusalem this morning. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the third conference of 
Palestinians in Europe appealed to the international 
community on Sunday to recognize the right of return of 
Palestinian refugees. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Sunday, the Knesset's 
Education Committee denounced the cabinet's decision to 
establish a university in the West Bank settlement of 
Ariel. 
 
Most media reported that in a petition to the High 
Court of Justice, Jonathan Pollard, who is serving a 
life sentence for spying for Israel, demanded on Sunday 
that Israel recognize him as a Prisoner of Zion, 
stating that his U.S. jailers cruelly torture him with 
sleep deprivation, electric shocks, and blasts of 
freezing cold water.  [NB: The term "Prisoner of Zion" 
usually refers to someone whom the "Law of Return" 
entitles to immigrate to Israel and who was imprisoned 
because of his Zionist activity in a country where such 
activity is illegal.] 
 
All media reported that on Sunday, State Comptroller 
Eliezer Goldberg submitted his annual report to the 
Knesset, in which he condemned Agriculture Minister 
Yisrael Katz's appointments of senior Likud Party 
members to positions at his ministry. 
 
The media reported on V-E Day's 60th anniversary 
celebrations and President Bush's visit to Europe. 
 
During the weekend, headlines were dominated by an 
affair involving the wife, daughter, and son of 
Sephardi Chief Rabbi Shlomo Amar, in connection with 
the alleged kidnapping and beating of a 17-year-old 
ultra-Orthodox youth romantically involved with Amar's 
18-year-old daughter.   While many media are uncertain 
about whether charges will be pressed against the 
Rabbi, Jerusalem Post and Israel Radio quoted senior 
police sources involved in the investigation as saying 
that they believe they have sufficient evidence to do 
so. 
 
All media (lead stories in Yediot and Maariv) reported 
on last night's victory of the basketball team Maccabi 
Tel Aviv over Spain's Tau Vitoria, winning the 
Euroleague's Final Four tournament for the second year 
in a row. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz: "Barring any change in Palestinian public 
opinion in the coming weeks, the evacuation of Israel 
from Gaza will leave control over the Strip in the 
hands of Hamas." 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
Ha'aretz: "If he transfers control to the Palestinians, 
he would need to explain, especially to the Americans, 
why he is not continuing to implement his road map 
commitments." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"The only one who can avert disaster is Abbas, disaster 
that, it need hardly be said, will doom him too.  All 
he needs to do is what the road map requires him to 
do." 
 
Veteran print and TV journalist Dan Margalit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "One must not err when 
reading [the Ha'aretz publisher's] article as if 
maintaining the Jewish majority is at all important to 
him.  It isn't even remotely so." 
 
Palestinian journalist Daoub Kuttab wrote in Jerusalem 
Post: "America, please practice what you preach.  Show 
respect to the afflicted, and don't allow your 
generosity to be abused in such a humiliating way." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "The Bitter Taste of the Hamas Victory" 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz (May 9): "Following the publication of the 
results of the second round of Palestinian municipal 
elections in Gaza, it can be said with certainty that 
barring any change in Palestinian public opinion in the 
coming weeks, the evacuation of Israel from Gaza will 
leave control over the Strip in the hands of Hamas.... 
Officially, at least, there has been no change in the 
Hamas position.  It does not recognize the State of 
Israel and supports the continuation of the armed 
struggle.... It is possible that sometime in the 
future, Hamas will change these positions.  But it is 
almost certain that the heads of the religious- 
political movement won't do so without getting 
something in return -- recognition of their movement 
and readiness to accept them as negotiating partners. 
There does not seem to be any chance of that now -- and 
certainly not soon.  Meanwhile, Hamas is marching down 
a paved path, relatively certain to get the Gaza Strip 
from Israel as the fruits of victory." 
 
II.  "The Pretext Behind 'Confiscating Weapons'" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
Ha'aretz (May 8): "It is difficult to understand the 
new excuse Israel is presenting for postponing 
implementation of the road map.  Ostensibly, it is a 
logical and reasonable issue, which is even contained 
in the terms of the road map: confiscation of illegal 
weapons and waging war against 'the infrastructure of 
terror.'  In fact, this is a vague condition that 
functions well as a barrier that can be easily deployed 
again and again, in an attempt at blocking any 
diplomatic progress.... The transfer of control is 
liable to be interpreted as proof that the Palestinians 
have indeed fulfilled the conditions stipulated in the 
road map and that it is now Israel's turn to freeze 
settlements, help establish a Palestinian state and 
begin discussing withdrawal from the West Bank.  It is 
this stage that the government -- and the Prime 
Minister in particular -- fears so much.  After all, he 
is the one who formulated the equation according to 
which the disengagement from Gaza would enable Israel 
to hold on to more of the West Bank.  If he transfers 
control to the Palestinians, he would need to explain, 
especially to the Americans, why he is not continuing 
to implement his road map commitments.  Therefore, it 
is preferable to wait, delay and block -- even at the 
expense of a few terror attacks, or perhaps the 
collapse of the cease-fire or the fall of Abu Mazen -- 
as long as the road map remains a mute map.  The tactic 
used for this end is to demand the confiscation of 
weapons.  It is interesting that the Americans, who 
granted broad authority to the Iraqi government without 
precondition and who took such pride in the formation 
of an independent government in Afghanistan (which also 
did not succeed in confiscating weapons) have failed to 
see through this maneuver." 
 
III.  "Abbas's Cubes" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(May 8): "This indiscriminate shelling of a peaceable 
civilian population cannot be tolerated in Sderot -- 
any more than it would anywhere else in the world. 
Abbas's truce was supposed to offer at least a respite 
from over four years of incessant killing and maiming. 
Many in the international community are convinced that 
the promised genuine calm now exists.  Satisfied with 
Abbas's 'achievement,' they credit him with having done 
his bit under his road map obligations, content to 
ignore that he has said plainly he will not satisfy the 
road map requirement to dismantle the terror groups.... 
Even the professed calm is fracturing.... The only one 
who can avert disaster is Abbas, disaster that, it need 
hardly be said, will doom him too.  All he needs to do 
is what the road map requires him to do and what he 
consistently refrains from doing -- combat terrorists. 
He doesn't need Russian helicopters and armored cars, 
nor American training and Egyptian advisers.  He has 
repeatedly promised to ensure that only his security 
forces are armed, and that they carry those weapons to 
impose his elected authority and implement his pledge 
to enforce law and order. He has the legitimacy and the 
wherewithal.  What's evidently missing, tragically, is 
the will." 
 
IV.  "Deceit" 
 
Veteran print and TV journalist Dan Margalit wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (May 9): "The cat is finally 
out of the bag.  In his [May 6] article, 'Does Israel 
Want Peace,' Amos Schocken removed himself and 
Ha'aretz, which he publishes and owns, from the last 
circle of Jewish consensus.... One must not err when 
reading his article as if maintaining the Jewish 
majority is at all important to him.  It isn't even 
remotely so.  He proposes as a means of maintaining the 
Jewish majority that hundreds of thousands of Arabs be 
given 'resident' status only and not 'citizen' status? 
That is pure deceit.  Their children will be citizens 
from the moment they are born.  A country that is 
incapable of meeting the demands of the second 
generation of illegal aliens will be unable to reject 
the demands for citizenship by the descendants of 
people who moved to it legally, even if only as 
'residents.'" 
 
¶V.  "America's Humiliating Gift" 
 
Palestinian journalist Daoub Kuttab wrote in Jerusalem 
Post (May 9): "The demand by the U.S. Congress to 
divert USD 50 million of President George W. Bush's USD 
200-million pledge of aid to the Palestinian Authority 
for Israeli checkpoints is something like requiring the 
Vatican to contribute air-conditioners to abortion 
clinics or divorce lawyers' fees as part of its policy 
of easing the plight of Catholic women.  The new motto 
of the US Agency for International Development (USAID) 
is very simple and direct: 'From the American People.' 
Recent conditions tacked onto a planned U.S. grant from 
the American people is adding insult to Palestinian 
injury.  Diverting to Israel millions from monies 
promised to the Palestinian Authority in order to 
reinforce Israeli checkposts deep inside Palestinian 
territories is a multiple insult to Palestinians.  Not 
only is it a reduction from the meager (in comparison 
to the billions given to Israel) grant to Palestinians; 
but to divert money earmarked for Palestinians to 
strengthen the Israeli army's occupation is a moral and 
political scandal.... If these U.S. congressional 
restrictions are enforced, it will be a terrible blow 
to the efforts of so many good people in America.  If 
the gift from the American is coated with poison, it 
will be a terrible mark that will take a long time to 
heal.  America, please practice what you preach.  Show 
respect to the afflicted, and don't allow your 
generosity to be abused in such a humiliating way." 
 
------------------------- 
¶2.  Democracy in Mideast: 
------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized: "With all 
due respect to Bush, the Arab states need 
dictatorships, and any other form of government, at the 
present stage, could actually serve the extremist 
elements." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Bush in Carter's Footsteps" 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized (May 9): 
"U.S. President George Bush called over the weekend, in 
a speech he gave in Riga, capital of Latvia, for free 
elections in Lebanon and Egypt.... Democratic elections 
in Lebanon and Egypt could lead these two countries 
into chaos.  With all due respect to Bush, the Arab 
states need dictatorships, and any other form of 
government, at the present stage, could actually serve 
the extremist elements.  It was Jimmy Carter who 
pressured the Persian Shah to instate a more moderate 
and democratic way of life in Iran.... Khomeini 
[eventually] came to power and the clan of ayatollahs 
is now threatening the Western world with an atom bomb. 
If the sane world fears the regime in Iran, an accusing 
finger should only be pointed in Jimmy Carter's 
direction.... Bush ... is endangering the Middle East, 
which is sitting on a powder keg in any case.  The 
criteria of Western morals are not applicable in the 
Islamic countries.... Mubarak is the lesser of the 
evils, and his son, who is being proposed as his 
successor, keeps an open line with Washington.  The 
present situation is preferable to real democratic 
elections that will end in the bullet of a gun or the 
bomb belt of a suicide bomber.  America should already 
know from Iraq that insanity in the Middle East greatly 
outweighs the sanity, especially now that Russia seeks 
to return to the region." 
 
KURTZER