05TELAVIV1870
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 001870 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Israel-Chad Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media continued to report on the upcoming Knesset 
votes on the issues of a popular referendum, which is 
not likely to be adopted even if Shas party mentor 
Rabbi Ovadia Yosef endorses the idea of a referendum, 
and the state budget.  The latter vote was practically 
decided in an agreement reached between PM Sharon and 
Shinui party leader MK Yosef (Tommy) Lapid on Saturday, 
according to which Lapid guaranteed his party's support 
for the budget in exchange for 700 million additional 
shekels, notably for higher education. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Sharon as saying at Sunday's cabinet 
meeting: "We can't expect to receive explicit American 
agreement to build freely in the settlements.  Sharon 
reportedly said that large settlement blocs in the West 
Bank "will remain in Israel's hands and will fall 
within the [separation] fence, and we made this 
position clear to the Americans.  This is our position, 
even if they express reservations."  Sharon allegedly 
said that the U.S. administration make a distinction 
between his position on the matter and the issues of 
continued construction in the settlements at the 
present phase.  Sharon further said that the publicity 
about the plan to connect Ma'aleh Adumim to Jerusalem 
put the U.S. in a very difficult spot.  Sharon was 
quoted as saying in an interview with Ha'aretz printed 
Sunday that the agreement with the U.S. on the 
settlements bloc remains firm.  Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice was quoted as reiterating in an 
interview with Israel Radio on Saturday President 
Bush's promises to Sharon and as saying that the 
President "strongly supports" the Prime Minister's 
disengagement plan.  In the interview, Rice went 
further than the vague wording of Bush's letter and 
made it clear that the term "Israeli population 
centers" refers directly to the "large settlement 
blocs." 
 
Israel Radio quoted GOI sources as saying that far- 
right activists could try to disrupt Sharon's upcoming 
trip to the U.S. through actions in Israel. 
 
Jerusalem Post quoted Sharon as saying at the cabinet 
meeting Sunday that the leak of Ambassador Daniel 
Kurtzer's recent comment to Foreign Ministry cadets was 
nothing less than an attempt to bring down the Israeli 
government.  On Sunday, Maariv cited similar remarks 
Sharon made in an interview with the newspaper. 
Leading media quoted Sharon as saying that the report 
was an attempt to harm him.  Jerusalem Post quoted 
Sharon as saying at the cabinet meeting: "It saddens me 
that, because of internal intrigue, diplomatic 
relations are damaged."  Israel Radio reported that FM 
Silvan Shalom has asked for an investigation into the 
identity of the person who leaked to Yediot information 
from Ambassador's Kurtzer's meeting with Foreign 
Ministry cadets.  The radio reported that on Sunday, 
A/G Menachem Mazuz ruled out a criminal investigation, 
and quoted Civil Service Commissioner Shmuel Hollander 
as saying that as long as the Foreign Ministry has not 
lodged an official claim in the matter, there will be 
no disciplinary investigation either. 
 
Israel Radio reported that last night there were 
exchanges of fire between the IDF and Islamic Jihad 
militants in Jenin, eight of whom were arrested.  The 
station says that the group tried to manufacture high- 
trajectory missiles.  Leading media reported that 
Israel suspects the members of the PA's military 
intelligence service were involved in smuggling 
shoulder-launched Strela antiaircraft missiles into the 
Gaza Strip. 
 
During the weekend, all media reported that on Friday, 
around 100 residents of the West Bank settlement of 
Yitzhar who celebrated Purim attacked Palestinians and 
IDF soldiers. 
 
On Sunday, Maariv cited the IDF's concern that less 
than a week after Israel handed over security 
responsibility of Tulkarm to the PA, it has become a 
"city of refuge" for terrorists. 
 
Maariv reported that Israel Military Industries (IMI) 
and Israel Aircraft Industries (IAI) signed an 
agreement Sunday to jointly develop and market precise 
artillery rockets with a 150-km range. 
 
On Sunday, Maariv reported that a judge at the Tel Aviv 
District Court ordered the operators of the Dimona 
nuclear reactor to divulge classified information about 
radiation levels from the reactor. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Dankner wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "Whoever tripped up ... Yediot 
Aharonot with this report had ... clear intentions: to 
create a tremendous uproar in which Sharon would be 
accused of having persuaded members of his party to 
support disengagement on the basis of American 
commitments that actually do not exist." 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"President Bush should do more than hint that it 
'seems' that Palestinians have no right to move to 
Israel; the sooner the U.S. starts saying so clearly 
and unabashedly, the sooner Palestinians will start 
abandoning such unacceptable positions themselves." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Once again, Sharon 
came out on top, and paid neither a domestic nor an 
international price for his critical decisions to 
strengthen the 'blocs.'" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Alexander Maistrovoy wrote in 
popular, pluralist Russian-language Novosty Nedely: 
"The 'tahdi'a's' durability seems to be dubious.... 
Should Israel decline the Palestinians' demands, Hamas 
would definitely return to the track of war with ... or 
without Abu-Mazen as a formal leader." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Pure Fabrication" 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Dankner wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (March 27): "Never before has anything 
like this happened: On the eve of one of the most 
fateful political weeks in Israel's history, a large- 
circulation newspaper threw out a main headline that 
made a huge noise, but which principally was all just a 
pure fabrication.  Whoever tripped up Shimon Shiffer 
and Yediot Aharonot with this report had, by all 
indications, clear intentions: to create a tremendous 
uproar in which Sharon would be accused of having 
persuaded members of his party to support disengagement 
on the basis of American commitments that actually do 
not exist.  Fact: U.S. Ambassador Kurtzer claims that 
there are no understandings between Israel and the U.S. 
on the matter of settlement blocs.  Some of the top 
Likud officials who were persuaded, already have 
announced in the wake of this false report that they 
are reconsidering their support.  The person who leaked 
the information achieved his goal.  But what is the 
truth?  The truth is that in the transcript of the 
statements made by Ambassador Kurtzer, the very same 
transcript Yediot Aharonot flaunts and says 'we have 
the full version,' shows that Ambassador Kurtzer made 
no reference to that matter.  Plain and simple.  No 
settlement blocs, no understandings or 
misunderstandings about them, no commitments or the 
lack thereof.... This quote ... created an enormous 
political tempest over nothing.... Is it conceivable 
that because of an incorrect report that is dealt with 
irresponsibly, a stick will be stuck in the spokes of 
the disengagement plan?.... The uproar ... was over 
nothing.  We can move on." 
 
II.  "The Kurtzer Flap" 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(March 28): "There is no reason to believe that [U.S. 
Ambassador to Israel Daniel] Kurtzer, a careful 
diplomat, contradicted existing presidential 
understandings.  Since the Yediot [Aharonot] report, 
both Kurtzer and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice 
have strongly reaffirmed Bush's April 14 letter.  Yet 
confusion remains, and it arises from the Bush letter 
itself.... What is striking about both of these 
statements is that the U.S. was careful not to take a 
firm position on what it emphasizes are final-status 
issues.  In other words, the U.S. is saying to Israel 
and the Palestinians, it is up to you to negotiate on 
borders and refugees, but if anyone asks us, we will 
probably back Israel on not returning completely to the 
1967 lines and on not settling Palestinians in 
Israel.... If Israel cannot show a tangible diplomatic 
reward for disengagement, then disengagement can only 
be perceived as a reward for four years of terrorist 
attacks.  Is it in the American interest, let alone 
Israel's, to fuel such a perception, much less such a 
reality?.... Israel, obviously, could not go to a final- 
status negotiating table denying the Palestinians right 
to a state.  Yet the Palestinians are openly doing just 
that to Israel when they claim a 'right' to move to 
Jaffa, Acre and elsewhere in Israel.  President Bush 
should do more than hint that it 'seems' that 
Palestinians have no right to move to Israel; the 
sooner the U.S. starts saying so clearly and 
unabashedly, the sooner Palestinians will start 
abandoning such unacceptable positions themselves." 
 
III.  "Sharon, Bush and the Settlements" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (March 27): "Sharon 
is in a bind.  He needs to show he is holding onto the 
settlement blocs to avoid further desertions to the 
Likud rebel camp.  Yet on the foreign policy front, he 
has had to keep a low profile on construction.  But 
according to statements by U.S. Ambassador Dan Kurtzer 
to the mass-circulation Hebrew daily Yediot Aharonot, 
there is no understanding between the U.S. and Israel 
concerning the settlement blocs.  Both left and right 
rejoiced at the report -- here was the proof that 
Sharon had lied and had received nothing from Bush in 
return for the disengagement.  Kurtzer subsequently 
denied the report, reiterated the president's promise 
regarding the settlement blocs, and praised Sharon's 
credibility.  Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice also 
backtracked on her harsh criticism of the E-1 plan, and 
in a Washington Post interview returned to ambiguous 
requests for clarifications.  Once again, Sharon came 
out on top, and paid neither a domestic nor an 
international price for his critical decisions to 
strengthen the 'blocs.'" 
 
IV.  "The Price of a Cease-Fire" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Alexander Maistrovoy wrote in 
popular, pluralist Russian-language Novosty Nedely 
(March 24): A conditional Tahdi'a -- a cease-fire 
limited in time ... declared by PA President Abu Mazen. 
One can only guess what will be follow it....  IDF 
Chief of Staff Moshe Ya'alon is not hiding his 
suspicions about Hamas using the 'tahdi'a' for 
regrouping and strengthening its forces before a new 
twist in the conflict.... The 'tahdi'a's' durability 
seems to be dubious.  The terror will most probably 
stop in the short term -- the period of disengagement 
from Gaza and [withdrawal] from northern Samaria [the 
northern West Bank], making Ariel Sharon's task much 
easier.  The question is for how long the current cease- 
fire would make Israel's life easier....  Obviously, 
the pressure on Israel for a final resolution [of the 
conflict] would grow significantly after the 
disengagement is completed.   Should Israel decline the 
Palestinians' demands, Hamas would definitely return to 
the track of war with ... or without Abu Mazen as a 
formal leader." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  Israel-Chad Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "It's 
important to renew relations with Chad.... Chad's 
action might have a ripple effect." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Chad As a Parable" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (March 
27): "Chad -- a majority of whose territory is desert 
and about half of whose population of 9 million is 
Muslim -- does not in and of itself constitute a 
particularly important objective for Israeli foreign 
policy.  Nevertheless, it's important to renew 
relations with Chad.  If it goes through, Chad will 
join Mauritania as a nation in the Sahara region that 
maintains good diplomatic relations with Israel. 
Chad's action might have a ripple effect.  First of 
all, its intention shows that its neighbor Libya -- 
which has tremendous influence over it (President Deby 
came to power in 1991 with the support of Muammar 
Qadhafi) -- is not opposed to ties with Israel.  Until 
now, the Foreign Ministry and the Mossad have been 
greatly frustrated that recent positive signals from 
Qadhafi have not resulted in concrete political action. 
Relations with Chad could send a message to other 
African countries, particularly those in the Maghreb, 
to follow in Chad's footsteps. Important countries 
outside Africa, too, might display interest in renewing 
ties: the Foreign Ministry has been making a great 
effort in recent months to persuade Muslim countries 
such as Pakistan, Afghanistan, Indonesia and Malaysia 
to establish diplomatic relations." 
 
KURTZER