05TELAVIV6386
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEL AVIV 006386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  France Riots 
 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media led with political developments at the 
Knesset on Monday.  They reported that eight Likud 
"rebels" voted with the opposition to defeat by 61-54 
the appointment of Vice PM Ehud Olmert and two other 
Likud Knesset members to permanent ministerial posts. 
However, in a later vote, the Knesset approved, 71-41, 
the separate appointments of Olmert as finance minister 
and Matan Vilnai (Labor Party) as science and 
technology minister, two of the empty posts.  PM Sharon 
vowed to take revenge against the eight Likud MKs. 
Yediot (Shimon Shiffer) quoted Sharon associates as 
saying that Sharon is more convinced than ever that the 
Knesset elections should be held earlier than the 
scheduled date of November 2006. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that EU ministers who are 
meeting in Brussels called on Israel Monday to 
"facilitate the preparations and conduct" of the 
upcoming PA elections.  An EU statement issued after 
the meeting "underlined the importance of the 
forthcoming elections for the Palestinian Legislative 
Council as an essential element for progress."  The 
Jerusalem Post and Israel Radio said that the 
Palestinians want the Europeans to serve as advisers at 
the crossing, while Israel wants the foreigners to be 
in charge, with the authority to carry out arrests or 
confiscate luggage if necessary.  Leading media 
reported that Israeli and Palestinian officials met 
with Quartet Special Envoy James Wolfensohn on Monday 
to hammer out the arrangement at the Rafah border 
crossing between Egypt and the Gaza Strip.  Israel 
Radio reported that Wolfensohn and Defense Minister 
Shaul Mofaz met in Tel Aviv today to sum up the 
understandings reached by Israeli and Palestinian 
negotiators about the Karni and Erez crossings.  The 
radio said that Israel's insistence on receiving closed- 
circuit television pictures from the Rafah crossing in 
real time remains an obstacle to reaching an agreement. 
The radio reported that PA Civilian Affairs Minister 
Muhammad Dahlan strenuously opposed this demand. 
Israel Radio reported that Wolfensohn is drafting a 
bridging document on the crossings issue, which he will 
ask the parties to sign. 
 
Leading media quoted Sharon as saying Monday before the 
Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee that 
Israel would restrict the movement of Hamas officials 
during voting in the January 25 elections to the 
Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC), in which the 
organization is participating for the first time. 
Sharon was quoted as saying that if Hamas participated 
in those elections, Israel would not hold meetings with 
PA officials, and would make it difficult for Hamas 
members to campaign freely.  Sharon also said that if 
Hamas was allowed to participate in the elections, 
there would be no easing of military restrictions in 
the territories in the run-up to the vote.  He was also 
quoted as saying: "Nevertheless, Israel has no 
intention of disrupting elections in the PA.  But we 
will do whatever is possible to impose difficulties on 
the movement of Hamas members on election day."  The 
Jerusalem Post reported that PA Chairman [President] 
Mahmoud Abbas dismissed Sharon's threat to hinder the 
movement of Hamas officials during voting in the PLC 
elections as a "flagrant intervention" in the internal 
affairs of the Palestinians. 
 
Yediot reported that U.S. Defense Secretary Donald 
Rumsfeld told Mofaz on Friday in Washington that Syrian 
President Bashar Assad is the devil and that the U.S. 
will punish him over his support for the terrorists in 
Iraq.  Leading media quoted Sharon as saying on Monday 
before the Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense 
Committee that Assad's condition is not important and 
that he does not intend to negotiate with Syria, even 
if the Syrians are interested in talks with Israel. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the USDA will assist 
Israel's poor, as part of its programs around the 
world. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Sharon and Internal 
Security Minister Gideon Ezra met on Monday with Dmitry 
Kozak, head of counterterrorism in Chechnya and the 
Kremlin's envoy to southern Russia, for talks on the 
effectiveness of the security fence and Israel's 
overall success in fighting Palestinian terror.  The 
newspaper says that the Russian government is mulling 
the construction of a security barrier along the border 
of Chechnya similar to Israel's security fence as part 
of its efforts to combat violence there. 
 
Ha'aretz printed a Reuters story, according to which FM 
Silvan Shalom will lead Israel's delegation to the 
World Summit on the Information Society that will take 
place in Tunisia next week. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Indonesian FM Noer Hassan 
Wirajuda has sent a message thanking FM Shalom for 
expressing support for Indonesia after the October 
terrorist attack on the island of Bali.  Ha'aretz 
writes that the message, which was conveyed by Israel's 
ambassador in Singapore a week ago, said that Wirajuda 
appreciated the letter Shalom sent him and that 
Indonesia was determined to step up the struggle 
against terrorism. 
 
Yediot reported that the UN has asked Israel to 
dispatch an army unit to peacekeeping missions around 
the world.  The newspaper also reported that the UN is 
requesting a medical unit from Israel, and that it is 
interested in purchasing advanced medical equipment 
from Israel -- including communications and night- 
vision equipment.  Yediot reported that Foreign 
Ministry DG Ron Prosor has instructed his ministry's 
staff to promote cooperation with the UN. 
 
This morning, Israel Radio reported that Israeli 
security forces arrested 20 Palestinian militants from 
Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and Fatah in the West Bank 
overnight. 
 
Yediot reported that the Shin Bet has been detaining a 
19-year-old settler from Elon More in the West Bank for 
a week on suspicion that he vandalized hundreds of 
olive trees belonging to the neighboring village of 
Salem. 
 
Leading media reported on the Mideast peace initiative 
announced by Iran's FM Manuchehr Motaki on Monday.  The 
Jerusalem Post reported that following Iranian 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's statements that Israel 
must be wiped off the map, Turkey's key policy paper 
from the recent meeting of its National Security 
Council singled out Iran as a potential source of 
instability, risk, and uncertainty in the region. 
Maariv and other media reported that several Jews who 
had emigrated from Iran and were disappointed by life 
in Israel have returned to their native country. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Monday, FM Shalom welcomed 
the announcement by the Swiss government that it would 
convene an international conference of the Red Cross 
next month to invite the Israeli group Magen David Adom 
to join the organization.  Shalom reportedly called the 
move "the righting of a historic injustice and 
recognition of the important function of Magen David 
Adom," adding that Israel would try to make the work of 
the Palestinian Red Crescent easier in the West Bank. 
Swiss FM Micheline Calmy-Rey announced the move on her 
visit to Israel about a week ago. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a delegation from the 
Palestinian Businessmen's Association in Gaza met 
separately with members of the Israel Manufacturers 
Association and the Israel Chamber of Commerce on 
Monday in an effort to initiate cooperation between the 
Israeli and Palestinian sectors.  The newspaper says 
that the Peres Center for Peace initiated the meeting, 
which was the first such event since the start of the 
Intifada. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Georgia Governor Sonny 
Perdue and a delegation of 39 U.S. business leaders 
came to Israel this week on a mission to strengthen and 
explore new areas for trade relations and economic 
cooperation with Israel. 
 
Israel Radio reported that India will purchase 50 
Israel Aircraft Industries-manufactured drones, at a 
cost of USD 220 million. 
 
Yediot and Israel Radio cited a story on Italy's 
national television network RAI, according to which the 
U.S. made use of phosphor bombs during the siege of 
Fallujah, causing the deaths of dozens of innocent 
civilians. 
Two public opinion polls predict Shimon Peres's victory 
over Histadrut Labor Federation Secretary-General MK 
Amir Peretz in Wednesday's primaries for Labor Party 
chairmanship.  According to the Yediot poll, Peres 
beats Peretz, 49-38 percent, and Binyamin Ben-Eliezer 
would garner 9 percent, with 4 percent of undecided; 
the results of the Maariv survey project a 49-39 
percent victory for Peres, with Ben-Eliezer clinching 
10 percent of the votes. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post excerpted 
a White House transcript of a speech delivered by U.S. 
National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley via satellite 
on October 31 to the AIPAC National Summit in Los 
Angeles: "[President Bush] has pledged to Prime 
Minister Sharon that he will never ask Israel to take 
risks with its security to suit U.S. purposes or to 
suit U.S. politics -- and he never will.  But if we 
succeed in our broader objectives in the war on terror 
and in Iraq, Israel will be more secure as a result." 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global 
Research in International Affairs Center, columnist 
Barry Rubin, wrote in The Jerusalem Post: "Ahmadinejad 
and Assad may get away with what they are doing.... But 
at least now it seems less likely they can do so than 
in the past." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Israel and the War against Terrorism" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post excerpted 
a White House transcript of a speech delivered by U.S. 
National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley via satellite 
on October 31 to the AIPAC National Summit in Los 
Angeles (November 8): "The spread of democracy will 
make the Middle East a safer neighborhood for Israel. 
An American retreat from Iraq, on the other hand, would 
only strengthen the terrorists who seek the enslavement 
of Iraq and the eventual destruction of Israel.  It is 
the spread of freedom, democracy, and justice that is 
the antidote to Islamic extremism. Experience shows 
that it is not poverty, but rather alienation, that 
most encourages terrorism.... Only when Palestinians 
are able freely to express themselves through ballots 
rather than bombs will we be able to get on the road to 
security for Israel.... A prosperous, democratic 
Palestinian society would provide the political basis 
and the needed resources for the Palestinian Authority 
to fight the terrorists within Palestinian territory 
before they can threaten Israeli citizens.  Israel will 
benefit in the long run by enacting the steps that 
Quartet Special Envoy Jim Wolfensohn has identified as 
most critical for the Palestinian economy.... As you 
know, President Bush is a dedicated friend of Israel. 
He has pledged to Prime Minister Sharon that he will 
never ask Israel to take risks with its security to 
suit U.S. purposes or to suit U.S. politics -- and he 
never will.  But if we succeed in our broader 
objectives in the war on terror and in Iraq, Israel 
will be more secure as a result." 
 
II.  "Propaganda and Caution" 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global 
Research in International Affairs Center, columnist 
Barry Rubin, wrote in The Jerusalem Post (November 8): 
"If I had to single out one critical factor about 
Middle East leaders it is their choice between two 
basic courses of action.  The first approach, common in 
the rest of the world but rarely seen in this region, 
is adjusting strategy, policy and goals to conditions. 
The alternative is ignoring or distorting the actual 
situation -- or substituting a public relations 
campaign for a substantive response -- giving top 
priority to preserving the existing system.  What 
distinguishes these two paths is clearly not the 
difference between a pragmatic and irrational policy. 
For if a regime can survive by fighting or by ignoring 
the reality of the challenges it faces, that behavior 
is a practical strategy.... Those most imperiled are 
the inexperienced leaders of Iran and Syria, 
intoxicated by ideas.... Here, of course, one must show 
respect for the validity of the 'irrational' policy 
path of Middle East dictators.  Ahmadinejad and Assad 
may get away with what they are doing, just as Arafat 
and Assad's father did and as Saddam Hussein almost 
did. But at least now it seems less likely they can do 
so than in the past." 
 
----------------- 
¶2.  France Riots: 
----------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "True, the current riots in France may 
be about rootlessness and alienation of minority youth, 
but they are not only about rootlessness and 
alienation.  Radical Islam is part of the mix as well, 
and the French will ignore that at their own peril." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"The Paris Intifada" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized (November 8): "The French would be wise 
to pay attention to the fact that these flames of 
alienation are being fanned and leveraged for their own 
use by Islamic radicals who -- as the homegrown London 
bombers proved in July -- are thriving on the streets 
of Europe.  Parallels can be found with our reality. 
At one time the Arab-Israeli conflict looked 
predominantly like a territorial one.  Indeed, this 
thinking underpinned UN Security Council Resolution 
242, which created the territories-for-peace rubric. 
What was ignored was the religious and ideological 
component of the conflict.... France -- yes, 
ironically, France -- has now awakened to find itself 
facing a similar dilemma.  The instinctive reaction in 
France to the rioting has been twofold: a pledge to 
restore security and to address the 'causes' of the 
rioting: the deprivation, discrimination, alienation, 
and rootlessness of the rampaging, largely Muslim, 
youth.  One cannot argue with either of these two 
points.  But French policy makers would be unwise to 
overlook the religious, ideological dimensions of the 
battle, and the way Islamic radicals preaching from the 
mosques and spewing out hatred via the Internet are 
able to prey on this disaffection and import a toxic 
ideology into France and the heart of Europe.  True, 
the current riots in France may be about rootlessness 
and alienation of minority youth, but they are not only 
about rootlessness and alienation.  Radical Islam is 
part of the mix as well, and the French will ignore 
that at their own peril." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Isi Leibler, Chair of the Diaspora-Israel relations 
committee of the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, 
and a veteran Jewish international leader, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "Anti-Jewish 
rhetoric is now rapidly penetrating the [U.S.] 
political mainstream." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Storm Clouds Ahead" 
 
Isi Leibler, Chair of the Diaspora-Israel relations 
committee of the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, 
and a veteran Jewish international leader, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (November 8): 
On the surface, the relationship between the United 
States and Israel has never been better.... Yet having 
met with a cross section of American Jewish leaders 
during a recent visit to New York, I fear that there 
are grounds for serious concern.  The deterioration on 
the campus continues and the demonization of Israel, 
frequently accompanied by anti-Semitism, now transcends 
all other campus political issues.... It should also be 
noted that anti-Jewish rhetoric is now rapidly 
penetrating the political mainstream.... Today, we 
[Israel] appear to be in the process of becoming 
transformed into a U.S. satellite.... Prime Minister 
Sharon had originally promoted disengagement to 
Israelis largely on the basis that as a quid pro quo 
Bush would support Israel's retention of the major 
settlement blocs.  But now he has apparently 
capitulated to all American demands and aborted all 
building activity, including the construction of the 
road link from Ma'aleh Adumim to the capital.  This 
suggests that Sharon is becoming totally subservient to 
the administration." 
 
JONES