06AMMAN7984
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR GAO IRAQ REVIEW VISIT TO
Fri Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAM #7984/01 2930937
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 200937Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY AMMAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5039
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 3952UNCLAS AMMAN 007984 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AGAO OTRA IZ JO
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR GAO IRAQ REVIEW VISIT TO 
AMMAN (JOB CODE 320383) 
 
REF: STATE 168128 
 
¶1.  (U) Embassy Amman welcomes the visit of GAO staff members 
Joseph Christoff, Stephen Lord, Kathleen Monahan, and Amy 
Sheller to Amman, Jordan 
from October 22 until October 25 (for the purpose of transit 
and annual leave en route to an assignment in Baghdad) and 
from November 5 until November 
9 for the purpose of conducting follow-up review of energy 
sector reconstruction in Iraq, as requested reftel. Country 
clearance is also granted to GAO team member Joseph Christoff 
from November 1 until November 3, for transit from Baghdad to 
the United States.  All visitors should carefully review this 
message, especially the threat assessment at para 8. 
 
¶2.  (U) Control officer for this visit will be Richard 
McCrensky, office 
962-6-590-6225; mobile 962-79-582-0115; fax 962-6-592-7653, 
or email at McCrenskyRM3@state.gov.  The Embassy's 
after-hours telephone number is 962-6-560-6500.  Embassy will 
provide expeditor services and transportation to and from the 
hotel as required. 
 
¶3.  (U) Hotel reservations have been made for the GAO team at 
the Four Seasons hotel for the nights of October 22 through 
October 24, and also for Christoff on the nights of November 
1 and 2.  Reservations for Lord, Monahan, and Sheller have 
been made at the Dead Sea Marriot hotel for the nights of 
November 5-7, and for the nights of November 8-10 at the Four 
Seasons.  Phone number for the Four Seasons hotel is 
962-6-550-5555, fax number is 962-6-550-5556.  Phone Number 
for the Dead Sea Marriot is 962-5-356-0400, fax is 
962-5-356-0444. Cost is a rate within per diem.  Due to 
security concerns in Jordan (para 8) TDY personnel are 
assigned on a rotational basis.  Therefore Embassy Amman will 
make the final decision on hotel accommodations for all 
visitors. 
 
¶4.  (U) Valid visas are required for entry into Jordan. Visas 
may be obtained at Queen Alia airport; however, Embassy 
suggests visitors obtain their visas prior to arrival, as 
there can be long queues for visa issuance at 
the airport. Money can be exchanged at Queen Alia airport. 
 
¶5.  (U) Administrative guidelines: 
 
Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must have 
fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit.  Each 
agency, organization, or visiting delegation will be 
charged for the actual costs attributed to the visit. 
Direct charge costs include, but are not limited to, 
American and LES overtime (for such services as airport 
expediting, cashier accommodation exchange, control room 
staffing, representational event support), travel and per 
diem costs incurred by post personnel in support of 
visitor's field travel, rental of vehicles and other 
equipment, long distance telephone calls, office supplies, 
gasoline and other vehicle maintenance costs, departure 
tax, and other airport fees. 
 
¶6.  (U) Health: 
 
Although Jordan does not pose any other particular health 
hazards for visitors, the quality of health care facilities 
is not up to U.S. or European standards, particularly 
outside of Amman.  As medications on the local economy are 
often in short supply, visitors should bring sufficient 
medications to post for their chronic medical problems. 
Immunizations should be current for Tetanus and Diphtheria, 
Hepatitis A and B.  Visitors should drink bottled water 
rather than tap water.  Food in the hotels and most 
restaurants is safe to eat, but some of the smaller local 
restaurants do not always observe proper food handling 
procedures. 
 
Only those personnel covered under the State Department's 
medical program and who have a valid medical clearance for 
Jordan are eligible for a medical evacuation at USG cost. 
All other visitors are advised to have their own medical 
evacuation insurance to cover evacuation by air ambulance. 
Otherwise it will be necessary to ensure that the 
respective agency will cover any costs related to a medical 
evacuation.  All local hospitals take major credit cards. 
 
¶7.  (U) Security clearance and building access: 
 
In compliance with State Department regulations and Embassy 
policies, visitors requesting unescorted access to the 
Embassy compound should inform RSO Amman of their security 
clearance level (if any) and should name the agency that 
granted that clearance.  Telegrams containing this 
information should include the &ASEC8 tag to ensure 
distribution to the RSO. 
 
Electronic devices:  RSO approval must be obtained before 
any electronic device is brought into the Embassy. 
Privately owned laptops and personal computers, peripherals, 
diskettes, and tapes are prohibited in all mission 
facilities.  Cellular/mobile phones and palm pilots are 
prohibited in CAA areas. 
 
Travelers with USG-owned unclassified laptops or notebook 
computers, peripherals, diskettes, and tapes must receive 
RSO/IMO authorization before being granted access to U.S. 
Mission buildings.  USG-owned classified computers must be 
sent to post via classified diplomatic pouch.  Classified 
equipment must bear external USG bar-code inventory numbers 
and classification markings commensurate with the highest 
level of information processed on the system.  Questions 
concerning other types of electronic devices and magnetic 
media may be directed to the RSO and IMO. 
 
Mandatory personal security training:  Per 04 STATE 66580, 
all employees traveling to post for 30 days or more 
(whether PCS or TDY) must have completed the mandatory 
personal security training (State Department Security 
Overseas Seminar or equivalent) before arriving at post. 
Agencies must provide the Chief of Mission with 
certification that this training will be completed prior to 
the employee's travel.  Failure to do so will result in 
denial of country clearance. 
 
¶8.  (U) Threat assessment: 
 
The threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. 
Transnational terrorist groups, as well as less sophisticated 
local elements, have demonstrated the capability to pose 
threats in Jordan.  The Al Qaida in Iraq network (AQIZ) in 
particular continues to focus its terrorist activities 
against U.S. and Government of Jordan (GOJ) targets in 
Jordan.  AQIZ claimed responsibility for the November 9, 2005 
bombings of three international hotels in Amman which killed 
60 people and injured over 100. 
Pedestrian suicide bombers wearing explosive vests carried 
the bombs into the hotels.  AQIZ also claimed responsibility 
for the Aqaba rocket attacks on August 19, 2005, which killed 
a Jordanian soldier and wounded another.  The U.S. Government 
urges Americans to review the need for planned travel to 
Jordan.  Americans in Jordan are urged to increase their 
vigilance when in public areas.  The nature of these attacks 
demonstrates that terrorists may pursue softer targets such 
as public transportation, residential areas, and public areas 
where people congregate including major tourist sites, places 
of worship, restaurants, hotels, clubs, and shopping areas. 
Terrorist will often not distinguish between U.S. government 
personnel or private citizens.  The assassination of American 
diplomat Larry Foley outside his Amman residence on October 
28, 2002, was also attributed to AQIZ leader Abu Musab 
al-Zarqawi, who was killed in Iraq in June 2006. 
 
In addition, there has been a series of serious, confirmed 
terrorist 
threats and disrupted terrorist plots targeting U.S. 
interests in Jordan.  In February 2006, the Government of 
Jordan (GOJ) disrupted a terrorist dell plotting to attack 
Queen Alia International Airport.  In November 2005, the GOJ 
indicted six men for planning to carry out attacks against 
Americans at hotels and bars in Amman and Aqaba.  In 
August-September 2005, four individuals were arrested for 
plotting the assassination of Americans in Jordan.  In July 
2005, GOJ authorities arrested 17 men linked to AQIZ who had 
planned to assassinate GOJ officials and Americans in Jordan. 
 In February 2005, four men were arrested for plotting 
attacks against GOJ officials, tourists, and five-star 
hotels.  In the same month another group was disrupted while 
plotting to attack liquor stores in Amman and foreign 
tourists in Aqaba. 
 
Terrorists often do not distinguish between U.S. government 
personnel and private citizens.  Terrorists may target areas 
frequented by Westerners, such as tourist sites, hotels, 
restaurants, bars, nightclubs, liquor stores, transportation 
hubs, places of worship, expatriate residential areas, and 
schools.  In light of these security concerns, Americans are 
urged to maintain a high level of vigilance, to be aware of 
their surroundings, and to take appropriate steps to increase 
their security awareness.  It is especially important for 
travelers to be unpredictable by varying their times and 
routes and to maintain a low profile.  Moreover, Americans 
are urged to avoid contact with any suspicious or unfamiliar 
objects and to immediately report the presence of such 
objects to the authorities. 
 
Anti-American and anti-Western sentiment exists in Jordan and 
has been sparked on occasion by incidents in the region, 
particularly those related to Israeli/Palestinian issues and, 
to a lesser extent, Iraq.  This may lead to random acts of 
violence against Westerners.  On September 4, 2006, a gunman 
fired on foreigners at a popular tourist site in central 
Amman, killing one and injuring six. 
 
Travelers are advised to avoid any demonstrations or large 
gatherings of people, especially during times of increased 
tension.  Many demonstrations occur near mosques after Friday 
prayers.  Consequently, special sensitivity and caution 
should be exercised at or near mosques and religious sites 
during holy days and the Friday Muslim Sabbath. 
Demonstrations also often take place at universities and 
refugee camps. 
 
Crime is generally not a serious problem for travelers in 
Jordan, but petty crime is prevalent in the downtown Amman 
Hashimiyah Square area and near the Roman amphitheater.  In 
the narrow streets of the older part of the city center, 
crowded conditions invite pickpockets and other petty 
criminals.  Travelers are urged to be more guarded in these 
areas so that they do not present easy opportunities for 
criminals. 
 
In central and west Amman, thieves in motor vehicles have on 
occasion snatched purses from pedestrians.  Several people 
have been injured when they were briefly dragged along the 
road.  When carrying a purse, it would be wise to conceal it 
if possible, to avoid walking near the road within reach of 
passing vehicles, and to walk towards the flow of traffic. 
 
Jordanian police have warned the public to exercise vigilance 
when leaving banks or ATM facilities, as thieves have 
reportedly preyed upon persons soon after using these 
services. 
 
Western women both visiting and residing in Jordan report 
sexual harassment and unwelcome advances of a sexual nature. 
There have been isolated reports of assault.  Women are 
advised to take reasonable precautions including dressing 
conservatively and not traveling alone.  Modest attire should 
be worn in deference to local custom. 
 
¶9.  (U) Travel guidelines: 
 
American citizens and official visitors traveling in Jordan 
should exercise caution, be alert, and stay informed of 
regional and local events that could quickly impact the 
security environment in the country.  It is also recommended 
to 
maintain a low profile and not establish predictable 
patterns of movement, even if only visiting for a short 
period.  Taxis are the only form of public transportation 
that is recommended. 
 
RAMADAN: The month of Ramadan (which began on September 24 
and lasts until approximately October 24) is the holiest 
period in the Muslim year.  During Ramadan most local 
restaurants will be closed daily between dawn and sunset 
except those establishments catering exclusively to tourists. 
Some restaurants may be open for take-out only during 
fasting hours.  All establishments serving alcohol, including 
bars in hotels, will remain closed throughout Ramadan. 
Foreign tourists may be served alcohol in their hotel rooms. 
Eating and smoking in public, especially in the streets and 
in taxis, cars, or buses, are strongly discouraged.  Dressing 
in a manner inconsistent with Islamic norms is strongly 
discouraged.  Conservative dress is recommended.  Official 
working hours for Jordanian government offices and ministries 
are 0900-1400 hours, Sunday through Thursday.  Foreign 
Service National employees of Embassy Amman are on reduced 
six-hour workdays.  Traveling by vehicle between the hours of 
1500 and 1800 can sometimes be problematic due to traffic 
congestion and accidents. 
 
For further information, see the State Department's 
Consular Information Sheet for Jordan at 
http://travel.state.gov/jordan.html and link from that site 
to the most recent Public Announcement on Travel in the 
Middle East and South Asia and the most recent Worldwide 
Caution. 1.  (U) Because of recent terrorist attacks and 
attempted 
terrorist operations in Jordan (see para 9), the U.S. 
Government has urged all Americans to review the need for 
planned travel to Jordan.  In addition, Embassy Amman 
requires U.S. government agencies and travelers to limit 
their official travel to Jordan to that which is essential. 
 
HALE