06ANKARA183
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, December 16-
Wed Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ANKARA 000183 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, December 16- 
31, 2005 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial Embassy translation. 
 
¶2.  Published by the Turkish Daily News on Friday, December 
16, 2005: 
 
     TITLE:  Aksu in Athens for talks on human trafficking, 
     crime 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Greek President Karolos Papoulias 
     yesterday received Turkish Interior Minister Abdulkadir 
     Aksu along with Iranian and Pakistani ministers who 
     were in Athens for a meeting on immigration and human 
     trafficking, the Anatolia news agency said. 
 
     The visiting ministers reportedly briefed Papoulias 
     about the meeting during which ways of fighting illegal 
     immigration, human trafficking, drugs and organized 
     crime were discussed. 
 
     Technical delegations were said to be working on a 
     concluding statement to be signed at the end of the 
     meeting today.  The meeting on immigration and human 
     trafficking was first scheduled between October 10 and 
     11, but was delayed due to the devastating earthquake 
     that hit Pakistan. 
 
     Having wrapped up his bilateral talks with the Greek 
     and visiting ministers, Aksu is expected to depart for 
     Turkey this evening.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published by the Turkish Daily News on Friday, December 
16: 
 
     TITLE:  83 arrested in human trafficking ring 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  European police detained 83 alleged 
     members of a human trafficking ring operating between 
     Iraq and Britain, the European Union's body of 
     prosecutors and magistrates, Eurojust, said yesterday. 
 
     The gang is said to have transported an unknown number 
     of people from Iraq through Turkey, Greece, Italy, 
     France and then across the North Sea to Britain.  In 
     the operation carried out simultaneously on Wednesday, 
     49 people were held in France, followed by 21 in Italy, 
     7 in Britain, 3 in Turkey and 2 in Greece, Eurojust 
     said in a statement.  Eurojust hosted talks in October 
     to coordinate the raids. 
 
     "It is one of the most important, if not the most 
     important operations dismantling clandestine migration 
     networks in France," Paris Prosecutor Jean-Claude Marin 
     told a news conference in the French capital.  The 
     operation followed a three-year investigation, Italian 
     police said.  END TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by Hurriyet on Friday, December 16: 
 
     TITLE:  Transvestite Gang Caught Selling 12-year-old 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  One and a half months ago, M.B. reported 
     to the police in Turgutlu, Manisa that her 12-year-old 
     daughter was missing.  It was determined that C.B. went 
     to Izmir with a girlfriend and was raped by U.A. (19) 
     in Hatay.  It was also determined that C.B. was forced 
     into prostitution by transvestites C.D. (27) and O.D. 
     (21).  Raids were carried out on two houses and U.A., 
     C.D. and O.D. were captured.  O.A., a university 
     student who gave a ride to C.B., was also detained. 
     C.B. was turned over to her family.  U.A. and the two 
     transvestites were arrested for forcefully keeping an 
     underage girl, raping her and forcing her into 
     prostitution.  O.A. was set free by the prosecutor. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by Hurriyet on Friday, December 16: 
 
     TITLE:  20 arrested for having relations with a little 
     girl 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The 12 people arrested on charges of 
     engaging in sexual intercourse with a 15-year-old F.A. 
     were arrested have been joined by an Akyakali poet, 
     O.O., and others, bringing the number arrested to 20. 
     Most of them are fathers and sons.  The first 12 were 
     taken to the Jandarma for their testimony and the judge 
     put them under arrest.  F.A. has a 1.5-year-old baby, 
     fathered by her step-father who raped her two years 
     ago.  F.A. was taken under the protection of the Mugla 
     Orphanage.  END TEXT. 
¶6.  Published by Yeni Safak on Friday, December 16: 
 
     TITLE:  UNICEF:  Poor children are slaves of rich 
     countries 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  According to UNICEF, which states that 50 
     million children in developing countries are "unseen," 
     each year 1.8 million children around the world are 
     used in the sex industry and 5.7 million children are 
     sold as slaves. 
 
     UNICEF noted that more than half of the children in 
     developing countries are not registered after they are 
     born. In its annual report entitled, "Status of World 
     Children in 2006:  Excluded and Unseen," UNICEF 
     concluded that in most of the developing world, more 
     than half of the children are not registered after 
     birth and, thus, governments are not aware of the 
     problems of these children.  Also, trafficking of 
     children cannot be prevented.  According to UNICEF, 
     each year approximately 1.8 million children are 
     kidnapped for various reasons.  In order to prevent 
     maltreatment of children, one has to achieve targets in 
     the fight against extreme poverty. 
 
     UNICEF stated that in all countries and societies 
     children are being affected by exclusion.  The primary 
     reason is poverty, bad handling of public affairs, 
     armed struggle and AIDS/HIV. 
 
     UNICEF noted that there were many factors that 
     contributed to the increase in children being "unseen." 
     It listed these factors as:  there are no official IDs, 
     children who do not have families are not protected 
     enough by the state, exploitation and the expectation 
     of young children to take an adult role. 
 
     Exploited children disappear in an illegal environment 
     without a trace.  They generally end up serving as 
     prostitutes, in pornography, armed conflicts or other 
     illegal activities. 
 
     In the report on the "unseen" children, the following 
     was mentioned:  Children who are not registered at 
     birth are not included in official statistics and not 
     recognized as a member of society.  Children without an 
     ID are sometimes excluded from educational, health and 
     social security services.  They cannot be protected 
     from dangerous conditions since they are not treated as 
     children.  In developing countries, except China, 55 
     percent of all births are unregistered. 
 
     UNICEF reported that millions of children are suffering 
     in front of the eyes of the world, but, paradoxically, 
     away from their sight.  They are ignored and people 
     remain indifferent to their needs.  In the report it 
     was stated that street children are prone to all types 
     of exploitation and maltreatment.  According to 
     estimates, there are more than one million children 
     around the world who are in detention facilities. 
     Their health, education and protection are not 
     guarantee. 
 
     UNICEF President Ann Veneman noted that other than AIDS 
     orphans, the number of children who are forced into 
     marriage at a very early age was high.  She noted that 
     the number of children who end up on the streets and 
     who disappear was very high.  Veneman noted that a lot 
     of children were used in the sex industry and said, 
     "Cheap plane tickets and internet open easy paths for 
     these children to become a sex slave in developed 
     nations."  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  Reported by Tercuman on Saturday, December 24: 
 
     TITLE:  Women forced into prostitution rescued 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Istanbul Security Directorate, 
     Foreigner Division, reported that 12 foreign women had 
     been brought to Istanbul, passports taken and forced 
     into prostitution.  Twelve women were rescued in a raid 
     in the Aksaray district.  One woman was arrested and 
     sent to prison awaiting trial.  In another raid, the 
     team arrested 20 women from Ukraine, Moldova and The 
     Kyrgyz Republic.  Ukrainian S.L. was found to be 
     carrying HIV.  END TEXT. 
 
¶8.  Reported by Anadolu Agency on Sunday, December 25 and 
TurkishPress.com on Monday, December 26: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkish Police Chief Aydiner in China 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkish Police Chief Gokhan Aydiner has 
     arrived in Beijing upon an invitation from the Chinese 
     Public Security Ministry. 
 
     "We have excellent ties with the Chinese public 
     security authorities.  Based on a mutual agreement, a 
     delegation from China visits Turkey one year and a 
     delegation from Turkey visits China the next year," 
     said Aydiner. 
 
     "The distance between us no longer is relevant.  Crimes 
     have become global and not merely local or regional. 
     Turkey needs to cooperate with all countries in the 
     fight against illegal drugs, arms and human 
     trafficking," noted Aydiner. 
 
     Aydiner will return to Turkey on January 1st, 2006. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶9. Reported by Hurriyet in their Sunday supplement on 
Sunday, December 25: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Professors Esin Kuntay and Guliz Erginsoy 
     studied girls who are younger than 18 and who are used 
     as sex workers in Istanbul.  They wrote the book, 
     "Girls Who are Commercial Sex Workers." 
 
     Their research lasted for one year and they visited 
     police stations, bars and discos in the Beyoglu 
     district of Istanbul, and the lobby a five-star hotel. 
 
     They predicted that there is around 300-400 such girls 
     and they managed to interview 80 of them. 
 
     Some characteristics of these girls are: 
 
     -- They hate big families and refer to their fathers as 
     "psychopath/alcoholic," and their mothers as "witch." 
     They were emotionally, physically and sexually 
     exploited by their families. 
     -- Most of them were from immigrant families who came 
     to Istanbul from elsewhere. 
     -- Limited means, lack of interest and education levels 
     dragged these girls to the streets.  Another trigger 
     was whether their fathers were drug addicts or 
     alcoholics.  Their fathers were generally fishermen, 
     cab drivers, butchers, marble masters and they beat 
     their wives. 
     -- Once a girl leaves home, she lives on the streets 
     where they are found by either young or older people 
     working in the prostitution sector.  They are taken 
     under their protection. 
     -- One girl said, "I wanted to be free.  So I fled from 
     home, but there is no freedom in the streets either. 
     On the contrary, you are a slave.  You may not want to 
     work at least one day a week, but cannot do so.  You 
     need to eat and pay the hotel bill.  So you have to go 
     back to the disco.  You cannot drink a cup of coffee 
     without paying the price. You are a slave.  I want to 
     fight and get rid of this situation, but I wonder what 
     my chances are?" 
     -- Most of the interviewed girls were 17 years old. 
     One-fifth of them have been working as prostitutes for 
     five years and two-fifths for one year. 
     -- They look like ordinary girls. 
     -- They say that they feel as though they are 60 or 70 
     years old.  They enjoy shopping and having fast food in 
     their spare time. 
     -- They are ashamed of the job they do, and most of 
     them cut their wrists. 
     -- When they earn enough money, they hope to open a 
     cosmetics shop, get married and have children and buy 
     their mothers a fully automatic washing machine. 
     -- Most of them are primary school graduates or they 
     did not go to school at all.  In the past they were 
     involved in the textile business, worked at a 
     hairdresser or as a salesperson. 
     -- Around 30 percent were subject to beating and other 
     types of exploitation, including emotional, physical 
     and sexual. 
     -- They were raised in religious homes.  Many were sent 
     to mosques and Koran courses. 
     -- They work mostly in the Taksim, Cihangir, Tarlabasi, 
     Galata, Kuledibi, Beyoglu, Dolapdere, Etiler, Moda and 
     Kadikoy districts.  END TEXT. 
 
¶10.  Published by Cumhuriyet on Sunday, December 25: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:   Professors Esin Kuntay and Guliz Erginsoy 
     wrote a book on girls who are younger than 18 and who 
     are used as sex slaves.  The name of the book is "Girls 
     Who are Commercial Sex Workers." 
 
     Kuntay wrote, "These children are victims.  If somebody 
     holds their hands, a great majority can be saved. 
     There are those who began this business when they were 
     10 or 11." 
 
     The book tells about the life stories of these child 
     victims of exploitation. 
 
     The writers were aiming to help these girls and the 
     UNICEF Turkey office, the Interior Ministry and Turkish 
     National Police and the Istanbul Governor's office 
     supported them.  As a result, a "First Step Center" was 
     established.  Some of the girls who once worked as sex 
     slaves are now living in this center. 
 
     Professors Kuntay and Erginsoy said, "As two female 
     sociologists, we have done our best given the 
     conditions, but we do not find this sufficient.  We 
     need important and long-term moral and financial 
     support from the public, the civic society, the youth, 
     academicians, international organizations, foundations 
     and associations." 
 
     The professors spoke to 30 girls aged between 14 and 18 
     who worked as sex workers. 
 
     Highlights include: 
 
     -- The most convenient places for them to work in the 
     city center are:  the European side (Taksim, Cihangir, 
     Tarlabasi, Galata, Kuledibi, Dolapdere and Etiler), and 
     the Asian side (Moda and Kadikoy). 
     -- Some houses, bars, hotels and restaurants in these 
     districts are open 24 hours a day. 
     -- In Aksaray and Laleli, the sex slaves from Romania, 
     Russia, Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia and Moldova dominate 
     the trade. 
     -- Other alternatives are Bakirkoy and Atakoy, along 
     with Istiniye, Bostanci and Maltepe. 
     -- Outside the city center, they operate in districts 
     such as Avcilar, Kanarya, Sefakoy, Cekmece, Belgrade 
     Woods, Kilyos and Polonezkoy.  In these districts, they 
     use houses, cafes, hotels, parks, parking lots and the 
     forest. 
     -- These girls would like to have a decent job and a 
     house. 
     -- Some of them would like to see their families and be 
     a housewife, raising kids. 
     -- Some would like to learn how to use a computer. 
     -- Some wanted to go back to age three or four and live 
     without realizing the things they experienced. 
 
     Sample stories included: 
 
     -- My mother might even kill someone.  She told me that 
     she would break my legs if I ever go out again.  She 
     has not done so yet, but it is hard to tell what she 
     would do if she got really angry.  She keeps throwing 
     things at me. 
     -- My mother beat me.  She pinned me down with a dog 
     leash.  She broke a stick on my back. 
     -- My father did not come home for a year.  Later he 
     asked me to beg.  He hung me from the ceiling and beat 
     me.  I began to beg. He was beating me with a stick. 
     -- He took me to his car and he did not even pay me. 
     He burned me with his cigarette.  I began to scream and 
     he put a sheet in my mouth.  END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  Published by the Turkish Daily News on Tuesday, 
December 27: 
 
     TITLE:  Police chief in China for talks 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Police Director-General Gokhan Aydiner 
     yesterday met with Chinese Public Security Minister 
     Zhou Yongkang as part of his talks in Beijing, reported 
     the Anatolia news agency. 
 
     The talks between the two officials centered on the 
     improvement of cooperation between the police 
     directorates of Turkey and China. 
 
     The Turkish delegation, led by Aydiner, had a meeting 
     later in the day with Chinese officials to seek ways to 
     fight cross-border crimes including terrorism and human 
     trafficking.  The Turkish delegation is set to depart 
     today for Sanya and Shenzen and will return home on 
     January 1 after a visit to Hong Kong.  END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  Published by The Independent on Wednesday, December 28: 
 
     TITLE:  Customers help stamp out Turkey's sex slaves 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  By Meriel Beattie in Ankara 
 
     An unlikely hero has emerged in Turkey to rescue 
     victims of forced prostitution:  the brothel customer. 
 
     While the country's security forces are hardly renowned 
     for their attention to human rights or sympathetic 
     treatment of women, they have been chalking up 
     impressive successes in finding and freeing trafficked 
     women from brothels. 
 
     In the past six months, 100 women - mostly from 
     Ukraine, Moldova, Romania or Russia - have been rescued 
     from sex slavery and Turkish police have broken up 10 
     trafficking networks. 
 
     There are two reasons for these results.  A charge-free 
     hotline was set up in May by the UN's International 
     Organization for Migration (IOM) for women to call for 
     help.  It is staffed by multi-lingual operators who try 
     to pinpoint where the women are - and then send in the 
     police. 
 
     But the second, more unexpected, factor is the chivalry 
     of the Turkish brothel client.  Since the hotline 
     started, 74 per cent of tip-offs have come from men: 
     customers who have learned to spot the difference 
     between a professional prostitute, and someone who has 
     been forced into it. 
 
     "I have been very surprised," said Marielle Lindstrom, 
     head of the IOM in Turkey.  "We have not noticed this 
     anywhere in Europe.  Turkish men seem to have an old- 
     fashioned view of women.  They do not mind using 
     prostitutes, but they want the women to be doing this 
     willingly.  If she is found not to be doing it 
     willingly . it affects their pride." 
 
     Unlike the professional Russian prostitutes, nicknamed 
     "Natashas," who invaded casinos and clubs of holiday 
     resorts in the 1990s, the trafficked women are not 
     migrant sex workers. 
 
     Typically they have been tricked into thinking they are 
     coming to better-paid jobs.  "I was told that someone 
     named Veysel would meet me at the Antalya airport and 
     take me to my new job," one 31-year-old Moldovan woman 
     told her rescuers.  "Instead he took my passport and 
     took me to a village.  They put a gun to my head and 
     threatened me, and then beat me.  They told me if I did 
     not consent, they would kill me.  They kept me locked 
     in the house and brought customers to me." 
 
     The hotline was publicized in two ways:  passport 
     officials at borders and airports slip an information 
     leaflet into the passports of women from high-risk 
     countries; and a Russian language advert has been 
     playing on Turkish television stations. 
 
     "Turkey respects your rights," it says.  "If anyone 
     takes away your passport, your freedom, or forces you 
     to perform work of any kind without pay, call the 
     helpline 157, free of charge. Any time, any phone." 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  Published by Hurriyet and Vatan on Wednesday, December 
28: 
 
     TITLE:  New Year's address "Mother Santa" service 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A raid was carried out on a house which 
     was going to offer "Mother Santa"-costumed women.  The 
     female ringleader, along with five gang members and 11 
     prostitutes, were caught. 
 
     Upon a tip, four plainclothes policemen called a cell 
     phone number of a member of a gang which reportedly was 
     selling women.  When the police found out that women 
     dressed up as "Mother Santa" were being provided to 
     special customers for New Year's, they posed as 
     clients. 
 
     The policemen got in contact with the ringleader, Z.O., 
     gave an important name as a reference, and made a deal. 
     Each woman would cost 250 Euros.  Giving marked bills, 
     the police raided a house in the Gursu District and 
     arrested 11 prostitutes, four of them foreign.  The 
     ringleader, Z.O., and gang members M.C., K.S., K.U., 
     Y.G. and G.C. were arrested.  Six of the suspects were 
     sent to the judiciary.  END TEXT. 
 
¶14.  Published by the Turkish Daily News on Thursday, 
December 29: 
 
     TITLE:  Free hotline service set up to help women 
     proves to be successful 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The practice of a charge-free hotline, 
     which was set up in May by the United Nations' 
     International Organization for Migration (IOM) for 
     women to call for help, has been successful, the 
     Anatolia news agency said yesterday. 
 
     In the past six months, 100 women - mostly from 
     Ukraine, Moldova, Romania and Russia - have been 
     rescued from sex slavery, and Turkish police have 
     broken up 10 trafficking networks. 
 
     Since the hotline started, 74 percent of tip-offs have 
     come from men:  customers who have learned to spot the 
     difference between a professional prostitute and 
     someone who has been forced into it. 
 
     "I have been surprised," Marielle Lindstrom, head of 
     the IOM in Turkey, told the British daily The 
     Independent.  "We have not noticed this anywhere in 
     Europe.  Turkish men seem to have an old-fashioned view 
     of women.  They do not mind using prostitutes, but they 
     want the woman to be doing this willingly.  If she is 
     found not to be doing it willingly . it affects their 
     pride."  END TEXT. 
 
¶15.  Carried by Vatan, Radikal, Aksam, Hurriyet and Milliyet 
on Thursday, December 29: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkish men are UN knights 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Seventy-four percent of the calls into the 
     hotline for women forced into prostitution are from 
     men, which has surprised the foreign press. 
     The United Nations' International Office for Migration 
     (IOM) has reported that seventy-four percent of the 
     calls coming into a free hotline for women forced into 
     prostitution come from men. 
 
     Quoting IOM's Marielle Lindstrom in the British 
     Independent, it was stated that IOM officials were 
     surprised that callers were mostly men trying to help 
     human trafficking victims.  Lindstrom said that nowhere 
     else in Europe had they encountered such a thing. 
 
     The Independent noted that brothel clients were the 
     heroes helping those women who were forced into 
     prostitution in Turkey. 
 
     Lindstrom noted that in the last six months around 100 
     sex slaves, mostly from the Ukraine, Moldova, Romania 
     and Russia were saved.  The Turkish police uprooted ten 
     gangs. 
 
     She noted that Turkish men regarded women in the old- 
     fashioned way.  They reportedly did not mind going to 
     prostitutes as long as they did their job voluntarily. 
     "If they notice that women are doing it involuntarily, 
     then their ego gets hurt," she noted.  END TEXT. 
 
¶16.  Published in the December edition of IOM's Migration 
magazine: 
 
     TITLE:  Elena's Ordeal - The Story of a Trafficked 
     Woman, by Lilia Cojocaru, IOM Chisinau 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  "It was five o'clock in the morning.  They 
     got me drunk and fell asleep.  I went to the balcony 
     and there I saw my chance for escape," recalls Elena, a 
     19-year-old Moldovan girl.  She had risked her life to 
     escape from a high-rise building in Turkey where she 
     had been imprisoned and forced into prostitution. 
     "Between the sixth and fifth floor I lost my grip and 
     fell.  Suddenly, everything around me was like a white 
     light." 
 
     Like many other Moldovan girls, Elena had been driven 
     to leave the country in search of a better life.  "My 
     father died when I was 12 and my mother is retired. 
     Her pension is so small that we could not survive.  I 
     found a job in a neighboring town, but the two dollars 
     I got a day was not enough to earn a living.  One day, 
     a relative who was living in Turkey came up to me and 
     suggested I go to work in Istanbul.  I agreed," she 
     explains. 
 
     She got a job as a shop assistant.  After several 
     months she went home to Moldova to see her mother.  But 
     when she returned, her job had gone and it was not easy 
     finding another one.  As she was not working, when two 
     women she knew invited her one day to join them and 
     their boyfriends on a trip to the Turkish capital 
     resort of Antalya for a few days, she agreed. 
 
     "When we arrived, they said they would go shopping and 
     left me with two men in the apartment.  They took my 
     passport and sold me like a piece of merchandise to 
     some other man," she said, with tears in her eyes at 
     the memory. 
 
     For the next 15 days, Elena was forced to work as a 
     prostitute with three to four clients a day.  Desperate 
     to escape her imprisonment, she decided to climb down 
     from the seventh floor balcony where she was.  She got 
     as far as the window below before literally slipping to 
     freedom.  The escape attempt left her with numerous 
     life-threatening injuries, including a crush spinal 
     cord and pelvis. 
 
     Luckily for Elena, the people who found her took her to 
     a hospital.  She was eventually referred to IOM whose 
     missions in Turkey and Moldova organized for her return 
     to Moldova with a medical escort. 
 
     "Elena was brought to the IOM rehabilitation shelter in 
     Chisinau.  She was in a bad physical and psychological 
     state.  She could not move at all.  At 19 years old, 
     she looked like a child.  She was very thin.  She 
     weighed only 35 kgs but she is 170 cm tall," recalls 
     Viorel Gorceag, medical officer at IOM Chisinau. 
 
     Her case is unfortunately not uncommon.  Victims of 
     trafficking typically suffer a series of abuse - the 
     dismal conditions at home that push them into the hands 
     of traffickers, the abuse by pimps and clients alike, 
     the wounds and accidents they often suffer when trying 
     to free themselves and finally, the stigmatization when 
     they return home. 
     "For me the most heart-wrenching suffering is what they 
     endure when they are ready to risk everything to 
     escape.  I have seen many women with broken limbs and 
     knife wounds after trying to escape their personal 
     hell," says Martin Andreas Wyss, IOM's Chief of Mission 
     to Moldova. 
 
     When Elena arrived at the rehabilitation center, she 
     was depressed and no longer had a desire to live.  The 
     only person she wanted to see was her mother.  But six 
     weeks on at the IOM center, her psychological state, if 
     not her physical state, had improved significantly. 
     Enough for her to regain the will to live. 
 
     It was this fighting spirit that impressed a group of 
     US Congresswomen visiting the IOM center. 
 
     "When our Congressional delegation on sex trafficking 
     saw Elena and heard her story, we were very moved.  We 
     knew . that medical treatment in her home country 
     offered little prospect of improving her physical 
     health, so we decided to help.  I did not know where to 
     start, so I called my good friend, Dr. Pedro Nosnik, 
     who led me to the physicians at the Texas Back 
     Institute," Kay Granger of Fort Worth, Texas said.  "I 
     was haunted by her story." 
 
     Now the Texas Back Institute Research Foundation in the 
     US, which agreed not to charge Elena for treatment, 
     reports incredible results.  Elena can move all her 
     extremities and appears to have full strength and 
     ability in her legs. 
 
     For physical therapy, Elena was moved to a senior 
     citizen care facility near the hospital.  It was the 
     only place where the Foundation could host her but they 
     were worried about her living with older people. 
     However, the residents welcomed her with open arms. 
 
     "I feel so grateful that we have gotten to meet Elena. 
     She is such an amazing person," said Britney Chambers, 
     spokesperson for the Texas Back Institute.  "I cannot 
     imagine going through what she has been through and 
     coming out smiling and positive like Elena.  She feels 
     like she can take on the world now, and I believe she 
     can." 
 
     Congresswoman Granger also sees the change.  "When I 
     first saw Elena in the Moldovan shelter, she was a 
     young lady without much hope.  Today, Elena can walk 
     well with the aid of a cane . and has hope for the 
     future, for living life to its fullest.  Her eyes are 
     alive with excitement, something that was not there a 
     few short months ago," she explains.  END TEXT. 
WILSON