06ANKARA6642
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Dec 12 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2883
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6642/01 3461447
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121447Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0275
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7649
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1785
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1424
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5615
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5338
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1996
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2006 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
EU States Agree to Partially Freeze Turkey Talks 
All papers report the European Union put the brakes on Turkey's 
accession drive after the foreign ministers of the EU decided Monday 
to put 8 of 35 negotiation chapters on hold, in line with the 
November 29 recommendation of the EU Commission, for failing to 
respect its trade obligations to Cyprus.  Discussions on the frozen 
chapters will continue but will not be concluded until Ankara 
complies with its customs union obligations.  Key to the deal was a 
revision proposal from the EU term president Finland under which the 
European Commission would constantly monitor Turkey's progress on 
normalizing trade ties with Cyprus. 
 
Radikal reports that the Finnish EU term presidency released a 
declaration, calling for a Cyprus settlement under the UN umbrella. 
The call was not added to the statement of EU foreign ministers as a 
result of the fierce opposition of Greece and south Cyprus, Radikal 
notes.  At the meeting EU officials merely agreed to discuss ending 
the isolation of Turkish Cyprus in January. 
 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said the decision "sends a 
signal to Turkey that failure to meet legal obligations cannot 
remain without consequences but it enables progress in talks."  The 
EU needs a democratic and stable Turkey, Rehn emphasized, calling 
Turkey "an anchor of stability in the most unstable region of the 
world and a benchmark of democracy in the Middle East and the Muslim 
world." 
 
Milliyet and Cumhuriyet say Ankara was disappointed with yesterday's 
EU decision. 
Turkish officials have been disturbed by the fact that Turkey's 
harbor offer was not discussed at all by EU foreign ministers, 
Cumhuriyet notes.  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul warned that a 
derailing of Turkey's EU drive would harm the interests of EU 
countries.  "I cannot help wonder whether Europe is really aware of 
the consequences of not sustaining the accession process at a time 
when a modern and prosperous Turkey is becoming increasingly 
relevant to the well-being of the European Union and beyond," Gul 
wrote in the International Herald Tribune. 
 
Despite the partial suspension, Sabah and Zaman are optimistic that 
Turkey's EU accession drive continues.  Radikal believes that EU 
officials have shrugged off Ankara's offer for opening Turkish ports 
to Greek Cyprus, whereas the pro-government Yeni Safak writes the EU 
foreign ministers have agreed to end the isolation of Turkish Cyprus 
and rejected proposals for freezing 17 negotiating chapters as well 
as fixing a deadline for Turkey.  Milliyet and Cumhuriyet disagree, 
saying the decision adopted by EU foreign ministers contained dates 
and that 2009 was seen as a "covert timetable" since the European 
Commission has decided to monitor Ankara's progress on opening ports 
to Cyprus in 2007, 2008 and 2009 "as appropriate." 
 
Editorial Commentary on EU's Partial Freeze of Turkey Talks 
Mainstream Milliyet carries this front-page op-ed:  "The Greater 
Europe project has achieved its goals in many ways, including the 
successful creation of a European "super-identity" which paved the 
way to ending the conflicts in the continent.  The circumstances 
calling for European integration in the aftermath of the World War 
II are pretty much still valid only in a different context.  In 
today's world, the conflict potential lays between the West and the 
Islamic world.  There is a bridge needed between the worlds in order 
to soften the conflict.  Thus, the final EU decision on Turkey's 
full membership will shape the nature of the relationship and 
contact between the West and the Islamic worlds.  The EU has to 
decide on whether it will be living in a glass menagerie or will be 
a global player in the 21st century.  When World War II ended, there 
were political leaders with vision, such as Adenauer and de Gaulle. 
The upcoming Brussels summit will be an important test to indicate 
whether the EU has leadership with vision or not." 
 
ANKARA 00006642  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Commenting in the liberal-intellectual Radikal, Gunduz Aktan 
comments:  "The Western Bloc defeated the Soviet system without a 
war. And in the course of that struggle the Communist ideology lost 
its validity (for the time being), making way for democracies. This 
time too the West is preaching the democratization of the Muslim 
countries to win the fight against 'terrorism in the name of Islam.' 
 In this context, from the strategic angle, the Anglo-Saxons greatly 
value Turkey's potential to be a role model. Before he became pope, 
Cardinal Ratzinger said that Turkey was Europe's historical rival 
and that Turkey's place was not in Europe. Before Sarkozy and 
Merkel, many other politicians (such as Delors, D'Estaing and Kohl) 
expressed similar views, clearly articulating the religious/cultural 
differences.  This is due partly to the fact that Turkey has not yet 
completed its modernization process. The West describes the Turkish 
AKP government as 'moderate Islam' but still fears that it could 
slide towards radical Islam. The West knows that the Turkish army 
would effectively defend Turkey's secularism but still it thinks 
that this situation is not democratic. So, the West believes that in 
its present state, Turkey neither constitutes a perfect model for 
other Muslim countries nor seems ready for EU membership.  This 
dilemma could have been avoided if the EU had displayed real 
political will in favor of Turkish membership in order to help 
Turkey achieve socioeconomic development and further 
democratization. Yet, on "petty" pretexts (by citing the Cyprus 
issue, for example), the EU avoids doing so.  However we are aware 
that it is because of 'prejudices' that continental Europe is not 
admitting Turkey into its ranks. In reality, 'prejudice' is a 
euphemism for anti-Semitism or other forms of racism.  The problem 
is that keeping Turkey outside the EU will not help eliminate racism 
in Europe. As history shows, getting bogged down ever more deeply in 
the quicksand of its own prejudices, Europe will, in order to 
justify its stance, make claims to the effect that the Muslims (whom 
it is demonizing as it once did the Jews) are not compatible with 
its high level of civilization, that they are uncivilized, 
undemocratic even a-historical, thus making them its dangerous 
'other.'  This process will simply transform today's manageable 
problem into something catastrophic." 
 
Defense Industry Committee Gathers for Last Word on Helicopter 
Tender 
Yeni Safak reports that the Defense Industry Executive Committee is 
expected to give its final word today on a controversial military 
tender.  The Committee which is made up of Prime Minister Erdogan, 
Chief of General Staff General Buyukanit and Defense Minister Vecdi 
Gonul, is expected to give its final decision on the tactical and 
reconnaissance Attack Helicopter Project (ATAK).  The tender process 
actually commenced 10 years ago to enhance the capability of the 
Land Forces Command in the fight against terrorism, but was 
cancelled two years ago as American firm Bell Textron, which was 
later excluded from the process, declined to give information on 
production technologies, especially on computers reserved for 
specific use.  Today, the committee will either cancel the tender 
for good or will give it to either South African firm Denel or 
Italian firm Agusta. 
 
Timetable for Countering PKK 
Milliyet reports that Turkish and US envoys for countering the PKK, 
retired General Edip Baser and his American counterpart retired 
general Joseph Ralston met in Germany yesterday and agreed on a 
timetable for countering the PKK terrorist organization. Within this 
framework, the US is expected to prepare a special timetable to call 
on PKK militants to surrender, to freeze PKK activities in Iraq and 
other countries, to cut the financial sources of PKK and to capture 
top level PKK terrorists and hand them over to Turkey. 
 
Survey: Izmir Most Transparent in Responding to Inquiries 
Radikal, Milliyet and Zaman report that a TESEV,  Turkey's economic 
and social studies foundation, field survey regarding the 
2004-adopted Law on Citizens' Access to Official Information shows 
 
ANKARA 00006642  003 OF 003 
 
 
that Izmir province leads with 91.7 percent of "full and timely" 
responses to inquiries coming from citizens, with Adana being the 
least reposnsive with 38.9 percent.  Ankara ranks sixth with 52.1 
percent and Istanbul the eight with 43.1.  For the survey, the TESEV 
pollsters looked at education, health, environment, social services, 
and police directorates in the provinces of Istanbul, Ankara, Izmir, 
Malatya, Samsun, Konya, Adana, Sanliurfa, and Van.  The results show 
neither citizens, not public servants have sufficient information 
concerning the law and its enforcement. 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 6.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- In the mainly Kurdish city of Diyarbakir, a military housing 
facility collapsed after an explosion said to have been caused by a 
malfunctioning boiler, killing seven people including four children, 
injuring another eight.  The deputy chief of Turkish General Staff 
(TGS) General Ilker Basbug went to the city.  The Diyarbakir 
prosecutor has launched an investigation into the incident to see 
whether the blast was an accident or act of sabotage. 
 
- Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc paid a courtesy call on General 
Yasar Buyukanit after the Chief of the Turkish General Staff assumed 
post in late August. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan, the Turkish General Staff Chief Buyukanit, 
and Defense Minister Gonul will participate Tuesday in the Defense 
Industry Executive Committee meeting to discuss defense and military 
supply projects. 
 
- Energy Minister Hilmi Guler will travel to Israel on December 13 
to discuss a pipeline project for the transportation of oil, natural 
gas, electricity and water to Israel. 
 
- Thirty-two suspects have been detained in Istanbul in security 
operations against the outlawed DHKP-C terrorist organization. 
 
- Turkey reports a USD 2.5 billion current deficit in October, 
raising the deficit for the first ten months of the year to USD 28 
billion. 
 
International News 
 
- The Turkish Foreign Ministry, followed by the EU, said it will not 
recognize the outcome of a constitutional referendum backing 
independence held in the Armenian-occupied Azerbaijani region of 
Nagorno Karabakh. 
 
- A group of Iranian students protested against Ahmadinejad, 
shouting "Down with the dictator," as the Iranian president 
delivered a speech at a Tehran university. 
- Syria and Iraq have reestablished diplomaticties as the sides 
reopened embassies in each other's capitals after 26 years. 
 
- Some 20 masked gunmen stopped an armored bank vehicle in Baghdad 
yesterday, taking away USD 1 million and abducting four guards in 
the car. 
 
- Leaders of six Gulf Arab states said they will jointly develop 
peaceful nuclear technology, drawing up a plan to that end. 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON