06ANKARA6631
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1810
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6631/01 3451533
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111533Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0262
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7645
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1776
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1419
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5612
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5334
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1993
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006631 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 11, 2006 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Orhan Pamuk Receives Nobel Literature Prize in Stockholm 
All papers report Turkish novelist Orhan Pamuk, the 2006 Nobel 
laureate in literature, received the prestigious prize on Sunday 
from the hands of King Gustaf XVI in a ceremony held in Stockholm. 
The Swedish Academy permanent secretary Horace Engdahl said Pamuk 
made his native Istanbul "indispensable literary territory," just as 
Dostoyevsky did for St. Petersburg, Joyce for Dublin and Proust for 
Paris.  Most headlines say in chorus that it was "a day of pride" 
for Turkey, underlining that Pamuk received the longest standing 
ovation of all recipients.  Several papers note that Pamuk declined 
to participate in a BBC interview featuring the award winners 
because he "did not want to talk politics."  Papers say it's unclear 
when Pamuk is to return to Turkey.  Papers report Pamuk, afraid of 
possible provocations, said he wants no welcoming ceremonies. 
 
Talabani Urges Turkey for Amnesty for the PKK 
A "behind the curtains" column in Turkey's leading daily Hurriyet 
claims Ilnur Cevik, the owner of the English-language daily The New 
Anatolian and businessman, has recently brought some messages from 
the Iraqi President Talabani to Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul. 
Talabani told Turkey, according to Cevik, not to expect the Iraqi 
Kurds to attack the PKK.  "We have persuaded the PKK for a 
ceasefire, but no thanks came from Turkey.  We were surprised," said 
Talabani.  He called on Turkey to declare an amnesty for the PKK. 
Talabani also directed a remark at Turkey, asking whether President 
Sezer had invited Iraq's Prime Minister but not its President 
because of the fact that Iraq's president is a Kurd.  According to 
Hurriyet, Ankara's "unofficial" response had been that "Talabani is 
unaware of the facts.  He can speak so recklessly just because the 
US backs him.  It is up to President Sezer's as to whom to invite." 
Ankara also stresses, "We have taken note of the fact that even when 
severely hostile against Turkey, Syria did not put the PKK leader on 
television.  Murat Karayilan, however, held a TV interview in Iraq." 
 Cevik, a figure close to the Iraqi Kurdish leaders Talabani and 
Barzani, has business investments in northern Iraq worth some USD 
150 million. 
 
Cyprus Proposal Deepens Political Rifts in Ankara 
All papers report that PM Erdogan came under strong pressure at home 
and abroad, following his government's last minute Cyprus proposal 
aimed at averting a crisis with the European Union.  Turkey earlier 
insisted that it will not open its ports to EU member Greek 
Cypriots, despite the Customs Union between Turkey and the EU since 
¶1996.  Ankara said it would only do so if EU would keep its promises 
to end the isolation of Turkish Cypriots.  The Turkish government's 
unexpected proposal on Wednesday created uneasiness among President 
Ahmet Necdet Sezer, the military and the opposition parties.  Chief 
of the Staff General Buyukanit complained to a prominent newspaper 
on Thursday that he had heard about the controversial proposal from 
television.  President Sezer joined the fray on Saturday, saying in 
a statement that he had not been directly or indirectly informed of 
the proposal.  PM Erdogan, in a speech in Afyon on Saturday said he 
was not obliged to inform anyone about such a proposal which he 
noted was verbal, and warned that these objections could destabilize 
financial markets and harm the economy.  The Turkish Foreign 
Ministry, in a written statement on Sunday dismissed statements from 
the General Staff and the Presidency, and said all relevant 
institutions were informed beforehand about the proposal.  The 
Ministry also underlined that traditional close cooperation with 
General Staff will continue. 
 
Meanwhile, Saturday's Sabah reported that PM Erdogan held a 
telephone conversation with President Bush on Friday and, 
reportedly, President Bush renewed support for Turkey's EU bid. 
Saturday's Hurriyet reported that FM Gul spoke to US Secretary of 
State Condoleezza Rice over the phone and Secretary Rice stressed 
that Turkey's Cyprus proposal is a very positive and constructive 
step. 
 
ANKARA 00006631  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq Study Group Report 
Writing in the mass appeal Hurriyet, Ferai Tinc notes that the 
summaries of the ISG report do not accurately reflect the report's 
real recommendations:  "The ISG report needs careful study.  It has 
more to say on Iraq than only sending a message to President Bush. 
The report depicts the current picture of Iraq, which it calls 'very 
bad,' but also sends messages to the Congress, Iraqi neighbors and 
to the international community.  Even though the highlights from 
this report were limited to the US pull out and possible dialogue 
with Syria and Iran, an in-depth reading gives more than this. 
Contrary to the conclusions drawn after a surface reading about a US 
withdrawal, in fact the ISG report advises a gradual growth in the 
American presence in Iraq, including security training, intelligence 
training and programs related to economic aid and development.   The 
report clearly suggests that an immediate withdrawal from Iraq will 
be disastrous for the entire world and asks support from Iraqi 
neighbors to change the already negative picture.  Following the 
release of this report, there have been commentaries about President 
Bush remaining distant to the report.  However, it should be telling 
us something significant that Robert Gates whose name is among the 
architects of the report, has been appointed to be the new Secretary 
of Defense." 
 
Omer Taspinar of the Brookings Institute comments in the 
liberal-intellectual Radikal on the possibilities for US dialogue 
with Iran and Syria:  "The report puts primary advice on Iraq policy 
into three groups, military, diplomatic and political.  It is 
however not clear whether the Bush administration will take the 
advice seriously.  Contrary to the President's rhetoric, everybody 
believes that the White House is searching for an exit strategy in 
Iraq.  President Bush also standsclearly distant to the idea of 
initiating diaogue with Iran and Syria.  'What are we going t 
discuss?' is always coming up as an immediate question at the White 
House whenever this issue is brought up.  Washington is reluctant to 
initiate a dialogue with Damascus and Tehran because of its feeling 
of weakness in Iraq.  The regional dynamics, starting with Iraq and 
Lebanon, are moving against US and Israeli interests.  Given the 
current situation in the region, a dialogue with Iran and Syria will 
only help them to sit at the table in a position of strength.  In 
sum, the Bush administration is at a serious impasse on Iran and 
Syria.  There will be more reports and advice on Iraq and there will 
always be search for a magical formula.  The fact of the matter is 
that Washington has already started considering Iraq a second 
Vietnam." 
 
Turkey Opposes US Bases in Northern Iraq 
Saturday's Cumhuriyet reports Turkey has told the US that the 
establishment of US military bases in northern Iraq was 
"unacceptable," warning the bases would spark serious problems.  The 
US has changed its plans, and the bases will be constructed in other 
parts of Iraq.   The Kurdish groups, afraid of possible Turkish 
interference in northern Iraq, have been uneasy that the change in 
US plans paves the way for an intervention by Turkey.  Sources told 
Cumhuriyet the US could not afford to ignore Turkish sensitivities 
while using Incirlik airbase in southern Turkey. 
 
Banking Watchdog Wary of Greek Interest in Turkish Banks 
Milliyet reports Turkey's banking watchdog BDDK was alarmed by the 
interest shown by Greek investors in Turkish banks.  BDDK had given 
the nod to the USD 2.3 billion sale of Finansbank to Greece's NBG 
only because the amount of money to be injected into Turkey was 
quite high.  The BDDK members are reportedly debating whether a 
restriction should be placed on foreign investments in the Turkish 
banking sector.  Milliyet says that the Greek EFG Eurobank had 
acquired 70 percent share of Tekfenbank for USD 185 million in May. 
In November, Greece's second largest bank Alpha Bank made a USD 
435.5 million deal for a 50 percent stake of Abank.  These sales 
have not yet been approved by the BDDK. 
 
 
ANKARA 00006631  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
TV News: 
(NTV, 7.00 A.M.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- EU foreign ministers will gather to decide whether to partially 
suspend membership negotiations with Turkey. EU General Affairs and 
External Relations Council will discuss EU enlargement, in 
particular, accession talks with Turkey and Croatia. 
 
- The Turkish and US envoys for countering terrorism, Edip Baser and 
Joseph Ralston will meet on Monday in Germany or Belgium. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan phoned Spanish Prime Minister Zapatero and 
Russian President Putin to discuss Turkey's EU entry process. 
 
- The Turkish Parliament will discuss the 2007 budget on Friday. 
 
- Eight people suspected to be trying to join the PKK terrorists in 
the mountains have been captured in security operations in the 
eastern province of Van. 
 
International News 
 
- General Augusto Pinochet, who seized power in 1973 in a military 
coup against the Chilean President Salvador Allende, died at 91 in a 
hospital from complications following a heart attack. 
 
- German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, whose Social 
Democrats support Turkey's EU membership, argued in an interview 
with the weekly Der Spiegel that "if Turkey were to turn away from 
Europe, that would be a serious strategic loss for the EU." 
 
- The Iraqi President Talabani said the US report calling for a new 
approach to the Iraqi war contained dangerous recommendations that 
would undermine his country's sovereignty. 
 
- Israeli Prime Minister Olmert has told his cabinet that the Iraq 
Study Group report released last week should be seen as an internal 
American affair and ignored. 
 
- US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, soon to leave office, 
paid a surprise farewell visit to the US troops in Iraq. 
 
- Palestinian President Abbas has threatened to call early elections 
if deadlocked negotiations with Hamas over the formation of a 
national unity government are not revived. 
 
- The widow of ex-spy Alexander Litvinenko blamed the Russian 
authorities for her husband's poisoning. 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON