06ANKARA5710
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6112
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #5710/01 2750508
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 020508Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9106
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7479
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1386
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1168
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5473
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5193
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1847
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 2006 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Ocalan Calls for PKK Ceasefire 
All papers report imprisoned leader of the PKK, Abdullah Ocalan, on 
Thursday appealed to the PKK to call a ceasefire in its fighting 
with the Turkish security forces.  "I appeal to the PKK to call a 
ceasefire and not use weapons unless attacked," Ocalan said in a 
statement relayed to press by his lawyers, adding such a process was 
"very important to building a democratic union between Turks and 
Kurds."  Ocalan urged Prime Minister Edogan to meet his promises for 
making Turkey a model for the whole Middle East.  He added that the 
EU and the US should support the ceasefire process, warning that the 
situation might go out of control if the opportunity for a truce is 
missed. 
 
Papers comment that the new call by Ocalan might kick off a similar 
process to the five-year period of non-violence that began with a 
call by the same PKK leader in 1999.  Sabah regards the call as the 
last phase of a "secret state plan" to liquidate the PKK, with an 
amnesty to the PKK members not involved in terrorist attacks coming 
next. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan rejected Ocalan's call, urging the terrorists 
instead to abandon their fight against security forces.  "A 
ceasefire is done between states, not with a terrorist 
organization," Erdogan said in an interview late Thursday with 
Samanyolu television. 
 
'Greater Kurdistan' Map Crisis 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others report that on September 15, a map showing "Greater 
Kurdistan" carved out of southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq, Syria 
and Iran was used in a lecture given by US Colonel Peter Faber at 
the NATO Defense College in Rome.  Turkish officers objected to the 
map, and walked out of the room after a brief dispute with Colonel 
Faber.  According to papers, General Peter Pace has apologized to 
Turkish General Staff (TGS) Chief Yasar Buyukanit for the use of the 
map.  Papers report the US Embassy in Ankara said that the map has 
nothing to do with official US policies, but that freedom of 
expression in academies cannot be restricted.  Zaman reports the 
State Department said it did not understand what happened at the 
academy, stressing it was in no way possible that the US 
Administration would accept the map. 
 
France Raises Armenian 'Genocide' Claims Again 
All papers report that France will debate on October 12 once again a 
controversial bill for penalizing those who deny the Armenian 
genocide.  The bill had been shelved last May following reactions 
coming from Turkish and French business groups.  A Turkish 
parliamentary delegation of lawmakers will travel to Paris to 
campaign against the motion. 
 
In other news, Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) Spokesman Namik Tan 
criticized in a written statement in response to a press question 
the removal of Turkish-heritage candidates in the Netherlands from 
party lists for general elections for not accepting the genocide of 
Armenians at the hands of Ottoman forces in the early years of the 
last century. 
 
Patriarch Wants Illegal Armenian Residents Educated in Turkish 
Schools 
Hurriyet reported on its front page that Mesrob II, Patriarch of 
Armenians in Turkey, sent a special letter to PM Erdogan asking him 
to allow the 30,000 or 40,000 Armenians living in Turkey with the 
consent of Turkish authorities to have schooling at Armenian schools 
operated under the Turkish Ministry of Education.  Mesrob II also 
expressed his discontent with Turkey's stance linking all issues of 
the Armenian community with reciprocity principles established 
between Turkey and Greece. 
 
 
ANKARA 00005710  002 OF 003 
 
 
Erdogan Due in the US 
Milliyet and Zaman report that on Friday, Prime Minister Erdogan is 
to depart Ankara for New York on a state visit to the United States. 
 Erdogan will join a Ramadan fast-breaking dinner (iftar) with the 
members of the Turkish associations in New York on Friday evening. 
Erdogan said in an interview with Samanyolu TV last night he would 
ask for "concrete steps forward" from President Bush with regard to 
the PKK at a scheduled meeting with the US President at the White 
House on Monday.  On Sunday, he will deliver a speech, "Turkey's 
message for global peace and justice," at Georgetown University in 
Washington before giving exclusive interviews to the Washington Post 
and Fox TV on the same day.  Milliyet claims Erdogan will hold a 
"surprise" meeting with the TGS Chief General Buyukanit before the 
PM departs for the US early Friday. 
 
Hasan Mesut Hazar commenting from Washington in the conservative 
Turkiye points out that Turkey needs the US as an ally in the 
region:  "The US is on the eve of an election, complete with heated 
debates as well as harsh criticism from Democrats of the Bush 
administration on international issues.  Given the current 
atmosphere in Washington, the US administration is in need of Turkey 
more than before.  Turkey is the only channel for the US 
administration to reach out to the region - a region where two 
countries, Iran and Syria, have already been included in the axis of 
evil.  Therefore the US should pay more attention to Turkey's 
sensitivities and priorities in this region.  The upcoming meeting 
between PM Erdogan and President Bush at the White House is very 
important for advancing the bilateral ties and also for advancing 
Turkey's regional influence.  Developments in Turkish-American ties 
not only serve bilateral interests but also are an assurance for the 
protection of world peace and stability." 
 
Muharrem Sarikaya also comments on the Prime Minister's Washington 
visit in Sabah, arguing that there are many factors that are 
"casting a shadow" over the trip: "Unlike during his previous trips 
to Washington, PM Erdogan does not enjoy full popular support this 
time as he travels to the US.  There are many factors casting a 
shadow over his trip, such as the recent warnings from the army on 
fundamentalism, the lack of support from the Jewish lobby due to the 
Hamas and Al Kadi incidents as well as growing anti-Americanism in 
Turkey with no interference to change this trend from the ruling 
AKP.  In general, there are paradoxical situations on both sides 
which prevent Turkish-American relations from getting fully on 
track.  The recent map crisis at a NATO seminar is only one of the 
many examples where one can see harm done regardless of apologies or 
official statements for explanation.  Washington, on one hand, 
expresses discontent due to Ankara's inefficient cooperation in 
preventing anti-Americanism in Turkey.  But on the other hand, the 
very same Washington takes some action through northern Iraq as if 
to provoke anti-Americanism even more in Turkey.  The Ankara 
government fails to take measures to properly deal with such crises, 
and only gets engaged in the situation once the damage is done." 
 
Baykal 'Booed' at Meeting with University Students 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others report opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal was "booed" at 
a meeting with university students at Kocaeli University in a 
program televised live Thursday night on Kanal-D TV.  Baykal 
received great applause when criticizing the US and EU, but was 
booed when he defended Article 301 of Turkish Penal Code, related to 
freedom of expression, and remarked on Turkey's Kurdish question. 
"It is mainly due to you and your ilk that Turkey is in this 
situation," one student yelled at Baykal, drawing the strong 
reaction of CHP members in the room when he shouted at Baykal to 
quit the party. 
 
Erdogan Supports Internet, Computer Campaign 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Yeni Safak report Prime Minister Erdogan 
joined a campaign launched by Turkish IT companies, including 
Microsoft Turkey, aimed at achieving Internet connection and a 
 
ANKARA 00005710  003 OF 003 
 
 
computer for every household in Turkey.  Erdogan said the "honest" 
use of the Internet would help support global peace whereas the 
"dishonest" use would support global terrorism.  Internet usage in 
Turkey climbed to 2,5 million as of 2006 from slightly over one 
million in 2002, and that 16 million had computers. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV (8 a.m.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish Air Forces Commander General Faruk Comert warned at the 
opening of the academic year at the Air College in Ankara that 
approaches which feed fundamentalism and terrorism will take the 
nation to catastrophe. 
 
- The chief Turkish EU negotiator Ali Babacan said after meeting 
with the Italian Foreign Minister D'Alema in Rome that new forward 
steps with regard to Cyprus might be taken before the end of the 
year. 
 
- Restaurant and bar owners in Istanbul's tourist district 
Sultanahmet say they had been asked by the municipality to stop 
serving alcohol. 
 
- Independent MP Emin Sirin has joined controversial businessman Cem 
Uzan's Genc Party (GP). 
 
- The number of foreign companies operating in Turkey is estimated 
13,000. 
 
International News 
 
- European Union foreign policy chief Solana said he failed to reach 
a deal with Iran's chief nuclear negotiator Larijani concerning 
Tehran's nuclear aspirations.  State Department spokesman Sean 
McCormack warned sanctions would not be the first choice but they 
could go down that path if that's what the Iranian regime wants. 
 
- Israeli Prime Minister Olmert said he hoped to meet Palestinian 
President Abbas soon for a summit meeting that could help revive 
peace talks. 
 
- A suicide car bomb attack killed two and injured another five in 
the oil-rich northern Iraqi town of Kirkuk. 
 
- Al-Qaeda leader in Iraq al-Masri calls in an Internet audio 
message for explosives experts and nuclear scientists to "join the 
holy war against West." 
 
- Russia called for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council 
to address Georgia's arrest of five Russian officers on charges of 
espionage. 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
MCELDOWNEY