06BAGHDAD1928
TRANSCRIPT OF PM MALIKI PRESS CONFERENCE
Thu Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1559
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1928/01 1590249
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 080249Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4943
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 001928 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SECSTATE FOR NEA/I 
DOD FOR OSD/PA 
LONDON FOR ARABIC MEDIA UNIT 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM IZ
SUBJECT: TRANSCRIPT OF PM MALIKI PRESS CONFERENCE 
 
 
(U) The following is a transcript of Prime Minister 
Nuri al-Malikis press conference in Baghdad on June 
6, 2006. 
 
----------------- 
Opening Statement 
----------------- 
 
BEGIN TRANSCRIPT. 
 
"In harmony with the Government program, which we 
announced the day the Council of Representatives 
granted us a vote of confidence; 
 
Out of our commitment to the principle of national 
reconciliation, which we believe will save Iraq from 
the current crisis, given that with national 
reconciliation we will be able to reaffirm national 
unity and face challenges and attempts at dragging the 
country toward strife, violence, and internal 
differences; 
 
 
In order to create a positive climate and 
circumstances to effect this reconciliation, which 
requires efforts, cooperation, and harmony in views, 
concepts, and stands because of the circumstances on 
which we might wager for the success of our experiment 
or the initiative whose details will be fully 
announced over the next two days; 
 
In order to save many of our sons who have been 
embroiled in the culture of violence and incitement 
and who adopted hostile attitudes that led to their 
imprisonment, and give them the necessary opportunity 
to reconsider their stands and abandon the line that 
they have adopted and which led among other things to 
destruction and the ruination of the country; and 
given that they are our sons and we are eager to make 
them good citizens and factors of reconstruction and 
basic elements in the process of building new Iraq on 
the ruins of dictatorship; 
 
In order that the sectarian and racist ideas might not 
take root in this country and so that we might replace 
them with tolerance, dialogue, and the words and the 
ideas that might bring progress, peace, love, and 
amity among the sons of this country; 
 
Because we are all aware of the need for the 
construction of this country, which dictatorship has 
destroyed and which continues to suffer from its too 
many wounds; 
 
Because no single group, denomination, community or 
sect can shoulder this responsibility alone, and 
because restoring Iraq's pride, sovereignty, and 
dignity cannot be realized unless through the 
participation of all, and that any harm done to any 
component of these people will reflect on the 
efficiency of the reconstruction process; 
 
And based on the above considerations and on the basis 
of fundamental steps to achieve national 
reconciliation and realize the principle of national 
dialogue, which will start soon, God willing, and be 
run by a central committee and local committees in the 
governorates, which will work in accordance with a 
timetable and agreed-upon mechanisms and hold 
extensive cultural and media events, the first step, 
which we deem necessary and view as a positive message 
of love, is to release more than 2,000 detainees who 
have been detained without conclusive evidence against 
them, who are willing to reconsider their positions, 
or who have been arrested by mistake. We will release 
2,500 detainees in batches within the next few days. 
 
The first batch of 500 prisoners will be released 
tomorrow. They will be released and sent back to their 
families.  We wish them happiness and we congratulate 
their families on the release of their sons.  We hope 
that our sons, who will be released tomorrow or after 
that, will be committed to their promises and the 
pledges that they have signed, and that they will not 
oppose the political process by violence. We do not 
have any objection to opposition by words and 
expression and it is the right of all Iraqis to be in 
 
BAGHDAD 00001928  002 OF 004 
 
 
the opposition. However, this should be an opposition 
through dialogue, a civilized opposition that does not 
resort to violence and bloodletting.  We welcome every 
voice in the opposition because we consider it a 
factor of strength to the political process. It does 
not harm it.  We do not want a society that says yes 
but we want a society that says yes after careful 
examination, a society that gives its viewpoint. 
 
I consider this a good beginning, God willing, to 
prepare the elements of national reconciliation and I 
greatly hope that the families of the prisoners, the 
organizations to which they belong, and all those who 
care for the prisoners will back this development and 
encourage it so as to create an appropriate climate 
for the culture of dialogue and cancel the culture of 
violence, which has brought many disasters on the 
country.  Thank you very much." 
 
------------------------- 
Questions and Answers 
------------------------- 
 
Q - What is your estimation of the security situation? 
Will the release of the detainees make the 
reconciliation conference successful? 
 
A - The government is taking some steps to support the 
reconciliation conference.  One of these steps is to 
release the detainees, reviewing their cases and 
making sure that human rights are applied. Terrorists 
increased their attacks in an attempt to restrict the 
government and to make it fail, but they wont succeed 
s because the government is supported by all 
components of Iraqi society. 
 
Q - MSA had put some preconditions to participate in 
the reconciliation conference.  Is the release of 
detainees a response to some of their preconditions? 
 
A - The attendance and participation isnt in one 
conference but it will be in a series of conferences 
with the participation of politicians, religious men 
and civil society institutions.  Anyone who wants 
reconciliation with himself, people and others 
shouldnt put preconditions; one listens, talks and 
negotiates, because negotiation is the master of 
reconciliation.  We cant reconciliation through TVs, 
satellite channels and complications. 
 
ns. 
 
Q - We heard about military operations to be launched 
in Anbar and Baquba.  Is the release of detainees 
related with the start of these operations? 
 
A - In order to deal with the security issue, we 
should use power against terrorists. Releases, 
security, reconstruction, all are ongoing processes 
and every track shouldnt stop in favor for another 
track.  We will put a date for Baghdad security plan 
to start and another security plan for Diyala 
province, which is intended to be stronghold for 
terrorists to launch their operations.  We will 
increase our security and fighting capabilities to 
confront the challenges.  The reconciliation 
conference will be put into effect. 
 
Q - Are the 2500 detainees to be released from Iraqi 
or MNF prisons? 
 
A - The decision included detainees in Iraqi and MNF 
prisons.  A committee was formed to review all the 
detainee cases in Iraqi prisons and to improve their 
conditions. 
 
Q - Why is there a delay in announcing the names of 
ministers of Defense, Interior and National Security. 
Are new names the cause of the delay? 
 
A - No, the names submitted are the same and the delay 
is because the attendants didnt reach the number 
required to hold the session. 
 
Q - The government demanded files of the Haditha in 
Ishaqi incidents.  What is happening regarding the 
investigations? 
 
BAGHDAD 00001928  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
A - We demanded the files of these cases and are 
waiting for them and we will follow up. The government 
also formed a committee to probe these files. The 
government condemned the killing of innocent people 
and it will demand punishment to those who commit such 
killing. 
 
Q - The situation in Basra is still deteriorating. 
What measures are being taken there? 
 
A - Forces there are still in ongoing alertness.  The 
forces had controlled the assassinations and random 
killing.  Explosions occurred to target the reform 
process there.  The government is discussing the issue 
with the concerned parties there to take full control. 
The government is trying to improve services in Basra 
because one of the reasons of the deterioration of the 
security situation there is unemployment. Security 
forces are intensifying their work there. 
 
Q - Will the PM as an executive authority call upon 
political blocs to support the reconciliation? 
 
A - All the political powers, the government, 
parliament, civil society institutions, men and women, 
should take responsibility for reconciliation. 
 
Q - Regarding security and stability, what has the 
government done,  especially after the massacres in 
al-Audhaim or in Salehiya? 
 
A - The security situation is very complex.  We 
offered condolences to the martyrs families.  This is 
terror.  There are internal and external 
interventions.  We have a short- term plan to confront 
terror and a long-term plan, how to impose security in 
the upcoming years to let reconstruction begin.  The 
government cant take responsibility for all of this; 
the people of the country should help. 
 
 
 
Q - When will the government leave the Green Zone? 
 
A - The security forces, police, army, the ministries, 
all are outside the green Zone.  If you mean the 
headquarters of the government, it was there in its 
present location before the Green Zone was defined. 
 
Q - Has not selecting ministers of Interior, Defense 
and National Security delayed implementation of the 
security plan? 
 
A - Its right that these posts are very important but 
this is not the reason of the delay.  It was that the 
attendants didnt reach the number required to hold a 
session.  Also, we need to select independent 
ministers to take this responsibility in order not to 
let there be any suspicion regarding their 
performance. 
 
Q - When will terrors fight law put into effect? 
What about Takfiris and Saddamists? 
 
A - Good point to mention that those who were released 
arent terrorists or involved in Iraqis bloodshed. 
One of the articles of the National Reconciliation 
initiative is to put into effect the terrors fight 
fight 
law.  The government completed the security plan and 
we will see the results of this plan in the near 
future. 
 
Q - We heard of the formation of a special force to 
protect Baghdad.  How is that true? 
 
A - Yes, this force was formed and they have put a 
security plan together to protect Baghdad.  You will 
see the results of this plan in the near future. 
 
Q - Were there recommendations from the Cairo 
conference to acknowledge the resistance and to 
alleviate Debaathifiaction law? 
 
A - There is no resistance since a legitimate 
government has been established, elected by the 
 
BAGHDAD 00001928  004 OF 004 
 
 
people.  Debaathifiaction is a constitutional issue. 
It was discussed that all independent committees 
including the Debaathification committee will be 
reviewed to be a method of reform.  There are many 
Baathists who want to get rid of this burden and 
interact with society again. 
 
Q - Are there certain areas in Baghdad like Dura, 
Biya and Al Amel that the security forces dont 
control? 
 
rol? 
 
A - The security plan will secure central Baghdad as 
well as its perimeter. 
 
Q - Have the parties who will participate in the 
National Reconciliation Conference been identified? 
 
A - No, the government didnt name any party to 
participate in the conference.  Everyone who isn't 
involved in bloodshed, killing or importing sectarian 
thinking is welcomed. 
 
END TRANSCRIPT. 
 
KHALILZAD