06BAGHDAD797
IRAQ PRTS ASSESS PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS - FEB 2006
Mon Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO6167
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUEHGB #0797/01 0720330
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130330Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3237
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000797 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON MOPS PREL IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ PRTS ASSESS PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS - FEB 2006 
 
¶1. (U) INTRODUCTION.  The Provincial Reconstruction Teams 
(PRTs) in Iraq report monthly the ability of the provincial 
level government to function effectively and the obstacles 
that prevent full self-governance. The PRTs assess 
provincial governments in the areas of governance, economic 
development and infrastructure, and the Multi-National 
Corps assesses security (which is included in the overall 
assessment).  Governance includes the governor, provincial 
council (PC), director generals (DGs), and rule of law and 
transparency.  The economic development category measures 
finance, banking and business; labor and unemployment; 
transportation; and agriculture and food. Infrastructure 
incorporates basic needs; capacity of electricity, fuel, 
telecom, transportation, and irrigation systems; and 
education systems.  The sub-categories are broken down even 
further to ensure full consideration of the various 
functions that fall into the respective categories. 
 
¶2. (U) PRT members evaluate each area and assign a color to 
identify its current status. Considering each sub-category 
status, the three main pillars are assigned a color-coded 
status and these roll up into the overall evaluation for 
the respective PC.  Green indicates good progress with no 
identified problems, yellow means progress being made with 
only minor problems, orange indicates slow progress with 
significant problems, and red means very slow progress with 
major problems.  The following paragraphs summarize the 
February 2006 assessments for the PRTs in Ninawa, Kirkuk, 
and Babil Provinces.  END INTRODUCTION. 
 
--------------- 
NINAWA PROVINCE 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) OVERALL AND GOVERNANCE. All three main pillars 
were rated orange for the Ninawa provincial government for 
February 2006, resulting in an overall assessment of 
orange.  The Governor and his staff continue to perform 
their functions satisfactorily.  However, the lack of 
decentralized authority and resources erodes any real 
power.  The Governor serves as the voice of the people and 
as a sounding board for their issues.  District mayors 
complain that he is unable to resolve their immediate 
problems, which relate to essential services and security. 
In order to see progress in the governance assessment, 
provincial authorities must obtain resources and legal 
authority to execute an essential services master plan for 
the province.  The Provincial Council (PC) is too dependent 
on the Chairman and fails to act as a real policymaking 
body.  Additionally, its current composition does not 
accurately reflect the ethnic and religious makeup of the 
province and, as a result, the PC does not effectively 
represent the interests of all its constituents. 
 
¶4.  (U) INFRASTRUCTURE.  Infrastructure was rated overall 
orange with basic needs coded orange, capacity of the 
various systems such as electricity, fuel, telecom, etc., 
continued to lag at red; and the education system was 
yellow.  Local managers within the potable water 
directorate are not proactive within their area of 
operations, thus limiting the effectiveness of the 
directorate outside Mosul.  Funding shortfalls have halted 
the ability of the solid waste department to collect and 
remove debris from Mosul.  Solid waste continues to block 
storm and sewer systems. 
 
¶5. (U)  Fuel distribution and storage present a significant 
limitation to overall capacity.  This limitation was even 
more obvious in February because of the nationwide fuel 
shortage.  Ninawa Province generates more electricity than 
used, but it is subject to the national distribution 
scheme.  Transportation infrastructure is inadequate to 
support expanded commerce and requires significant national 
investment. 
 
¶6. (U) ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.  Economic development factors 
were rated overall orange. The economy of the province is 
poor.  Unemployment remains a persistent problem and 
directly correlates to security and instability issues. 
Job creation must be a top priority and growth in 
businesses and industry is necessary to drive those jobs. 
The national government must invest in this process and 
encourage outside investment.  Local projects delivering a 
short turn around and providing observable improvement will 
best assist provincial leaders to serve the interests of 
Ninawa citizens.  The focus for economic activity in the 
province should be small to medium-size business growth 
combined with agricultural initiatives. 
 
----------------------- 
 
BAGHDAD 00000797  002 OF 004 
 
 
TAMIM (KIRKUK) PROVINCE 
----------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) OVERALL AND GOVERNANCE. Kirkuk was rated overall 
orange, as well as the three main pillars.  The governance 
area was rated orange.  The Kirkuk provincial leaders 
function on an acceptable level, although ethnic divisions 
hinder progress.  Among the actions required to move 
governance from orange to yellow, the deputy governor needs 
to be appointed and effectively working.  The PC 
performance is improving and moved from orange to yellow in 
February.  They drafted a charter which is currently in 
review.  The PC has also begun publishing its meeting 
minutes and making them available to the public.  To 
continue their progress, the PC must become self-policing, 
corruption free, and self-sufficient.  They must 
demonstrate the ability to manage priorities and resources. 
 
¶8.  (U) INFRASTRUCTURE. Infrastructure was rated overall 
orange with basic needs coded orange, capacity of the 
various systems such as electricity, fuel, telecom, etc., 
coded yellow, the education system was yellow, and civil 
service was rated red.  The GST-5 Water Storage Project is 
expected to greatly increase the potable water supply in 
two large Arab Neighborhoods.  Thirteen rural water 
initiatives are planned for smaller towns. These projects, 
and others, will drastically improve the availability of 
potable water to Kirkuk residents. 
 
 
¶9.  (U) Electricity capacity must increase to 10-12 hours 
per day from the current average of 4-5 hours per day.  To 
improve their assessment rating in transportation 
infrastructure, more rail networks must be added, as well 
as increased airport capacity.  There is no commercial 
airport in Kirkuk.  The Kirkuk Air Base is controlled by 
the U.S. military and has only military and USG contracted 
civilian flights.  The only other airfield in the area is 
located on an Iraqi Army Base.  To increase the education 
infrastructure, more universities are needed or expansion 
of the current university to accommodate the province 
needs. 
 
¶10.  (U) ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.  Factors affecting the 
economic development rating were overall orange. The PC 
needs significant assistance in attracting investment and 
maximizing opportunities for business development in 
manufacturing, petroleum, and agri-business.  A campaign to 
attract investment, including financial and other 
incentives is essential. 
 
-------------- 
BABIL PROVINCE 
-------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) OVERALL AND GOVERNANCE.  Babil Province was 
overall assessed at orange. Governance was yellow, while 
infrastructure and economic development were coded orange. 
Religious political parties hold significant influence over 
the Babil Police Department, reported to be the last 
independent police department in south central Iraq.  The 
Governor and PC hand picked 700 recent police recruits 
rather than select from an open recruiting process.  The 
recruits consisted of 250 DAWA, 250 Badr Corps, and 200 
personally appointed by the Babil Governor.  To help 
increase the governance assessment rating, police recruits 
should go through the normal vetting process in order to 
ensure they are screened properly and qualified.  Continued 
selection by the Governor or other official implies that 
the government is picking loyalists rather than the best 
qualified candidates. 
 
¶12.  (U) It appears that the PC is becoming more effective 
in the political process and decision-making.  Projects are 
being carefully prioritized.  The Director Generals and 
other leadership are working together to improve their 
communities.  The Babil provincial leaders need to strive 
towards strong leadership with little tolerance for 
corruption or intimidation.  The legislative government 
needs to improve its management information system and 
strategic project planning capabilities. 
 
¶13. (U) INFRASTRUCTURE.  The overall infrastructure 
assessment for Babil Province was rated orange.  To improve 
the basic needs infrastructure rating, Babil Province needs 
to sustain projects that improve water irrigation and water 
systems.  Additionally, pipes that are encrusted with 
asbestos, high volumes of chlorine, and water-borne 
diseases should be replaced.  The Minister of Health needs 
to incorporate plans and coordinate with the Director of 
 
BAGHDAD 00000797  003 OF 004 
 
 
Health in Al Hillah to improve the hospital situation. 
Currently, hospitals can only barely handle major 
catastrophic events for a very limited time, not for any 
sustained catastrophic issues.  The hospitals need to be 
better equipped with the appropriate tools and personnel to 
handle large scale issues.  Expansion and more hospitals 
are needed in rural areas to relieve overcrowding. 
 
¶14. (U) ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. The economic development 
category was rated overall orange.  As an agrarian society 
that relies heavily on the success of the agriculture 
industry, the economic stability of Babil province can be 
improved by ensuring fertilizer is available to improve the 
crops.  It is important that the government provide yearly 
aerial spraying and that farm equipment can be easily 
replaced or repaired. 
 
------------------- 
TABLE SUMMARIZATION 
------------------- 
 
¶15.  (U)  The following table summarizes, by province, the 
assessment report in governance, economic development, 
infrastructure, and security which all contribute to the 
overall assessment. 
 
NINAWA PROVINCE: 
Overall Assessment            Orange 
Governance Overall            Orange 
--Governor's Office               Orange 
--Provincial Council              Orange 
--Director's General              Orange 
--Rule of Law and Transparency    Orange 
Economic Development Overall  Orange 
--Finance/Banking/Business        Orange 
--Labor and Unemployment          Orange 
--Transportation                  Orange 
--Agriculture/Food                Orange 
Infrastructure Overall        Orange 
--Basic Needs                     Orange 
--Economic Infrastructure         Red 
--Education                       Yellow 
Security                      Not Reported 
 
TAMIM (KIRKUK) PROVINCE: 
Overall Assessment            Orange 
Governance Overall            Orange 
--Governor's Office               Orange 
--Provincial Council              Yellow 
--Director's General              Orange 
--Rule of Law and Transparency    Orange 
Economic Development Overall   Orange 
--Finance/Banking/Business         Red 
--Labor and Unemployment           Orange 
--Transportation                   Orange 
--Agriculture/Food                 Orange 
Infrastructure Overall         Orange 
--Basic Needs                      Orange 
--Economic Infrastructure          Orange 
--Education                        Yellow 
Security Overall               Orange 
--Capable Iraqi Army               Orange 
--Capable IPS                      Orange 
--Detention                        Red 
--PJCC                             Green 
--PSC                              Green 
 
BABIL PROVINCE: 
Overall Assessment            Orange 
Governance Overall            Yellow 
--Governor's Office               Yellow 
--Provincial Council              Yellow 
--Director's General              Orange 
--Rule of Law and Transparency    Yellow 
Economic Development Overall  Orange 
--Finance/Banking/Business        Orange 
--Labor and Unemployment          Orange 
--Transportation                  Not Assessed 
--Agriculture/Food                Yellow 
Infrastructure Overall        Orange 
--Basic Needs                     Orange 
--Economic Infrastructure         Orange 
--Education                       Orange 
Security Overall              Orange 
--Capable Iraqi Army              Orange 
--Capable IPS                     Yellow 
--Detention                       Orange 
--PJCC                            Red 
--PSC                             Yellow 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000797  004 OF 004 
 
 
¶16. (U) SUMMARY:  The assessment is performed each month by 
the PRTs and evaluates information existing at the time. 
In some cases, the PRT members do not have sufficient data 
to make a fair evaluation without further research.  The 
rating is aimed at identifying areas that need improvement 
to pursue the provincial path to self-sufficiency.  It 
serves as a roadmap for future PRT training efforts, as 
well as a measurement of progress made. The items cited in 
the above paragraphs are not totally inclusive, but rather 
a sampling of the actions necessary for further progress. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
KHALILZAD