06BEIJING7518
APRIL 20 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR
Thu Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8922
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #7518/01 1101105
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201105Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3489
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD IMMEDIATE 6327
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE 2820
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID IMMEDIATE 0685
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 3759
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY IMMEDIATE 0109
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS IMMEDIATE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0992
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0902
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 007518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM PTER KNNP CH IR
SUBJECT: APRIL 20 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRANIAN NUCLEAR 
ISSUE, GUANTANAMO BAY, DETAINED JOURNALISTS, SIX-PARTY 
TALKS, RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, SCO, ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE,  SPANISH 
TRIAL, ORGAN TRANSPLANTS, SOLOMON ISLANDS,  SAARC 
 
BEIJING 00007518  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the April 20 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- China encourages the EU-3 and Iran to promptly 
resume talks in Moscow in order to promote a peaceful 
resolution to the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 
- The United States should consider the interests of 
the international community in dealing with the 
Chinese citizens held in Guantanamo Bay, in addition 
to supporting China's counterterrorism efforts. 
 
- The MFA Spokesperson declined to answer questions on 
the detention of both Singapore Straits Times reporter 
Ching Cheong and New York Times researcher Zhao Yan. 
 
- The Six-Party Talks participants have already 
reached a consensus outlined in the Joint Statement, 
which they should implement promptly. 
 
- Overseas organizations should recognize that the 
Chinese Government protects its citizens' freedom of 
religion. 
 
- Military cooperation within the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) framework serves to maintain 
regional peace and stability. 
 
- China is not involved in economic espionage in 
Canada and is concerned over such "groundless and 
irresponsible accusations." 
 
- The lawsuit filed by Tibetan organizations against 
several Chinese leaders in a Spanish court is a 
"complete farce." 
 
- The British Transplantation Society's disregard for 
the facts in its recent report on China's organ 
transplant practices is "puzzling." 
 
- The Chinese Government has launched an emergency 
response mechanism to aid the PRC citizens and ethnic 
Chinese who were victimized in the recent Solomon 
Islands riots. 
 
- The decision to grant China observer status in the 
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
(SAARC) will usher in a new chapter in China-South 
Asia relations.  End Summary. 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  During his recent visit to Iran, Assistant Foreign 
Minister Cui Tiankai conveyed to Iranian officials 
China's concern over the situation regarding its 
nuclear program and called for a display of restraint 
and flexibility in order to negotiate a resolution to 
the issue, MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang stated during the 
regular April 20 MFA press briefing.  AFM Cui and 
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov, while meeting in 
Moscow, agreed to enhance communication regarding the 
Iranian nuclear issue and promote a diplomatic 
resolution.  AFM Cui expressed support for Russia's 
position.  During the April 18 meeting of P-5 and 
German officials, he expressed China's concern over 
recent developments and the hope that the parties will 
exercise restraint and flexibility to achieve a 
diplomatic resolution.  Qin stressed that there is 
still room for a peaceful resolution to the Iranian 
nuclear issue, calling on the international community 
not to abandon diplomatic efforts.  China encourages 
the EU-3 and Iran to resume talks in Moscow promptly 
in order to gradually expand mutual trust and promote 
a peaceful settlement. 
 
Chinese at Guantanamo Bay 
 
BEIJING 00007518  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked by the AP correspondent about the recent 
Supreme Court decision regarding the PRC nationals 
being held at the U.S. military facility in Guantanamo 
Bay, Qin asserted that the United States should 
consider the interests of the international community 
in dealing with the Chinese citizens detained in 
Guantanamo Bay.  East Turkestan forces are a component 
of international terrorism.  The international 
community, including the United States, has been 
harmed by terrorist organizations and should support 
China's counterterrorism efforts, according to Qin. 
 
Detained Journalists' Cases 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Qin declined to answer questions on the detention 
of both Singapore Straits Times reporter Ching Cheong 
and New York Times researcher Zhao Yan.  Pressed by 
reporters, he maintained that China's judicial 
authorities will handle these cases according to the 
law. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  Questioned whether the territorial dispute between 
Japan and South Korea has contributed to the delay in 
the Six-Party Talks, Qin said that Beijing hopes the 
two countries can resolve their dispute through 
negotiation.  The interests of all Six Parties will be 
served by promoting the Six-Party Talks and the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.  The parties 
have already reached a consensus outlined in the Joint 
Statement, which they should implement swiftly, Qin 
stressed. 
 
Detention of Christian Leaders 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  Responding to the Bloomberg correspondent's 
inquiry into the U.S.-based China Aid Association's 
report that over 1,300 unofficial church leaders were 
detained in 2005, Qin said that he had not seen the 
report but argued that the Chinese Government protects 
its citizens' freedom of belief in accordance with the 
law.  The President of the China Christian Council 
recently briefed the press on the development of 
Christianity in China.  Overseas organizations should 
take an objective view of religious freedom in China, 
Qin remarked. 
 
Upcoming SCO Meetings 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  Asked about the upcoming Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) defense and foreign ministers' 
meetings and whether they will discuss joint military 
exercises, Qin noted that in addition to the June SCO 
Summit in Shanghai, a defense ministers' meeting will 
be in held in late April in Beijing and a foreign 
ministers' meeting will occur at a later time, which 
he did not specify.  China hopes these exchanges will 
enhance dialogue and coordination among member states, 
helping maintain regional peace, stability and 
security.  Qin offered no information on specific 
plans for SCO joint military exercises but stated that 
military cooperation within the SCO framework helps 
maintain regional peace and stability. 
 
Chinese Espionage in Canada 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Responding to the Xinhua correspondent's inquiry 
into reported comments by a Canadian official that 
China was conducting high-tech espionage activities in 
Canada, Qin argued that China is not involved in 
economic espionage in Canada and is concerned over 
such "groundless and irresponsible accusations." 
 
BEIJING 00007518  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Beijing hopes Ottawa can distinguish between true and 
false accounts and make more efforts to support the 
healthy development of bilateral ties, he said. 
 
Spanish Court Hearing on Chinese Leaders 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked by the Spanish News Agency correspondent 
about a high-level Spanish court's decision to try a 
case filed by a Tibetan organization against several 
Chinese leaders, Qin asserted that the lawsuit is a 
"complete farce."  The Spanish court handling the case 
should possess a common knowledge of judicial affairs, 
he said.  China-Spain relations are developing 
smoothly, Qin remarked, while warning that 
"unpleasant" matters should not be allowed to 
undermine bilateral ties. 
 
Criticism of Organ Transplant Practices 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  In response to the AFP correspondent's question 
about the British Transplantation Society's reported 
criticism over China's organ transplant practices, Qin 
said that the recently issued Ministry of Health 
regulations address these concerns.  He remarked that 
he was "puzzled" by the British report's disregard for 
the facts.  This organization should remember that 
several years ago some doctors at British hospitals 
removed patients' organs without properly informing 
patients' relatives, Qin asserted. 
 
Beijing Aids Chinese Victims of Solomon Islands Riots 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶11.  In his opening remarks, Qin highlighted that the 
Chinese Government is extremely concerned about the 
welfare of PRC citizens and ethnic Chinese who were 
targeted in recent riots in Honiara.  Premier Wen 
Jiabao instructed the MFA to monitor the situation 
closely and ensure the safety of overseas Chinese in 
the Solomon Islands, prompting the MFA to activate its 
emergency response mechanism.  While Beijing and 
Honiara lack diplomatic ties, the Chinese Government 
urged the Solomon Islands Government through various 
channels to adopt measures to halt the looting of 
businesses owned by PRC nationals and overseas 
Chinese.  Beijing requested that Australia, New 
Zealand and Papua New Guinea provide assistance to 
Chinese citizens victimized during the riots.  The PRC 
Embassy in Papua New Guinea has dispatched diplomatic 
staff to the Solomon Islands to make contact with the 
local Chinese community and urge Solomon Islands 
officials to ensure the safety of resident Chinese. 
The PRC diplomats have also helped local Chinese seek 
police protection.  In addition, China has appealed 
for assistance from the International Committee of the 
Red Cross. 
 
China to Attend SAARC Summit as Observer 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Noting that China was recently accepted as an 
observer at the 2007 South Asian Association for 
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Summit, Qin said that 
Beijing hopes the relevant procedures will be 
completed quickly.  China becoming a SAARC observer 
will usher in a new chapter in China-South Asia 
relations.  Beijing is willing to work with South 
Asian nations to promote regional peace and stability 
and explore cooperation in many fields. 
SEDNEY