06CAIRO73
American Business Leadership Trainers Reach
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

041430Z Jan 06UNCLAS CAIRO 000073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/T/ES (DURANT), IIP/G/NEA-SA (SCOTT), NEA/PPD 
AND NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958: NA 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC OIIP EG
SUBJECT: American Business Leadership Trainers Reach 
Out to Women Entrepreneurs 
 
REF: A) STATE 83422 B) 2004 STATE 261067 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  American business leadership trainers Kay 
Westerfield and Kathy Holland captivated audiences of 
Egyptian women entrepreneurs and other business people 
in workshops Dec. 8-15.  The programs reached everyone 
from veteran businesswomen in Cairo and Alexandria to 
aspiring Minya entrepreneurs who could not read or 
write but who were anxious to develop their micro- 
enterprises.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  Following paragraphs are formatted per reftels. 
 
¶A. NAME OF SPEAKER AND DATE OF PROGRAM: Kay 
Westerfield, Business Programs Coordinator at the 
University of Oregon's American English Institute; and 
Kathy Holland, who operates the business advisory firm 
LongSherpa Design.  Holland is former Divisional Head 
of New Products and Markets at Nike.  The workshops 
were held Dec. 8-15. 
 
¶B.  SUMMARY OF TOPICS/VENUES/AUDIENCES: Topics included 
"Leadership Tools for Professional Communication" and 
"Entrepreneurship: Building Your Future." The 80 
participants included grantees and organizations 
participating in micro-finance programs financed by the 
Ambassador's Self-Help Program and USAID microfinance 
programs, as well as other contacts of the Embassy, 
USAID, and American Center Alexandria.  The workshops 
were held in the Embassy Information Resource Center, 
American Center, and at the Minya offices of the NGO 
"Better Life Association." Six USAID grantees from the 
city of Assiut Business Association traveled to Minya 
to participate.  In Alexandria, participants 
represented 18 NGOs active in volunteer work. 
 
¶C. EFFECTIVENESS OF THE SPEAKER:  Westerfield and 
Holland have extensive professional experience and 
training abilities, but the key skills they 
demonstrated in these workshops were the patience, 
flexibility, enthusiasm, and good humor necessary to 
engage participants with widely varying skills and 
interests.  Also key to the success of the program was 
the Egyptian translator, Rabab Zeineldin, who shared 
their enthusiasm for the subject and worked as a 
seamless part of the team.  She translated their oral 
presentations as well as written material, which was 
also later used in Manama. 
 
¶D. QUALITY OF IIP SUPPORT: Excellent. 
 
¶E. IMMEDIATE RESULTS: It was clear from the 
participants' feedback after the workshops that 
Westerfield and Holland reached the minds and hearts of 
elite and non-elite alike, demonstrating a very 
positive side of America.  They not only imparted 
useful business skills, they were able to help 
strengthen bonds between American and Egyptian people 
on personal and professional levels.  Many participants 
requested follow-on training.  We recommend them for 
future workshops in the region on entrepreneurship and 
leadership skills for a mixed group of men and women. 
We hope to expand their next visit to workshops in 
other governorates. 
 
¶F.  PRESS PLACEMENT:  The local Minya television 
station participated in the workshop and filmed 
interviews afterward with participants and Embassy 
representatives.  The Embassy did not have an 
opportunity to see the broadcast of the story.  News 
bulletins on Alexandria television broadcast excerpts 
of the workshop.  The Alexandria TV English program "In 
Focus" is scheduled to broadcast interviews with 
Westerfield and Holland on January 3, 2006. 
 
 
RICCIARDONE