06CAIRO5030
THE END OF THE MYTH." EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS: AUGUST 14, 2006
Mon Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #5030 2261406
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141406Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0567
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 005030 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ALBERTO FERNANDEZ, ROBIN SMITH AND DAVID BENZE 
R/PPR FOR GRETCHEN WELCH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL IS LE EG
SUBJECT:  "THE END OF THE MYTH." EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS: AUGUST 14, 2006 
 
¶1.  Summary.  For the second consecutive day, headlines in 
opposition and independent papers, responded to the ceasefire 
agreement between Israel and Hezbollah by highlighting Israel's 
"last minute massacres" and portraying Israel as "failed." 
Government-controlled dailies focused on President Mubarak's meeting 
with the Iranian foreign minister, and Egypt's assistance to 
Lebanon.  Commentaries in opposition and independent papers showed 
strong reactions against the U.S. and some claimed new Arab pride 
thanks to Hezbollah.  Egyptian Television hosted a prominent 
Lebanese writer who decried Hezbollah. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  In the headlines and front pages.  In the first day of the 
implementation of a ceasefire between Israel and Hezbollah, 
opposition and independent headlines pronounced, "Tel Aviv 
Surrenders" (Nahdet Misr), "Victory for Hezbollah" (Al-Ahrar), "The 
End of the Myth" (Al-Wafd), and "Huge Losses for Israel" (Al-Masry 
Al-Yom).   In many papers, these pronouncements were supported by 
large photos of Israeli Prime Minister Olmert appearing unhappy, 
with his hand on his head, and fatigued Israeli soldiers.  Headlines 
in the government-controlled dailies portrayed "Israel's great 
losses" (Al-Akhbar), "Israel's defeat" and inability to "provide 
food and water for our soldiers" (Rose Al-Youssef), and "an Israeli 
massacre before cessation of hostilities" (Al-Gomhouriya), while 
also focusing on Hezbollah's ability to "repel armored attacks" 
(Al-Ahram).  All government-controlled dailies provided prominent 
coverage of President Mubarak's meeting yesterday with Iranian 
Foreign Minister, Motaki, stressing "Egypt and Iran agree on a 
ceasefire" (Al-Akhbar), and "ties with Tehran are stable... we share 
common views on many issues" (Al-Gomhouriya). 
 
¶3.  In the commentaries.  Commentaries in opposition and independent 
papers, as well as government-controlled Rose Al-Youssef, showed a 
high concentration of anti-American, pro-Hezbollah opinions, and in 
a number of commentaries, writers predicted a new era of "Arab 
pride" due to Hezbollah's actions.  Al-Wafd editorials propounded, 
"...revenge will remain in the heart of Lebanese", "Hezbollah's 
steadfastness will encourage the repetition of war", "President Bush 
is good at the art of hatred", and "this is a 'Nazi American' war 
led by President Bush against Islam and Muslims." One senior writer 
predicted that "Iran may lead the Islamic world after it possesses 
nuclear arms ... since Arab countries refrained in order not to 
anger the US.... Lebanon reaped a new Middle East different from 
Condi's project which will be made by heroic jihadists and martyrs." 
A columnist in independent daily, Al-Masry Al-Yom argued in favor of 
"supporting Hezbollah as the only resistance group that has regained 
pride for Arabs." 
 
¶4.  While most relevant commentaries in government-controlled 
dailies focused largely on Israel's "failure" and debated the 
benefits of the new UNSC resolution, two columns in Rose Al-Youssef 
were strongly negative toward the U.S.  One writer claimed that "the 
Bush Administration has achieved unprecedented success in convincing 
the Arab public opinion of its destructive intentions... and in 
destroying the American dream in the hearts of the world."  He 
accused the administration of, "partiality, flagrant bias, racism 
... using the past six years to spread fascist thinking, hate and 
wars among nations."  Another columnist expressed "no surprise at 
the use of the term Islamic fascists" as "President Bush is leading 
a crusade against Muslims...." 
 
¶5.  In the airwaves.  Egyptian TV's main news program at 9:00 pm 
hosted Dr. Chibili Mallat, a Lebanese Lawyer and writer who 
described Hezbollah's actions as an "adventure" and called upon 
Nassrallah to disarm and engage in Lebanese political life.  While 
discrediting Hezbollah, he also acknowledged Hezbollah's role in 
pushing Israel to withdraw from southern Lebanon in 2000. 
RICCIARDONE