06CAIRO2438
APRIL 25 UPDATE ON DAHAB TERROR ATTACKS
Tue Apr 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

251259Z Apr 06UNCLAS CAIRO 002438 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER ASEC EG
SUBJECT: APRIL 25 UPDATE ON DAHAB TERROR ATTACKS 
 
REF: CAIRO 2437 
 
¶1.  (U) The official numbers of dead and injured following 
the April 24 triple bombing at the Dahab seaside resort in 
the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt, remain in flux, with State 
Security sources informally sharing their count of 24 killed 
and upwards of 100 injured.  The Embassy is not aware of any 
Amcit fatalities, but there are currently four injured 
Amcits, the three more seriously injured having been 
transferred to Cairo for medical attention.  We understand 
all three are in stable condition.  Unconfirmed media reports 
have stated that 18 Egyptians and six foreigners were among 
those killed.  The spokesman for the Prime Minister reported 
publicly that 87 were injured, including 29 foreigners. 
 
¶2.  (U) In a series of telephone exchanges with senior 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials late April 24 and April 
25, the Embassy extended condolences on the loss of life in 
Dahab and extended an open offer of assistance to the GOE to 
address the crisis.  Assistant Minister for American Affairs, 
Ambassador Salama Shaker, expressed to the DCM her 
appreciation for the U.S. offer and pledged to communicate 
the information to her minister. 
 
¶3.  (U) President Mubarak condemned the Dahab attacks in an 
April 25 holiday speech to commemorate Egypt's "Sinai 
Liberation Day" national holiday.  Despite varying reports on 
the number of killed/wounded, local media coverage of the 
attacks has been quick and comprehensive, carried by all 
major television and newspaper outlets.  We understand that 
Information Minister Al-Fikky immediately channeled GOE staff 
and resources to Dahab to ensure that news coverage of the 
event was not dominated by foreign media outlets.  April 25 
papers also carried world-wide condemnations of the attack, 
including the remarks of President Bush, President Chirac, 
President Mahmoud Abbas, and from the Hamas-led Palestinian 
Authority. 
 
¶4.  (U) Media reports of April 25 also indicate that Egyptian 
police have so far arrested 10 individuals in and around the 
Dahab resort area.  Ministry of Interior contacts shared that 
these arrests reflect the start of a drag-net operation to 
collect information on the Dahab attacks. 
RICCIARDONE