06CARACAS614
BRV REQUESTS SUPPORT FOR ITU COUNCIL CANDIDACY
Wed Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCV #0614/01 0671340
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081340Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3468UNCLAS CARACAS 000614 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CIP/BA FOR CHOLIDAY/MGORDON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS VE
SUBJECT: BRV REQUESTS SUPPORT FOR ITU COUNCIL CANDIDACY 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Post requests Department 
guidance to respond to the BRV diplomatic note No. 269 in 
para (2) dated January 25, 2006 requesting USG support 
Venezuela's candidacy for re-election as a member of the 
International Telecommunications Union council.  A copy of 
the note has been faxed to CIP/BA, attn: Cecily Holiday. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin Text:  (Unofficial Embassy Translation): 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Office of the Vice-Minister 
for North America, Multilateral Affairs Management Office, 
presents its compliments to the Honorable Embassy of the 
United States of America and has the honor to inform that the 
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has 
decided to present its candidacy for re-election as a member 
of the International Telecommunications Union Council (UIT). 
These elections will take place during the Plenipotentiary 
Conference, in Analya, Turkey from November 15 through 
November 24, 2006. 
 
The International Telecommunications Union is the specialized 
international organization of the United Nations in charge of 
telecommunications regulation and planning worldwide.  It 
consists of the Conference of Plenipotentiaries (which is the 
head body of the UIT and meets every four years); the 
Council; the Radio Communications, Normalization, and 
Development Sectors; and the General Secretariat.  The 
Council is composed of members of the UIT elected by the 
Conference of Plenipotentiaries and acts as leader of the 
Conference as limited by the faculties delegated by the 
Conference itself. 
 
Venezuela is currently a member of the Union Council, whose 
mandate expires this year.  It was also member of the UIT 
during the periods 1965-1989 and 1999-2002. 
 
Since the country resumed its participation in the Council in 
1998, Venezuela, through its regulatory body in this area, 
CONATEL (National Telecommunications Commission) has been 
developing efforts aimed at maintaining an active presence in 
this organization through constant attendance at meetings and 
international fora sponsored by the UIT, as well as holding 
meetings of different study groups of the UIT on Venezuelan 
territory in order to encourage both the participation of 
representatives from different countries of the region and 
the dissemination of the information. 
 
In addition, Venezuela holds the Vice-Presidency for the 
American region at the Commission of Studies 1 in the 
Development Sector, for the 2002-2006 period, fact that 
implies recognition for the work done by the Venezuelan state. 
 
A possible re-election would allow Venezuela to obtain 
first-hand the most advanced information on what is happening 
around the world and to fully participate in the 
decision-making process of the UIT, since it is in the head 
of the Council where the directives that guide the sector 
according to what is established by the Conference of 
Plenipotentiaries are decided and approved. 
 
An eventual re-election in the UIT Council in addition to the 
presence of the country as member of the Inter-American 
Telecommunications Commission (CITEL), would place Venezuela 
in the center of telecommunications worldwide, and would 
contribute to the strengthening of those services in our 
region by focusing efforts and negotiations in order to 
complete common projects. 
 
In line with the Venezuelan government and regarding the need 
to promote a new multipolar system, Venezuela has developed 
in the past few years efforts to achieve international 
objectives in the area of telecommunications that will 
eventually help in the process of positioning the country 
internationally, and for this reason we consider it important 
that Venezuela continue participating in the UIT in favor of 
the strengthening of the Organization, which will benefit all 
UIT members. 
 
For that purpose, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will 
greatly appreciate the valuable support that your 
distinguished Government could grant the referenced national 
candidacy, assuring that it will benefit the relations 
between our countries and will contribute to the Council's 
great work. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Office of the Vice Minister 
for North America, Multilateral Affairs Management Office, 
takes this opportunity to renew to the Honorable Embassy of 
the United States of America, the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
Caracas, January 25, 2006. 
End Text. 
 
WHITAKER