06CAIRO565
PRIME MINISTER NAZIF OUTLINES GOE GOALS BEFORE
Mon Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000565 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON EG
SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTER NAZIF OUTLINES GOE GOALS BEFORE 
PARLIAMENT 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Presenting the GOE's overall policy and 
legislative agenda for the current legislative session, Prime 
Minister Nazif addressed parliament on January 30.  The Prime 
Minister's remarks covered seven pillars, five of which 
concerned economic and development matters, a sixth covering 
"legislative and political development" and a seventh pillar 
covering foreign policy and internal security.  Reflecting 
Egypt's new reality, the speech detailed a list of mainly 
economic reforms intended to address the public's bread and 
butter concerns.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Political Reform: Past and Future 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Nazif asserted the GOE had already implemented 
important political reforms.  He highlighted in particular 
the 2005 amendment to Article 76 of the constitution, 
allowing for competitive and direct presidential elections. 
He also cited the creation (in 2003) of the National Council 
for Human Rights,  noting the various reports it has 
produced, affirming that they were closely studied and 
weighed by the cabinet. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On the upcoming political and legislative agenda, 
Nazif pledged the government would work on the following 
areas: 
 
-- developing the concept of citizenship and equal rights of 
citizens regardless of religion, gender, race, or ideology; 
 
-- reviewing the constitution for further areas of amendment 
(no further specifics offered); 
 
-- drafting a new judiciary law that would strengthen the 
rule of law and judicial independence; 
 
-- "activating" the role of political parties; 
 
-- accelerating the process of decentralization; 
 
-- new laws governing the press and publications; 
 
-- review laws governing criminal procedures, including the 
practice of administrative detention; 
 
-- increasing the oversight role of the People's Assembly. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Foreign Policy and Internal Security 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) On foreign policy, the Prime Minister said Egypt 
would seek to expand its leadership role in Arab and African 
fora, would continue to seek peace, stability and 
reconstruction in Sudan and Iraq, and support the Palestinian 
people's quest for rights, stability, and security.  He also 
pledged the government's continued support for the 
"efficient" work of police and internal security agencies in 
maintaining the country's national security. 
 
------------------- 
Economic Priorities 
------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Nazif focused on unemployment as the number one 
economic/social issue to be addressed by the GOE.  He said 
that the government would combat unemployment by increasing 
foreign and domestic investment, particularly through 
amendments to laws governing trade and taxes, as well 
corporate governance and infrastructure development.  Nazif 
laid out market-oriented policies that he claimed would both 
generate jobs and promote stability.  Indicative of this 
approach was his call to reactivate the 
Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) programs for infrastructure 
development, which had been an early casualty of the foreign 
exchange crisis. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Nazif used the speech to introduce several new 
economic initiatives for parliament.  He called for better 
consumer protection laws, the development of courts devoted 
to specific economic issues, and a unified building code.  In 
making these proposals, he noted that Egypt's transition to a 
democracy would require the support of the people.  He called 
on the people to change their view of the state as the 
provider of first and last resort, warning that unless people 
let go of this socialist mind set, the success of the 
government's economic agenda could not be guaranteed. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Laying out the GOE's plans, Nazif presented a 
factual and detailed action plan.  While there were no 
surprises, and the language on political reform remained 
general, this represents the political reality of Egypt, 
where bread and butter issues take precedence.  In both his 
recap of achievements to date and plans for the future, Nazif 
gave primacy to social issues, followed by economic issues, 
and then political issues.  The language Nazif used was not 
the typical flowery rhetoric favored by many of his 
predecessors, but more a fact-filled laundry list of the 
accomplishments of his economic team and a rather detailed 
action plan for future development.  End comment. 
RICCIARDONE