06CARACAS633
COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR US DELEGATION TO
Wed Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXYZ0010
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCV #0633/01 0672052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 082052Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3493UNCLAS CARACAS 000633 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC EAGR ECON KCRM KFRD OAS AMGT APER VE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR US DELEGATION TO 
OAS TIP CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A) STATE 33755 B) STATE 35668 
 
¶1. The Embassy grants country clearances for the visit to 
Venezuela of T. March Bell, Mark Mittelhauser, Pedro Moreno, 
Stacy D. Williams, and Carla Menares Bury from Monday, March 
13 through Saturday, March 18.  This approval is granted on 
the condition that the travelers will be utilizing an 
official or diplomatic passport with an appropriate 
Venezuelan visa.  (See paragraph titled, Passport 
Requirements.) 
 
The purpose of the visit is to attend the OAS Trafficking in 
Persons Conference to be held on Margarita Island from 
Tuesday, March 14 through Friday, March 17. 
 
¶2.  Control officer for the visit will be LaTranda Martin. 
Address: Embassy of the United States, Calle F con Calle 
Suapure, Colinas de Valle Arriba, Caracas, Venezuela. 
Telephone numbers: Office: 58-212-907-8531.  Cellphone: 
0414-140-4615.  Embassy after-hours direct line for the 
Marine security guard is 58-212-975-9821. 
 
Hotel accommodations for the delegation have been arranged 
and confirmed at the Hilton Hotel on Margarita Island 
(confirmation numbers will be sent via email).  Address: 
Calle Los Uveros Urb. Costa Azul, Margarita Island, 6301. 
Telephone Number: 58-295-260-1700.  Fax: 58-295-262-0810 
The nightly rate for hotel accommodations is USD 109. 
 
TRAVEL NOTICE - TRANSPORTATION BETWEEN THE AIRPORT AND 
CARACAS: In December the GoV indefinitely closed the first 
bridge on the Caracas-La Guaira highway.  The highway is the 
principal link between Caracas and Maiquetia Simon Bolivar 
International Airport.  On February 26, the 2.4 km Bridge 
Bypass Route (BBR) was opened to traffic.  On March 6 post 
management approved the elimination of the armored airport 
shuttle service/daylight travel restriction and returned to 
using private transport services with the following 
provisions: The BBR or the Galipan road (accessible via 
4-wheel drive only) are the only approved routes to/from the 
airport and La Guaira.  For safety and security reasons, the 
"Carretera Vieja" route is not authorized for use.  Post will 
continue to assess the situation.  It is recommended you 
remain in contact with the Embassy regarding any possible 
changes. 
 
PASSPORT REQUIREMENTS 
--------------------- 
All passengers who enter Venezuela on official travel 
(including third country nationals) require a visa. 
Travelers should not use tourist passports. 
 
Venezuelan immigration requires citizens of the United States 
and certain other countries to have at least six months of 
validity remaining on their passports to enter Venezuela. 
While this law is not uniformly enforced, some U.S. citizens 
have been denied entry.  Ensure your passport has at least 
six months validity from the date of arrival to Venezuela. 
 
CURRENCY / EXCHANGE RATE 
------------------------ 
The exchange rate is USD 1 = 2150 Bolivares (Bs). 
 
Visitors should bring a major credit card.  Travelers checks 
are not recommended as they are only honored in a few 
locations.  It is possible to exchange cash at major hotel 
chains in Caracas (personal checks are not accepted). 
 
DEPARTURE EXPENSES 
------------------ 
An airport user fee of Bs. 84.000 (approx. USD 40) is levied 
upon departure for holders of official and diplomatic 
passports.  Holders of tourist passports must pay the user 
fee plus an exit tax, for a total of Bs. 117.600 (approx. USD 
55).  Payment of both must be made in Bolivares. 
 
SECURITY 
-------- 
At the Airport.  Many drivers -- often wearing badges 
identifying them as "taxi officials"-- have been known to rob 
unwary travelers.  If someone asks if you are with the 
American Embassy: 1) do not give you name and 2) ask for the 
name of the person he is seeking and identification.  Do not 
go with the individual if he cannot give you the information 
you request.  Call the embassy. 
 
Airport parking lot robberies are increasing.  The Embassy 
advises all persons to stay away from airport parking lots, 
except for diplomatic lots located close to the terminal. 
 
General Crime.  There is a significant level of common street 
crime in certain areas of Caracas and other major cities in 
Venezuela.  These crimes are of the pick-pocketing, 
 
purse-snatching variety and visitors are advised to be aware 
of their surrounding and to be particularly alert in crowded 
areas.  Jewelry items, particularly gold-colored, attract the 
attention of thieves and should be left in a safe place along 
with other valuables. 
 
If you are confronted in a robbery situation, the RSO 
suggests that you comply with the criminals' demands.  Do not 
attempt to run or antagonize the perpetrator.  Most criminals 
only seek cash and jewelry items; many will resort to 
violence if you resist their demands. 
 
To avoid being victims of a crime, visitors should remain 
alert to their surroundings and maintain constant control of 
purses, backpacks, briefcases and luggage. 
 
The Embassy recommends the use of hotel and radio dispatched 
taxis and group travel whenever possible, especially after 
dark.  Travelers should carry only the minimum cash needed 
and, if possible, no credit cards when venturing outside of 
the hotel. 
 
Civil Disturbances.  Travelers to Venezuela should be aware 
of the potential for violent demonstrations, especially in 
the urban centers, and exercise appropriate caution by 
standing well clear of public protests, police lines and 
barricades. 
 
CAR RENTAL 
---------- 
Car rentals must be pre-authorized with the Agency 
responsible for your visit. 
 
MEDICAL 
------- 
Venezuela recommends that all travelers be vaccinated prior 
to arrival.  As yellow fever vaccine is difficult to obtain 
in Venezuela, do not count on Embassy to provide vaccination. 
 In addition, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requires a 
Yellow Fever vaccination certificate for travelers older than 
one year of age arriving from various countries.  Information 
about vaccination requirements for travel to Venezuela may be 
obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention's Internet site at http://www.cdc.gov/travel. 
 
The water is considered contaminated.  Drink only bottled 
water or carbonated soft drinks and avoid ice in drinks.  Do 
not eat raw vegetables or fruits unless they have been 
disinfected, peeled or cooked.  Wash your hands often with 
hot, soapy water. 
 
Cases of dengue fever and malaria are reported throughout 
Venezuela each year.  Travelers planning to spend time 
outdoors should bring insect repellent; wear long trousers; 
and avoid wet areas. Symptoms include fever, headaches, 
diarrhea and general malaise.  While rarely fatal, you should 
see a doctor if you experience these symptoms. 
 
The Embassy does not make or guarantee payments to medical 
providers on behalf of non-U.S. Government employees.  All 
individuals should bring clear evidence of medical insurance 
coverage.  In case emergency evacuation is required, non-USG 
employees, USG contract staff, and locally employed staff 
from other posts must have adequate medical and air ambulance 
insurance and must carry the contact information with them. 
Venezuelan hospitals and physicians do not accept insurance 
documents and may require payment in cash or be credit card. 
 
WEATHER 
------- 
Daytime temperatures in Margarita are usually between 78 and 
87 degree Fahrenheit.  Although Margarita is basically a 
desert island, from June to July and November to January rain 
showers are common.  Embassy recommends travelers bring a 
light sweater for evening outings and an umbrella, no matter 
the time of year. 
 
COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE PRESS 
----------------------------- 
Travelers are remained that Public Affairs is responsible for 
handling press arrangements for both mission personnel and 
official visitors.  Contact the Public Affairs Officer, 
Salome Hernandez, 58-212-907-8363 or the Press Attache, Brian 
Penn, 58-212-907-8325 after arrival if you believe you may 
have contact with the press while in Venezuela. 
BROWNFIELD