06DAMASCUS2777
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Lebanon, Syria/Qatar,
Mon Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2777/01 1631159
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (508)
O 121159Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9595
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6022
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3882
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2403
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7086
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1073
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4459
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0684
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6823UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002777 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Lebanon, Syria/Qatar, 
Syria/Yemen, Palestinian Territories, Iraq (6/12) 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that President Asad received 
former US Senator James Abourezk, Chairman of the American-Arab 
Anti-Discrimination Committee on Sunday. Talks during the meeting 
concentrated on the situation in Iraq, Syria's full support for 
the political process there, and means to restore security in 
Iraq. The talks also dealt with the troubled peace process in the 
Middle East and Syria's firm stance towards it, based on 
international resolutions. Both sides touched upon terrorism and 
combating it, as well as Syria's current process of reform at all 
levels, particularly in the economic field. 
 
Papers also reported that the Lebanese party, "al-Maradah," 
headed by former Lebanese Minister Sulaiman Franjieh, underlined 
the strategic relations connecting Syria and Lebanon. The Party, 
in a document published on the 28th anniversary of the 
assassination of Tony Sulaiman Franjieh, father of Sulaiman 
Franjieh, his wife, daughter and companions in the Ihden 
massacre, called on all Lebanese to recognize the positive 
aspects of maintaining good ties with Syria and her main role in 
ending the civil war in Lebanon. The Party noted that Syria has 
supported the Lebanese army and resistance as well as the al-Taif 
Accord, stressing the importance of maintaining the strategic 
relationship between the Syrian and Lebanese people. 
 
On the other hand, "al-Maradah" Party described the Lebanese 
national resistance's weapon as an honor for Lebanon, saying that 
this weapon had been created to liberate the country from the 
Israeli occupation. "This weapon is legal because of Lebanon's 
right of resistance to protect itself from Israeli dangers and to 
liberate Sheba'a farms and the Lebanese captives in Israeli 
jails," the document added. In a statement issued during the 
commemoration, in which "al-Maradah" Party was launched, Sulaiman 
Franjieh stressed Lebanon's Arab identity, that rejects all kinds 
of foreign intervention in Lebanese internal affairs, calling 
upon all Lebanese to enhance the country's national unity. For 
his part, Lebanese ex-Premier Omar Karami called for early 
elections in accordance with the new electoral law to allow 
healthy representation of the Lebanese people in the parliament. 
He criticized foreign interference in Lebanon, indicating that 
the so-called "March 14th Forces" are leading Lebanon to the edge 
of collapse. Meanwhile, Lebanese ex-premier Najib Miqati stressed 
the importance of the fraternal relations between Syria and 
Lebanon. "Fraternity, history and geography connect the two 
countries," Mr. Miqati said in a statement. 
 
Papers also reported that Ahmad Ali Saed, Secretary General of 
the Yemeni Unionist Popular Liberation Party, expressed the 
Yemeni people's support for Syria's positions under the 
leadership of President Asad in the face of the pressures and 
threats to which she is exposed. This came in discussions held on 
Sunday between Assistant Secretary General of al-Ba'th Arab 
Socialist Party Abdullah al-Ahmar and Saed. Talks during the 
meeting dealt with the achievements of the two parties in their 
countries and the latest developments in the Arab region, 
particularly the situations in Palestine and Iraq and the foreign 
pressures against Syria. The two sides stressed the necessity of 
enhancing Arab solidarity in facing challenges and supporting the 
Palestinian people in the face of Israeli aggression, to 
establish their independent state with Jerusalem as its capital 
and maintain the right of return of the Palestinian refugees to 
their homeland. They also reiterated the importance of 
maintaining Iraq's territorial integrity and sovereignty by 
ending the foreign occupation of Iraq. 
 
All papers reported that Sheikh Hamad Bin Khaleifa al-Thani, Emir 
of Qatar, awarded an order of merit to Mr. Hajem Ibrahim, Syria's 
ambassador to Qatar, on ending his term of office, and expressed 
satisfaction over the distinguished ties connecting the two 
brotherly countries. "We wish for the brotherly Syrian people 
more development, progress and security in all domains of life," 
The Qatari Emir said. For his part, the Syrian ambassador 
stressed the deep-rooted relations between Syria and Qatar. 
 
End of summary 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
 
"President Asad receives Chairman of the American-Arab Anti- 
Discrimination Committee and reviews with him the situation in 
Iraq, the stumbling peace process, the issue of terrorism and the 
current reform process in Syria" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
6/12) 
 
"Minister of Information Bilal: Syria is cooperating fully with 
Brammertz, Head of International Investigation Commission into 
the assassination of former Lebanese PM al-Hariri.... Syria seeks 
to unveil the truth about the killers of al-Hariri.... The doors 
of Damascus are open to Lebanese brothers" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 6/12) 
 
"Lebanese figures warn against dangers of foreign intervention in 
Lebanon's internal affairs. Former Lebanese Prime Minister Karami 
calls for early elections. Former Lebanese Minister Franjieh: We 
reject hegemony" (Government-owned Tishreen, 6/12) 
 
"Prince of Qatar: We are proud of distinguished relations with 
Syria" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/12) 
 
"Israeli massacres continue in Gaza. Israeli Prime Minister 
Olmert threatens to liquidate Palestinian figures" (Government- 
owned Al-Thawra, 6/12) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
"A Response that Is an Announcement" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
Maha Sultan, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(6/12): "The US reaction to the Gaza massacre was the most 
insolent of all previous American reactions to Israeli 
massacres.... 
 
"Not only did Washington defend the killing of Palestinian 
civilians, but it also thanked Israel for suspending the 
bombardment and called on the Palestinian Authority to stop what 
it called terrorist Palestinian actions against Israel.... 
 
"Had we been living in a world that supports justice and 
humanity, the officials of the US Administration -- before the 
Israeli terrorists -- would have been brought to trial before 
the whole world for committing and encouraging crimes against 
humanity.... 
 
"The worst and gravest thing about the US reaction to the Gaza 
massacre is that it ushers in a new stage marked by  stronger 
collusion with the Israeli plans and the methods of realizing 
them, no matter how brutal these methods may be. This reaction is 
an announcement to Palestinians that they should expect nothing 
from the US Administration and the international community and 
its organizations. Will the deluded Palestinian leaders finally 
realize this and recognize the threat that this collusion poses 
to their entire cause?" 
 
--------------------- 
 
"What Right Is This?" 
 
--------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, said (6/12): "The United States tried to justify the 
killing of Palestinian civilians on the Gaza beach when it 
announced, in a more than provocative manner, that Israel has 
the right to defend itself.... 
 
"US Administration officials build their positions on pure 
Israeli considerations and sometimes upstage Israeli 
officials.... 
 
"Some Arab governments have kept silent and adopted harmful 
positions toward Israel's crimes thus opening the Arab arena for 
Israeli and American aggression and for deliberate killing and 
sometimes genocide against Arab citizens, who are bleeding 
around the clock in Palestine and Iraq...." 
---------------------------- 
 
"Gaza Beach Massacre " 
 
---------------------------- 
 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (6/12): "The world community should not feel content with 
condemning the Israeli massacre on the Gaza beach, calling for 
self-restraint, or awaiting the results of the investigation 
that Israel said it will conduct.... 
 
"The massacre once again exposes the dirty racist Israeli 
mentality.... The United States is Israel's real partner in its 
criminal policy and racist practices.... The US reaction to 
Israel's killing of Palestinian civilians on the Gaza beach was 
more provocative than the crime itself, and more painful than 
the scene of the appalling killing.... 
 
"The Gaza beach crime, the massacres of Hadithah and Al-Ishaqi, 
and the thousands other crimes that television cameras did not 
capture or that have not yet been revealed, carry almost the 
same fingerprints. They are established war crimes against 
humanity. If they go unpunished because the balance of power and 
international politics would be upset, they will be left to 
history, which no one can forge...." 
 
-------------------------- 
 
"Israeli Massacre in Gaza" 
 
-------------------------- 
 
Samir Abd-al-Rahman, a columnist in government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
commented (6/12): "The hypocrisy of the world superpowers and 
the silence of some Arab countries encourage Israel to shed 
Palestinian blood every day.... 
 
"What is most ridiculous is Washington's expression of 
satisfaction with Israel's announcement that it halted the 
artillery shelling of Gaza.... Washington gives Israel an open 
authorization, through the so-called right of self-defense, to 
attack Palestinians.... 
 
"What is most astonishing is the call on Israel to investigate 
the Gaza massacre.... The results of any investigation will not 
be different from the results of US investigations into the 
massacres of Hadithah and Al-Ishaqi in Iraq.... 
 
"Israel, through its attacks on Palestinians, ultimately seeks 
to expel Palestinians who have remained in the occupied 
territories and to force Palestinians to drop their right of 
return...." 
 
Johnson-Casares