06DAMASCUS426
Damascus Media Reaction: Cartoons on Prophet Mohamed,
Mon Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0426/01 0371519
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061519Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6889
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5765
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3661
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2121
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6889
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0762
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4252
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0480
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6631UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Cartoons on Prophet Mohamed, 
Lebanon, Palestinian Territories, Iraq, State of Union Address 
(2/3-6) 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that on Saturday angry mobs 
protesting cartoons depicting the prophet Mohamed as a terrorist 
stormed the buildings housing the Danish and Norwegian Embassies 
in Damascus.  Protestors set fire to both missions and pillaged 
the contents of the first-floor office of the Chilean Embassy 
located in the building housing the Danish Embassy.  Papers 
reported that the Syrian mufti and the Awqaf minister expressed 
regret over the incidents. 
 
Syrian papers also published a statement by the Syrian Foreign 
Ministry in which the Ministry expressed its regret over the 
acts of violence that accompanied the protests and damaged the 
embassies in Damascus.  In the statement the Ministry said, "We 
understand the popular anger over the offences against the 
Prophet but it is unacceptable for law and order to be violated 
in the country." 
 
The ministry's statement echoed comments by the country's top 
religious leader, Grand Mufti Sheikh Ahmed Badreddine Hassun. 
"It is regrettable that certain people have poorly expressed 
their protest against the European newspapers' publication of 
images that are offensive to the Prophet," he said. 
Sheikh Hassun, whose comments were carried by state media, 
suggested "elements who do not believe in dialogue were 
introduced among the demonstrators" in Damascus. "We are sad 
about their actions that harm our dialogue with the Danish and 
Norwegian people," Sheikh Hassun said. 
Syrian papers also reported that anti-terrorism units clashed 
with an armed "takfiri terrorist group" in the town of Kafr 
Batna outside Damascus. Takfiris are extremist Islamic militants 
who label other Muslims as apostates, issuing religious fatwas, 
or edicts, to kill others. A SANA release said the group was 
planning to carry out terrorist attacks in Damascus and its 
suburbs. The release added that the leader and two of his aides 
were killed during an exchange of fire lasting 30 minutes. 
 
End summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"Syria expresses regret over the violent acts during the protests 
which caused material damages at some embassies. No threats 
against foreign citizens. The anger continues. Lebanese Interior 
Minister Hasan Sabeh resigns following Beirut protest 
demonstration" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/6) 
 
"Syria's anti-terrorism forces kill chief of a takfiri group, 
arrest two of his assistants and confiscate weapons and 
instruments of provocation." (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/6) 
 
"The Mufti of the Republic: We hope for dialogue, and regret this 
mode of protest" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/5) 
 
"Despite tight security measures, demonstrators storm the 
embassies of Denmark and Norway in Damascus to protest insults to 
the Prophet Mohamed" Government-owned Tishreen, 2/5) 
 
"Denmark officially apologizes to Syria for cartoons on Prophet 
Mohamed. French Ambassador in Damascus notes that publication of 
cartoons of the Prophet are contrary to French values" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/3) 
 
"The issue of cartoons on Prophet Mohamed escalates. Western 
newspapers went to an extreme. Indications show that the crisis 
will reach a dangerous state. Demonstrations sweep the Islamic 
world calling for boycott of European products" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 2/4) 
 
"The French Ambassador in Damascus Jean-Francois Girault: 
Insulting religions is a foolish and disallowed act" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 2/4) 
 
"The People's Assembly calls on world parliaments to confront 
biased campaigns against Islam" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/3) 
 
 
 
"President Asad discusses with Arab-French Nida Society the role 
of intellectuals and journalists in boosting dialogue. President 
Asad: Syria's role is pivotal to realize peace and stability" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/3) 
 
"The killing the Lebanese youth in the Shebaa Farms escalates. 
Hizbollah retaliates. Lebanese FM Salloukh: The international 
community is called upon to move and stop the Israeli 
aggressions. Lebanese personalities: Lebanese resistance 
confronts aggression" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/4) 
 
"Subsequent to a meeting with a delegation from the Council for 
the National Interest: We refuse to place Hizbollah on the 
terrorism list" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/6) 
 
"FM Farouk Shara confirms continued Arab support for 
Palestinians. Khaled Mashaal, Chief of Hamas Political Bureau: We 
work to form a national coalition government" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 2/6) 
 
"Hamas confirms its right to self-defense. Two Palestinian 
martyred in a new Israeli aggression against Gaza" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 2/6) 
 
"Hamas is expected to form the cabinet soon. Washington to starve 
the Palestinian people" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/4) 
 
"The Iraqi unified coalition chooses its candidate for Prime 
Ministry today" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/6) 
 
"One US soldier killed near Baghdad. The final results of the 
Iraqi elections will be announced soon. Additional $120 billion 
to cover war costs. A news conference by Rumsfeld transforms 
into a hearing on Iraq. (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/4) 
 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"Even Apology Is Insufficient" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (2/5): "The Danish government and some other European 
governments, whose newspapers reprinted the cartoons about the 
Prophet Muhammad, are responsible for the escalating protests in 
the Islamic world and for any reactions that attacks on 
religious sanctities might draw in the future.... 
 
"The Danish Prime Minister's failure to offer an apology at the 
beginning led to the escalation of anger in the Islamic 
world.... 
 
"The Arab and Islamic countries must apply pressure to drive 
European countries to take legal measures against those who use 
the freedom of speech to offend other societies and faiths...." 
 
--------------------- 
 
"Claims on Democracy" 
 
--------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, commented (2/5): "The Arab citizens feel and see 
clearly that they are directly targeted by Israel and America, 
and they are convinced that what is being promoted as reform and 
Western democracy raises scores of questions regarding the 
causes, motives and consequences, especially in the light of 
reports that show that there is a lot of wealth expended in this 
effort to promote these ideas.... 
E 
 
 
"This belief is enforced by the fact that the Arabs who are 
impassioned by Western democracy have kept silent about the 
deliberate insults to Muhammad, and indeed some have used these 
attacks as an occasion to defend what they call the freedom of 
opinion and expression... 
 
"Israelis, Americans and some Europeans speak publicly of what 
they call Islamic terrorism, but plunge into wars to insult Islam 
and the Muslims, imposing sanctions on them, keeping them from 
knowledge and technology; and then it is they who speak of what 
they call political realism, opening up to others and receiving 
their opinions...." 
 
 
------------------------- 
 
"Reasons of Israeli Anger" 
 
------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (2/4): "Lebanese PM Al-Saniora's statement, saying 
that Hizbollah is a resistance movement, might have disturbed 
Israel and its allies and masters so it decided to commit the 
crime of assassinating the 17-year old Lebanese shepherd in the 
Shebaa Farms. This crime is like a message to the Lebanese 
saying Israel is angry and dissatisfied with Al-Saniora's 
statement and the subsequent step that was taken; namely the 
return of the ministers from Hizbollah and Amal Movement to the 
[Lebanese] government.... 
 
"Israel is angry because when the Lebanese and their government 
say that the resistance is not a militia, they foil all Israeli 
and American attempts to end the resistance based on Resolution 
1559.... 
 
"Through the killing of the Lebanese boy, Israel told the 
Lebanese that it will not leave Lebanon alone or allow accord 
and reconciliation in Lebanon, and that its aggression will 
continue in various forms.... 
 
"Will this drive some Lebanese to change their calculations and 
not exclude Israel from what happened, is happening, and will 
happen?" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"State of the Failure Address" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Samir al-Shibani, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (2/4): "In his State of the Union Address, President Bush 
was unable to hide the signs of weakness and defeat.... 
Observers are fully convinced that Bush's war on Iraq has 
failed.... 
 
"The US President showed unlimited bias towards Israel.... This 
perpetuates tension and conflict in the region. It is necessary 
for the peoples of the region, therefore, to stand fast and 
entrench the concept of resistance as a method and behavior 
because it is the only way to force Israelis and their 
supporters to comply with the "ABCs" of peace. Any other wager 
will lose. Indeed, it might heighten the aggressiveness of the 
Israeli and American practices against the world". 
 
---------------------- 
 
"Who Provokes Hatred?" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Ahmad Hamadah, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (2/3): "While Arabs and Muslims call for dialogue and 
understanding among nations and civilizations, many Western 
 
 
countries close doors to dialogue with them, and their media, 
supported by the Zionist lobby and Israel, launch campaigns 
entailing lies and fabrications to harm Arab and Muslim 
standing, distort their civilized image before the world public, 
and describe them as terrorists, killers, and criminals.... 
 
"Cartoons about the Prophet Muhammad are part of the erroneous 
understanding of the Arab and Muslim culture and civilization, 
especially after the 9/11 attacks.... Such campaigns provoke 
hatred among nations instead of promoting the values of 
tolerance.... Arab and Islamic organizations must make further 
efforts to advance the culture of tolerance and to explain to 
misled people that Islam condemns attacks on any person 
regardless of his race and religion...." 
 
Seche