06DAMASCUS3914
Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon,
Wed Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3914/01 2211307
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091307Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0872
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6169
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4012
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2564
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7206
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1199
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4581
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0800
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6939UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon, 
Syria/Venezuela (8/9) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers today reported that the Syrian 
Cabinet listened to a political review by Foreign Minister 
Mouallem confirming that Arab Foreign Ministers oppose any UN 
Security Council resolution on Lebanon that doesn't include 
Lebanese demands, and any other resolution that gives Israel 
political gains which it has been unable to achieve by 
aggression. 
 
Papers also reported that Desiree Santos Amaral, Deputy Speaker 
of the Venezuelan Parliament, conferred with members of the 
Syrian-Venezuelan Friendship Parliamentary Association headed by 
Mustafa al-Owaied. During the meeting Amaral reiterated her 
country's support of Syria's positions regarding legitimate Arab 
causes, as well as of the Lebanese and Palestinian people's 
steadfastness in the face of Israeli aggression. Amaral hailed 
Syria's hosting of the Lebanese displaced by the Israeli 
aggression on Lebanon. She expressed the Venezuelan parliament's 
desire to develop cooperation with the Syrian People's Assembly 
and to activate the role of the  Parliamentary Friendship 
Associations between the two parliaments. For his part, al- 
Owaied stressed the importance of developing relations between 
the two parliaments. 
 
Papers also cited an article by US journalist Bert Stephens 
published in the 'Wall Street Journal' saying that ... Israel has 
nothing to show from its aggression on Lebanon, underlining that 
Israel has so far gained no Lebanese territory, has killed no 
Hezbollah leaders, and has failed to abate the missile barrage 
that has sent a million Israelis from their homes and workplaces. 
"Generally speaking, wars are lost either militarily or 
politically. Israel is losing both ways" Stephens said, 
clarifying that at the beginning of the war Israeli officials 
boasted that they had destroyed 50% of Hezbollah's military 
capabilities and needed just 10 to 14 days to finish. But after a 
record 140 Katyushas landed on Israel, Israeli Prime Minister 
Ehud Olmert told visiting Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice 
that he needed another 10 to 14 days. Stephens noted Israel's 
failure since the beginning of the war, and a change in official 
Israeli statements, , saying "When the war began, Israeli 
officials spoke of 'breaking' Hezbollah; next of evicting 
Hezbollah from the border area; then of 'degrading' Hezbollah's 
capabilities; now of establishing an effective multinational 
force that can police the border." "Israel's goals are becoming 
less ambitious" he emphasized, noting that Israel seems unable to 
defeat Hezbollah. He questioned Israel's intelligence 
capabilities, indicating that the war began with a string of 
intelligence failures about Hezbollah's military and fighting 
capabilities. 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Vice President Shara and Prime Minister Ottri review with the 
Egyptian Popular Delegation recent developments in the Arab 
arena. Shara: The absence of Arab solidarity and US collusion is 
the main motive for the Israeli aggression against Lebanon" 
Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/9) 
 
"Foreign Minister Mouallem receives phone calls from Iranian, 
German and Danish FMs, as well as Deputy Russian Foreign 
Minister. Discussions focus on international diplomatic moves 
regarding the Lebanese issue. Mouallem warns against adopting a 
UNSC resolution that does not enjoy Lebanese approval" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/9) 
 
"The Cabinet listens to political reviews by Foreign Minister 
Mouallem and Information Minister Bilal about recent developments 
in the Israeli aggression against Lebanon and Syrian contacts 
regarding that issue" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/9) 
 
"Deputy Foreign Minister Mikdad and Information Minister Bilal 
review developments in the Israeli aggression against Lebanon 
with the Chinese envoy and a delegation from the Venezuelan 
parliament" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/9) 
 
"Israel commits  scattered massacres in Lebanon in the US style. 
 
The Israeli army takes revenge upon Lebanese civilians after big 
failure in confrontations with Hizbollah" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/9) 
"Heavy missile-shelling by the Lebanese Resistance. Israeli 
occupation evacuates settlements in Northern Israel. 29 Israeli 
soldiers killed or injured and eight Israeli tanks destroyed by 
the Lebanese national resistance. President Lahoud: Lebanon has 
won politically. The US-French draft resolution meets the demands 
of Israeli goals" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/9) 
 
"US Military Journalist Bert Stephens [in World Street Journal]: 
Israel is facing its worst humiliation" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/9) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------ 
 
"Before It Is Too Late" 
 
 
------------------------ 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (8/9): "The seriousness of Arabs in shouldering their 
historic responsibility toward Lebanon is now put to a real 
test.... Some Arab governments moved late, only to save face and 
after the Lebanese resistance proved not easy to crush.... 
 
"Now there are hopes that the Arab diplomatic effort that the 
Beirut conference initiated will succeed in rectifying the 
crisis management diplomacy that the United States and France 
are leading through their Security Council draft resolution, 
which seeks to lead Lebanon to where Ehud Olmert and his 
criminal war machine failed to lead it, within the plan to 
create a new Middle East.... 
 
"It is still not too late for Arabs to correct the negative Arab 
position and make efforts on the international scene to support 
Lebanon's position and the steadfastness of its valiant national 
resistance and to curb Israeli terrorism and reject all the 
colonial plans and the Security Council formulas that do not 
serve the interests of Lebanon first and the Arab nation 
second." 
 
-------------- 
 
"A US Slip-up" 
 
-------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(8/9): "The remark by Nabih Berri, Speaker of the Lebanese 
Parliament, that the Franco-American UNSC draft resolution gives 
Israel more than it asked for, was perhaps the most expressive 
description of the essence of this draft.... 
 
"While everyone knew that the US Administration was from the 
beginning a partner in the aggression, the French position came 
as a surprise, even to those who placed their bets on it.... The 
international community and its superpowers showed that they are 
sliding completely toward the American position.... 
 
"The draft resolution showed the narrow and limited margins 
within which these powers operate.... After much 
procrastination, France appeared closer to the American 
position, while other positions were completely absent.... 
 
"The clarifications that US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice 
offered regarding the draft resolution added insult to injury. 
She admitted that the draft seeks to keep Israeli forces in 
their positions. This clearly shows that the convening of the 
Security Council was intentionally delayed to enable Israel to 
occupy Lebanese territory to serve as a chip for bargaining and 
blackmail.... 
 
 
"We hope that Arabs, in light of all this, will reconsider their 
calculations and stop searching for room to maneuver within the 
roles and positions of others...." 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
"Presenting the Victory of Resistance over Aggressors" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
Isam Dari, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(8/9): "The Lebanese, who pinned their hopes on a French 
position different from the US position, were disappointed.... 
 
"France, which falsely claims to care about its ally in the 
region, Lebanon, has not forgetten its past in the region, in 
general, and in Lebanon, in particular. It took the side of 
Israel and the United States.... 
 
"Those who believe that France loves a strong, free, and 
sovereign Lebanon, are mistaken; France wants Lebanon as it left 
it six decades ago, weak, frail, and implementing orders. It 
wants it just as Israel and the United States want it: a link in 
an old plan and another new plan. The Franco-American UNSC draft 
resolution, therefore, came to reap the victory of the 
resistance and present it to Israel...." 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
"Open War and Unified Resistance Front" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Suwwan, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
said (8/9): "Israel's attacks against Lebanon violate all 
international laws and conventions and the UN Charter. The right 
to resistance in Lebanon, Palestine, and Iraq is a sacred right 
acknowledged by worldly and divine laws.... 
 
"The Lebanese resistance proved to the world that peoples cannot 
be subjugated even if they pay a heavy price. 
 
"What Israel is doing in Lebanon and the Palestinian territories 
is very serious.... It minimizes the chances for a political 
settlement in the region and kills the very basis of peace.... 
 
"This dictates that Arab countries and the international 
community work to force Israel to comply with the requirements 
of a just and lasting peace.... 
 
"Those who fear that the Palestinian-Lebanese-Israeli 
confrontation might turn into an open war and conflict must not 
broadcast their fears. This is required if the issue is to move 
toward a solution. Those who say otherwise are either terrified 
or happy seeing Israel isolate the Palestinians and the Lebanese 
and keeping the conflict and the confrontation away from their 
palaces and despotic regimes." 
 
Corbin