06DAMASCUS5137
Damascus Media Reaction:  Peace Process, Lebanon, Iraq,
Tue Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #5137/01 3041316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 311316Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2259
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6342
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4148
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2733
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7332
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1355
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4713
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0931
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7064UNCLAS DAMASCUS 005137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction:  Peace Process, Lebanon, Iraq, 
Palestinian Territories (10/31) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers reported President Asad's meeting with a 
delegation of the Foreign Journalists Association in which he 
underscored the role of media and journalists in conveying facts and 
enhancing communication among civilizations. President Asad answered 
questions about the peace process in the region, the importance of 
the roles of Europe and America in establishing a just and 
comprehensive peace, Syrian-European relations, Syria's stances 
vis--vis current developments in the region, Syrian and Arab 
relations with Latin American countries and ongoing modernization 
and reforms in Syria in all fields. 
Papers also reported the graduation ceremony of a new class of air 
force cadets at which Chief of Staff Lieutenant General Ali Habib 
delivered a speech confirming Syria's readiness to confront any 
aggression and that it will not be intimidated by threats.  Habib 
praised the Lebanese resistance's confrontation of the recent 
Israeli aggression against Lebanon.  He reiterated that Syria would 
always stand by the international community to establish peace and 
stability in the region by implementing legitimate international 
resolutions. 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
"Under president Asad's patronage, a new class of air force cadets 
graduates.  Chief of Staff Lieutenant General Habib:  Threats and 
pressure against Syria will not intimidate or divert it from its 
firm stances and principles" (Government-owned Tishreen, 10/31) 
"President Asad underscores the important role of media and 
journalists in conveying facts and enhancing communication among 
civilizations.  President Asad emphasizes the important role of 
Europe and America in the peace process" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
10/31) 
"Syria's Information Minister Dr. Mohsen Bilal and former Russian 
Premier Primakov review reactivation of media cooperation between 
Syria and Russia" (Government-owned Tishreen, 10/31) 
"British expert Williams confirms that Israel used depleted uranium 
in its latest aggression against Lebanon.  Lebanese call for a new 
government and warn against conspiratorial positions by the March 14 
group" (Government-owned Tishreen, 10/31) 
"A US diplomat is involved in smuggling arms into Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/31) 
"While Haaretz calls for returning the Golan to Syria, US daily 
'Washington Post':  Israel is working hard to double the number of 
settlers in the occupied Syrian Golan" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
10/31) 
"The International Parliamentary Federation calls on Israel to 
release HAMAS MPs.  Omert threatens to wage a massive assault in the 
West Bank.  Hahieh calls on the international community to stop 
Israeli attack" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/31) 
"One Palestinian martyred and two wounded in Beit Hanon" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 10/31) 
"A US security delegation suddenly in Baghdad.  Various explosions 
claim the lives of scores of Iraqis.  Zebari supports extension for 
US troops in Iraq" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 10/31) 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------- 
"Alicante Declaration" 
---------------------- 
Muhammad Khayr al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (10/31):  "Peace in the Middle East is not only a 
regional need but also an international need.  This is why the 
foreign ministers of 11 Mediterranean countries issued a declaration 
in the Spanish city of Alicante calling for the launch of a new and 
credible Middle East peace process.... 
"The current peace process has failed despite efforts and 
negotiations that lasted for 10 years, during which the Arab 
position, particularly the Syrian position, was characterized by 
seriousness, firm commitment to the principles and international 
terms of reference of peace, and positive cooperation with every 
international effort that sought to guarantee the success and 
survival of the peace process.  The Israeli and American positions, 
on the other hand, were characterized by intransigence regarding the 
peace requirements, and Israel used the peace process to waste time, 
believing that Arabs adopted peace as the only strategic option and 
dropped all other options.... 
"The previous peace process failed because Israel, supported by the 
 
United States, refused to comply with the requirements of peace, 
namely, withdrawing its forces to the June 4, 1967, border and 
recognizing the full legitimate national rights of the Palestinian 
people.  In order for the Alicante initiative not to meet the same 
failure and for the region not to witness further tension, chaos, 
and unrest endangering world peace, it is necessary to make Israel 
and those who take its side for personal reasons or strategic 
interests understand that policies of force, occupation, pressure, 
and threats will result in many disasters that will affect not only 
the countries that are targeted by these policies, but also, and 
mainly, the parties that adopt these policies.  The alternative, 
therefore, is a credible peace process proceeding from a serious 
Israeli desire for peace and a sincere American commitment to it and 
a positive, unbiased role leading the process to its desired end." 
------------------------ 
"'The Tripartite Attack,' and Continued Colonialist Course" 
------------------------ 
Dr. Khalaf al-Jarrad, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishrin, 
commented (10/31):  "The Tripartite Attack against Egypt in 1956, 
was not the first or the last in the wave of colonialist 
invasions....  The Arab world is currently witnessing fierce Western 
colonialist campaigns....  Pretexts and objectives have always been 
the same. 
"Those who have a chance to thoroughly examine recently released 
archive documents, memoranda, and correspondence on the old 
colonialist plans in the Arab region will find similarity, 
proximity, and indeed conformity between these objectives and known 
tactics of colonialist forces in past centuries and what their major 
heir (the United States) is declaring and doing today:  invasion, 
occupation, threats, political and diplomatic games, blackmail, 
provocation, and attempts to divide Arabs by bringing some of them 
closer and driving others away.  This is in addition to creating 
sedition, doubts, and obsessions among them through carefully 
thought-out media leaks, hints, suggestions, doublespeak, lies, 
psychological mobilization, personalization of issues, and inflation 
of differences.  The aim is to ignite the fire of Arab-Arab disputes 
and maintain the climate of tension so that the US Administration 
alone will remain the dominant power in continuation of the 
inherited colonialist traditions." 
------------------------ 
"Deliberate Criminality" 
------------------------ 
Umar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(10/31):  "A British press report revealed that Israel used 
uranium-based ammunition in its recent war against Lebanon.... 
Israel persists in inflicting long-term harm on the Lebanese.... 
"Israel was not content with immersing Lebanese territory in the 
blood of innocent people and with fully destroying Lebanon's 
infrastructure from north to south.  It left gifts for the Lebanese: 
 uranium, cluster bombs, mines, and phosphoric bombs that killed a 
number of Lebanese.  It refuses to give the maps of these deadly 
bombs to UNIFIL, and it continues to challenge Resolution 1701 and 
Lebanese sovereignty.... 
"We regret that no one in the international community is speaking 
up, demanding that Israel be held to account and punished for its 
proven crimes against Lebanon and the Lebanese...." 
Corbin