06DAMASCUS2406
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Syria/Spain,
Thu May 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0018
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2406/01 1451431
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251431Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9163
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5981
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3843
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2357
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7049
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1020
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4422
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0645
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6786UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Syria/Spain, 
Syria/Canada, Resolution 1680, Olmert's US Visit (5/25) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers commemorated the anniversary of the 
liberation of south Lebanon and featured a statement by former 
Lebanese Prime Minister Salim al-Hoss criticizing the Lebanese 
government's cancellation of the formal holiday, which had been 
approved earlier for celebrating the liberation and resistance. 
He stressed that the 25th of May is a national day symbolizing 
the great national and Pan-Arab achievement of liberating 
occupied Lebanese lands from the Israeli occupation. For its 
part, the Lebanese Democratic Party, headed by Talal Arslan, 
stressed that the Lebanese resistance is "a strategic balance and 
strength in the face of the Israeli enemy," adding that any 
dialogue about resistance should aim to reinforce it, not target 
it. The party warned against Western plans to internationalize 
the Lebanese issue, calling on all parties to behave wisely and 
adopt dialogue to solve all disputes. Papers cited a message of 
congratulation from the Golan prisoners to the Lebanese 
resistance on Liberation Day in Lebanon, saying, "we are a nation 
living in dignity, not fearing pressures and conspiracy against 
us." They stressed that their liberation from Israeli prisons is 
inevitable as long as there are men of great will. 
Papers also reported that Syria and Lebanon signed a memorandum 
of understanding to fight money laundering and terrorism 
financing within the framework of Syrian efforts to join the 
EGMONT GROUP [of Financial Intelligence Units.] Governor of the 
Central Bank of Syria, Dr. Adib Mayala, who also chairs the 
Commission to Fight Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing, 
signed the memorandum with Mohammed Al-Baasiri, Secretary of the 
Lebanese Special Investigation Commission. The memo is part of 
the Commission's quest to widen international cooperation to 
fight money laundering, and the persistent efforts of Syria to 
join the International EGMONT GROUP of financial intelligence 
entities. The EGMONT GROUP is an international network that 
works to collect information on suspicious activities from the 
financial industry, to analyze the data, and to make it 
available to national authorities and other intelligence units 
for use in combating terrorism and other financial crimes. 
 
Papers also reported that Bernardino Leon, Spanish State 
Secretary for Foreign Affairs, underlined the important role of 
 
SIPDIS 
Syria in the Middle East, saying "Syria is a central country in 
the region, and it is difficult to ignore its role." "Syria is 
witnessing important and attractive developments on the social, 
tourist and economic levels;  Spanish companies wish to 
contribute effectively to investments in Syria so as to boost 
relations between the countries," the Spanish Minister added, 
during a meeting with Buthaina Shaaban, Minister of Expatriates. 
Shaaban underlined the importance of Syrian-Spanish relations on 
all levels and expressed appreciation for Spain's positive role 
on Arab issues. 
 
Papers reported that Mahmoud al-Abrash, Speaker of the People's 
Assembly, discussed with Brad Trust, Head of a Canadian economic 
parliamentary delegation, strengthening of parliamentary 
relations between the two countries. During the meeting, al- 
Abrash expressed Syria's readiness to enhance economic relations 
with all countries, and with Canada in particular, in way that 
will reflect positively on Syrian development. The Canadian 
delegation, for its part, expressed its country's desire to 
contribute to an economic role in the region, particularly in 
Syria, who enjoys good investment climate. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Lebanon celebrates Liberation Day. President of Lebanon Lahoud: 
Disarming the national resistance is a conspiracy against 
Lebanon. Former Lebanese Premier al-Hoss: Liberation Day is an 
historical day. Prisoners of occupied Golan congratulate the 
Lebanese resistance on Liberation Day" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 5/25) 
 
"A memorandum of understanding with Lebanon on combating money 
laundering and financing terrorism" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
5/25) 
 
"Speaker of the People's Assembly al-Abrash discusses with a 
Canadian economic delegation boosting parliamentary and economic 
relations" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/25) 
"US President Bush supports Israeli Prime Minister Olmert's plan, 
and the Palestinian Authority rejects a unilateral settlement. 
Scores of Palestinians martyred and injured in an Israeli 
Incursion into Ramallah" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/25) 
 
"Spain: Syria is a pivotal country that can't be ignored" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/25) 
 
"FE-ARAB [Arab Federation for Latin America] Venezuela condemns 
pressures and threats against Syria" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
5/25) 
 
"Iraqi Prime Minister Al-Maliki expects to control security in 
Iraq within 18 months. Washington acknowledges difficulties 
facing its forces in Iraq" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/25) 
 
"UN SecGen Annan reiterates the importance of solving crisis with 
Iran through negotiation. Iranian President Nejad: We will react 
to any aggression by a historic blow" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
5/25) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
 
---------------------------------- 
 
"Resistance Is the Way to Freedom" 
 
---------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (5/25): "No military power can defeat a nation 
aspiring to freedom, adopting resistance as a strategic option, 
and rejecting surrender and bargaining.... 
 
"The unprecedented accomplishment of the Lebanese national 
resistance, with its limited resources but unyielding resolve, 
forced the strongest terrorist military power in the region to 
retreat.... 
 
"These days, while the Lebanese people commemorate the 
anniversary of the May 2000 victory, when the Israeli Army ran 
away from the hell of south Lebanon, dragging behind it the 
agents who betrayed the homeland and stabbed it in the back, 
some Lebanese parties are trying to disavow the resistance, or 
perhaps take revenge against it. They throw all their weight 
behind the attempts to disarm the resistance under feeble 
pretexts, to expose Lebanon to a vicious enemy that cannot 
forget its miserable defeat in the south six years ago and that 
is still trying to take revenge against the Lebanese national 
resistance and its forces and leaders.... 
 
"However, these desperate attempts will not succeed, and the 
resistance in Lebanon and in every other place and time will 
remain the only way to freedom." 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
"Flagrant Intervention in Lebanon's Domestic Affairs" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (5/25): "UN Security Council Resolution 1680 is a 
flagrant violation of international conventions and a blatant 
interference in the domestic affairs and sovereignty of UN 
member states.... 
 
"The Syrian position toward the resolution is based on the right 
of states to exercise their sovereignty and authority on their 
land and the fact that national laws and sovereignty have 
supremacy and cannot be touched, no matter what international 
 
resolutions may say.... 
 
"The United Nations is turning into a forum for American-Zionist 
tutelage over the world, particularly the Arab region and 
Islamic nations...." 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"What Is Hidden and What Is Announced on Olmert's Visit" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Adnan Ali, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(5/25): "We expect that during his visit to Washington Israeli 
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will fail in his effort to gain 
American support for the two main points on the agenda of his 
visit: the unilateral withdrawal plan and the Iranian nuclear 
file.... 
 
"The United States, which is facing problems in Iraq, Iran, and 
Afghanistan, does not want to appear to be abandoning the 
Roadmap at a time when it needs the international community's 
support and perhaps the support of some of the countries in the 
region for its anti-Iran policy. Also, Washington does not want 
any Israeli appearance on the stage of the Iranian nuclear 
crisis, as this would embarrass the US Administration, which is 
portraying this crisis as a confrontation between Iran and the 
entire international community.... 
 
"But these ostensible differences between the two allies must 
not conceal the fact that they often work for the same 
objectives. The situation sometimes dictates that they use 
certain tactics and take particular factors into consideration 
until the right time comes for them to market their joint 
approach...." 
 
SECHE