06DAMASCUS2238
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Kuwait, Iraq, Lebanon,
Sun May 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2238/01 1341427
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141427Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8962
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5948
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3814
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2325
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7020
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0984
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4392
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0615
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6756UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002238 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Kuwait, Iraq, Lebanon, 
Palestinian Territories, Syria/Italy (5/12-14) 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syria papers reported that Syria denied Friday 
evening Jordanian claims on the training of Hamas members in 
Syria and criticized the UNSC bid to issue a resolution on Syria 
and Lebanon as "an obstacle to clearing the air." 
 
Foreign Minister Walid al-Mouallem said in a joint press 
conference with his Kuwaiti counterpart Mohammed Salem al-Sabah 
that "the Jordanian claim that Hamas members, who are trained in 
Syria, have entered Jordan is inaccurate." 
 
"Syria is concerned about Jordan and about the Jordanian people 
as well as their security and is eager to develop relations 
between Syria and Jordan," he said. 
 
Asked about Syria's stance over the expected US-French UNSC 
resolution on Syria, Minister Mouallem said "ties between 
sisterly countries Syria and Lebanon do not need 
internationalization and what the UNSC is trying to do is just to 
block attempts to clear the air between Syria and Lebanon." 
 
And if there is Syrian mediation between Iran and the Gulf 
countries, Mouallem said "contacts between Iran and the Gulf 
Cooperation Council countries already exist and there is no need 
for mediators." 
 
At the beginning of the press conference, Mouallem said that he 
had conveyed to his Kuwaiti counterpart Sheikh Sabah, who invited 
him to visit Kuwait, what Syria has heard from the Iranian side, 
noting that he had listened attentively to the explanation made 
and will convey that to the Syrian leadership. 
 
Asked about statements of US Assistant Secretary of State David 
Welch that Syria is the only country outside Lebanon that is 
accused of assassinating former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik 
Hariri, Mouallem asked, "I wonder why he doesn't issue his 
documents" and stressed "I challenge that he has no proof" noting 
that "Syria is the most affected party from the assassination of 
the late al-Hariri." 
 
For his part, Kuwaiti Foreign Minister Sheikh Sabah said "we have 
talked about the role Kuwait might have to help to boost economic 
openness in Syria saying "there is a Syrian-Kuwaiti joint 
committee that will meet next month in Syria and that is a most 
welcome point." He said that discussions with Foreign Minister 
Mouallem have underlined the importance for the neighboring 
countries of Iraq to hold a meeting as soon as possible after the 
Iraqi government formation for discussion with brothers in Iraq 
and to put a joint vision for the upcoming Iraqi role as well as 
the role of neighboring countries in Iraq's security and 
stability. Sheikh Sabah said "we talked about Iran's nuclear 
file, the situation in Palestine and how to aid the Palestinian 
people as well as the need to acknowledge the Arab peace 
initiative and respect the Palestinian people's decision to elect 
the one who represents them. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Kuwaiti Prince and Prime Minister receive Foreign Minister 
Mouallem, and review regional issues and encouraging investments. 
Sabah admires President Asad's developmental views on boosting 
the economy. Mouallem: Damascus doors are opened for all Arab 
brothers" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/14) 
 
"Syrian-Kuwaiti talks to boost ties and discuss the latest 
developments in the region. Foreign Minister Mouallem voices 
readiness to hold dialogue with the US noting there are no secret 
channels with Bush administration. Kuwaiti Foreign Minister 
Mohammed al-Sabah: Syria is working to serve Arab interests... 
Kuwait will contribute to Syria's economic process" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 5/13) 
 
"Qaddoumi discusses Palestinian developments with Foreign 
Minister Mouallem. Vice President Shara receives an Iraqi 
delegation reiterating the importance of maintaining Iraq's 
 
integrity" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/12) 
 
"President Asad holds talks with Mayor of Istanbul and calls for 
increasing Syrian investments in Turkey. Asad receives Farouk Al- 
Qaddoumi Chairman of PLO Political Bureau and confirms: 
Dialogue is the solution for inter-Palestinian disagreements" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/12) 
 
"Palestinian FM Al-Zahhar: Hamas has no connection with smuggling 
arms to Jordan... Hamas officials are ready to visit Jordan to 
end the crisis" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/14) 
 
"Israeli occupation forces disperse an anti-separation wall 
demonstration in Ramallah by force. Red Crescent confirms lack of 
food and medical equipment in Gaza Strip" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 5/14) 
 
"Abbas accelerates appeal for international aid before the 
catastrophe exacerbates.  One Palestinian martyred, ten wounded 
in the West Bank" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/13) 
 
"Lebanese circles warn against failure of the national dialogue" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/14) 
 
"Repercussions of the Beirut demonstration of last Wednesday 
aggravate tension on the eve of national dialogue resumption in 
Lebanon. Four military Lebanese killed in a helicopter crash over 
Bekaa valley" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/13) 
 
"Ten Israeli jet fighters violate Lebanese airspace, reaching 
Beirut. Lahoud: Syria has maintained Lebanon's unity" (Government- 
owned Al-Thawra, 5/12) 
 
"An American soldier killed in Baghdad. The Iraqi government will 
be announced tomorrow" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/14) 
 
"Al-Fadila party withdraws from the Iraqi government. Four 
marines killed in Anbaar, Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/13) 
 
"Four US soldiers killed in Baghdad and Mosul. Disputes postpone 
announcement of the Iraqi government" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 5/12) 
 
"President Asad congratulates election of Napolitano as president 
of Italy" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/12) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------ 
 
"Wagering on Foreigners" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/13): "We know that the current US Administration is prepared 
to present more draft resolutions to the UN Security Council to 
harm and even besiege Syria. But we also know that some other 
big and influential powers in today's world stand on the side of 
justice and refuse to get involved in American plans that are 
based on false foundations and predetermined hostile positions 
toward Syria. 
 
"For more than five years, Bush's administration has never 
stopped applying pressure on Syria and directing accusations and 
fabricating lies against it. But other superpowers, like Russia 
and China, reject the continuation of the pressure on Syria and 
assert that there is no need for new Security Council 
resolutions against it. 
 
"Now the Bush administration wants to obtain a Security Council 
resolution demanding that Syria establish diplomatic relations 
with Lebanon. Since when has the establishment of diplomatic 
relations between countries been an American or an international 
affair? Can other countries ask the Security Council to issue 
resolutions demanding that the United States establish 
 
diplomatic relations with this country or that? Has Bush's 
administration forgotten that for half a century the United 
States has not recognized the government in Cuba and has imposed 
a relentless unjust siege on this country and its people? 
 
"What is more remarkable is that while friendly countries in the 
East and the West stand in the face of the pressure policy that 
the Bush administration is pursuing against Syria, some 'Arab 
brothers' volunteer to work, free of charge, for the American 
master. They fabricate lies that harm Syria and the struggle of 
the Palestinian people, or they make malicious accusations 
against Syria from Washington and New York in an exposed harmony 
between the neoconservatives who plan the US policy and groups 
and individuals in the region who accepted to mortgage 
themselves to foreigners and to abandon their national identity; 
who considered Syria, not Israel, their archenemy; and who stood 
in the American-Israel trench against nationalism, pan-Arabism, 
and resistance. 
 
"But we trust that these people represent only themselves. The 
entire Arab nation, on the other hand, supports Syria. All the 
friendly, honorable, and peace- and justice-loving nations in 
the world also support Syria. So Syria needs not fear as long as 
it wagers on all these and on right and justice." 
 
----------------- 
 
"Unjust Policies" 
 
----------------- 
 
Muhammad Ali Buza, an editorialist in government-owend Al- 
Thawra, wrote (5/12): "The international quartet's meeting in 
New York was part of the campaign of American-Zionist pressure 
against Palestinians. Its aim was to tighten siege on the 
Palestinian people and punish them for their democratic choice, 
which brought HAMAS to power, and wrest unfair positions and 
policies that would deepen tension and allow the Israeli 
terrorism to proceed with the policy of belligerence, siege, 
starvation, slaughter, and liquidation of the Palestinian 
people.... 
 
"The Quartet failed to prove its credibility and role as a 
supportive power entrusted with achieving stability and peace in 
the Middle East.... The Quartet, on the other hand, showed that 
it goes along with the American policy in its support for Israel 
in its continuous wars and aggression against the Arabs.... This 
would only prolong the crisis in the region.... Arabs, in 
coordination with the forces of freedom and peace in the world, 
need to apply pressure to change these policies and stop their 
champions from participating in the crime of punishing and 
destroying the Palestinian people...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
"Extending Bridges by Understanding, not by Spying" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
Haytham Salih, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (5/12): "The US endeavor to market big lies in its foreign 
policy on spreading democracy, namely its outreach initiative to 
build bridges between American intelligence agencies and Arabs 
and Muslims in the state of Michigan, 
 
"Bridge-building, though a beautiful name with many positive 
meanings that all the nations of the world call for, is in fact 
nothing but an intelligence game invented by the 
neoconservatives after the 11 September events to recruit people 
to spy on others in favor of the American military mentality.... 
 
"Bridges between the US Administration and Arabs and Muslims 
inside and outside the United States cannot be built by 
recruiting Arabs to spy on their brothers and the sons of their 
nation, or by eavesdropping on their conversations, monitoring 
their movements, or dealing with them as suspects. Nor can they 
 
be built by labeling Arabs as terrorists or potential terrorists 
or viewing them with a suspicious eye. Rather, they can be built 
through equality, respect, and trust for them inside the United 
States, and through understanding, dialogue, balanced relations, 
and noninterference in the domestic affairs of the Arab 
countries in our region." 
 
Seche