06DAMASCUS236
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iran, Syria/Spain,
Mon Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0236/01 0231452
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231452Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6664
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5738
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3635
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2093
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6866
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0728
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4226
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0456
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6607UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000236 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iran, Syria/Spain, 
Lebanon, Al-Asad Speech, Iraq, Palestinian Territories (1/23) 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers today reported positive reactions in 
Lebanon to President Asad's speech to the Federation of Arab 
Lawyers citing statements by former Lebanese Minister Wadi Al- 
 
Khazen, Kamal Shatila, President of the Lebanese People's 
Congress, Al-Diyar newspaper, and Hasan Nasrallah of Hizbollah. 
Papers also reported a speech by Hasan Nasrallah of Hizbollah 
during a university graduation ceremony in Beirut in which he 
said that "getting rid of Hizbollah is mere illusion" and that 
"anyone who collaborates with the US scheme is Israeli and 
Zionist." 
The Hizbollah chief accused the majority of the Lebanese 
government of not abiding by basic provisions of the ministerial 
statement and called for the cabinet's resignation and for 
formation of a national unity government. 
Syrian papers also reported the visit to Damascus by Francisco 
Javier Rojo Garcia, Speaker of the Spanish Senate, who underlined 
the importance of Syrian-Spanish relations and reiterated the 
importance of boosting cooperative ties between the two countries 
and working to achieve peace and stability in the region and the 
whole world. 
End summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Positive reactions to President Asad's speech in the Lebanese 
arena: Syria is the main guarantee for Arabs. Striking at Syrian- 
Lebanese relations and the Lebanese resistance are US demands. 
Nasrallah: Hizbollah is the banner of resistance, steadfastness, 
sacrifice and liberation" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/23) 
 
"Lebanese political and media circles: President Asad's speech at 
the Federation of Arab Lawyers expresses the opinion of loyal 
Lebanese. Hasan Nasrallah, Secretary General of Hizbollah: Those 
who conspire against Hizbollah will regret it"(Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/23) 
 
"Nasrallah calls for cabinet resignation to break the impasse: 
Getting rid of Hizbollah is mere illusion. Anyone who 
collaborates with the US scheme is Israeli and Zionist" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/23) 
 
"Bkhitan, Regional Assistant Secretary of the Ba'th Arab 
Socialist Party, receives a delegation representing the General 
Secretariat of the Arab National Conference and the Egyptian 
 
SIPDIS 
Committee for Afro-Asian Solidarity. Bkhitan: The current stage 
necessitates reactivation of joint Arab action" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 1/23) 
 
"The Federation of Arab Lawyers: A judicial board will be formed 
to defend Syria" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/23) 
 
"Speaker of the Spanish Senate, Francisco Javier Rojo Garcia, 
arrives in Damascus: "Enhancing cooperation and working to 
realize peace". 
 
"Brammertz, Head of International Investigation Committee into 
killing of Hariri, meets Lebanese President" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 1/23) 
 
"Three Palestinians martyred before elections. Marwan al- 
Bargouthi launches an election campaign from his prison: A 
democratic intifada is our tool toward liberation" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 1/23) 
"Tehran reiterates call for dialogue and criticizes Chirac's 
statement: If Iran is to pay the price, Europe will pay it as 
well" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/23) 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
"A Very Important Visit" 
Samir al-Shibani, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (1/23): "Iranian President Mahmud Ahmadinejad's visit to 
Syria has confirmed the righteousness and accuracy of Syria's 
options, for Syria has always been confident that Iran would only 
stand in Arab ranks and in the Arab trench, thus defending Arab 
rights and the Arabs' main issue, the Palestine question.... 
"The Syrian options have prevailed, the Syrian wager was 
correct.  Meanwhile, the wager by those who fabricated a battle 
with Iran was wrong, because, according to all readings and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during a university graduation ceremony in Beirut in which he 
said that "getting rid of Hizbollah is mere illusion" and that 
"anyone who collaborates with the US scheme is Israeli and 
Zionist." 
The Hizbollah chief accused the majority of the Lebanese 
government of not abiding by basic provisions of the ministerial 
statement and called for the cabinet's resignation and for 
formation of a national unity government. 
Syrian papers also reported the visit to Damascus by Francisco 
Javier Rojo Garcia, Speaker of the Spanish Senate, who underlined 
the importance of Syrian-Spanish relations and reiterated the 
importance of boosting cooperative ties between the two countries 
and working to achieve peace and stability in the region and the 
whole world. 
End summary. 
 
analyses, it was a crazy battle that struck the Arabs and Iran in 
the heart, thus making them the two main losers.... 
"What stresses the success of the visit is the joint US-Israeli 
criticism of the visit, which only projects the significance of 
the visit and stresses the sincerity and clarity of the exemplary 
relations that bind Syria and Iran.  Together, Syria and Iran 
represent the genuine front of resistance against all programs of 
elimination, division, and occupation...." 
"Israel Is not Jumblatt's Enemy" 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(1/23): "In his most recent televised statement, Walid Jumblatt, 
Leader of the Lebanese Progressive Socialist Party, did not 
conceal that Israel is not his enemy.... 
"Jumblatt is implementing specific instructions and guidance in 
harmony with the foreign plan that the Lebanese people are 
confronting stoutly.... 
"The confusion in Jumblatt's recent statement shows that he has 
became nothing but a media trumpet spreading poison and lies in 
Lebanese society in implementation of orders from his masters.... 
"Jumblatt is involved in plans against Lebanon and the region.... 
He is misleading the investigation into the Al-Hariri 
assassination by fabricating false testimony.... 
"Jumblatt can be expected to grow more vicious now that the truth 
about his foreign connections has become more evident and it has 
become impossible for him to return to his previous positions. 
But his latest statements leave no room for doubt that his 
accusations will backfire very soon." 
----------------------------------- 
"Sovereignty and Confused Concepts" 
----------------------------------- 
Dr. Fayez Sayegh, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (1/23): "As explained by President Asad, national 
sovereignty is above all international laws and conventions.... 
"Syria will continue to cooperate with the international 
community to identify the real perpetrator or perpetrators of the 
assassination of Prime Minister Al-Hariri on the basis of 
national sovereignty, to which we adhere, and the national 
interest, in which we take pride and for the sake of which we 
work, construct, and resist.... 
"Syria's interest does not conflict with the interest of a fair 
and professional investigation...." 
Seche