06DAMASCUS388
Damascus Media Reaction: HAMAS Election Win, Lebanon,
Thu Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0037
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0388/01 0331359
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (508)
O 021359Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6835
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5762
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3658
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2117
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6886
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0755
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4249
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0477
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6628UNCLAS DAMASCUS 00388 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: HAMAS Election Win, Lebanon, 
Prophet Muhammad Cartoons, Iraq (2/2) 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers reported President Asad's meeting with 
a delegation from the Council for the National Interest, a U.S. 
NGO. A SANA release stated that the talks dealt with ways of 
activating ties in the interest of both countries and thereby 
achieving security and stability in the region, through the 
language of dialogue and by listening to the views of the other. 
President Asad reviewed with the delegation Syria's stances on 
current events in the region. There was a discussion of terror 
and how to combat it, Iraq, and the latest developments in the 
Palestinian arena. The U.S. delegation stressed the importance 
of Syria's pivotal role in the region. 
 
Edward Peck, Chairman of the Council for the National Interest, 
underlined the need for diplomatic dialogue between Syria and 
the US on issues of mutual concern, the region and international 
issues in general. Peck told reporters, after meeting FM Shara, 
that the delegation he is heading includes former diplomats and 
ambassadors of the United States and noted that it dedicates its 
work to bringing more balance to U.S. policy in the Middle East. 
He pointed out that the group might not agree with U.S. policy 
on many issues. 
 
Peck said the delegation would put on its website a film about 
the visit and hold many meetings and seminars to explain the 
viewpoint of the officials the delegation had met. "The aim of 
this will be to find appropriate means to boost dialogue among 
countries, particularly between Syria and the U.S.," Peck said. 
 
Syrian papers also featured a SANA statement that the Foreign 
Ministry has summoned the Syrian ambassador to Copenhagen for 
consultation and explanation of the measures taken by the Danish 
government against insults to the Prophet Mohammed that are a 
violation of sanctity and holiness to hundreds of millions of 
Arabs and Muslims. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
 
President Asad reviews with a delegation from the U.S. Council 
for the National Interest Syria's positions on events in the 
region and means of reactivating US-Syria relations" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 2/2) 
 
"Foreign Ministry summons Syrian Ambassador to Copenhagen for 
explanation of measures taken by the Danish government against 
condemned insults to the personality of Prophet Mohammed" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/2) 
 
"Lebanese calls to solve the cabinet's crisis and to deal 
seriously with the Arab initiative" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
2/2) 
 
"In response to HAMAS' victory, Israel suspends revenues of 
Palestinian taxes. Relief organizations warn against suspending 
aid to the Palestinian Authority" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
2/2) 
 
"Straw announces the possibility of withdrawing British forces 
from Iraq. The National Reconciliation Front threatens a mutiny 
if militias are not dismantled and detainees released" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------ 
 
"Democracy Upon Request" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(2/2): "No person, group, or party raising the slogan of 
resistance and fighting for freedom is allowed to assume power 
or enter Arab parliaments because they endanger world peace and 
security. This is the view of the champions of freedom, the 
 
advocates of democracy, and defenders of human rights who occupy 
the White House and decision-making centers in the United 
States.... 
"Those who want to rule in the Arab world must recognize 
Israel's right not only to exist but also to practice 
aggression, occupation, destruction, intimidation, and 
terrorism. 
 
"The United States does not have the right to impose its own 
version of democracy on the world. Is it not shameful for a 
superpower to threaten to cut off aid from peoples and to 
besiege and starve them only because they dare to choose their 
representatives in parliaments and governments...?" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
"Palestinian Victims and Blind Bias" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Suwwan, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (2/2): "The American and European positions on aid to the 
Palestinian Authority appear as a kind of punishment of the 
Palestinian people for expressing their will, choosing their 
representatives, and deciding their own affairs and policies.... 
 
"These positions, taken under clear Israeli pressure, create 
obstacles in the way of the Palestinians as they seek to regain 
their rights and liberate their lands. The pressure on HAMAS 
renders a big service to the aggression and occupation and to 
Israeli policy, which has never served the interest of peace, 
security, and stability in the Palestinian territories or the 
region in general.... 
 
"The time has come to formulate an American policy, and even a 
European policy, without blind and absolute bias toward the 
Israeli occupation and without the Palestinian people being 
always the victims of this bias." 
 
------------------------- 
 
"Symptoms of Bankruptcy" 
 
------------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, wrote (2/2): "Repetition of the same anti-Syria 
statements, talk about a deal between Syria and the United 
States, and praise for the American position toward Syria are 
signs that the anti-Syria team in Lebanon is weakening and that 
the Syrian response has been convincing and the Syrian argument 
powerful.... 
 
"The Syrian people have discovered the falsehood of those 
Lebanese and the link between their positions and a conspiracy 
that targets Syria.... 
 
"Those who talk about a deal between Syria and the United States 
want to cast doubt on Syria's commitment to its positions and 
principles.... 
 
"Syria calls for transparent dialogue and rejects the logic of 
secret deals.... The signs of weakness among the champions of 
 
SIPDIS 
the campaign against Syria do not mean the battle is over. All 
these battles are doomed to failure because we have sufficient 
tools and will to foil them...." 
 
------------------------ 
 
"Insulting Sanctities" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Hasan Yusuf, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(2/2): "We condemn the cartoons of Prophet Muhammad in a Danish 
 
newspaper and every encroachment on any religion in the 
world.... This is not the first time that Islamic sanctities 
have been insulted.... Why did no one call for a boycott of 
American products when the Koran was desecrated in Guantanamo 
and Al-Fallujah...? 
"Insulting sanctities is undoubtedly unacceptable, but remaining 
silent on an insult here and declaring anger at a similar insult 
there is something that raises questions. 
 
"There are some active and growing forces in Norway and Denmark 
that want to support Arab rights in Palestine. This is why 
Zionists, through their agents in the media worldwide, work to 
drive wedges between Arabs and Muslims, on the one hand, and 
their potential friends, on the other...." 
 
Seche