06DAKAR664
SENEGAL: MARCH 15 AVIAN FLU UPDATE
Wed Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO9628
RR RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0664/01 0741441
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151441Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4579
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC//USDP/ASD-HD//
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GA
RUEHRO/USMISSION UN ROME
RUFOADA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UK
RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE
RUEHYD/AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE 0209UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 000664 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR OES, AF/EPS, MED AND AF/W 
AID/W FOR AFR/WA 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO KFLU CASC EAID AMED EAGR SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL: MARCH 15 AVIAN FLU UPDATE 
 
REF: A. DAKAR 0460 
 
¶B. DAKAR 0459 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: Between March 7 and 10, USAID/Senegal 
Health Officers visited the primary sites where migratory 
birds are found.  They found Ministry of Livestock 
officials well informed about avian influenza, but health 
officials were less knowledgeable and less prepared. 
Although a national coordination mechanism is in place, 
many questions about how Senegal would address an AI 
outbreak remain unanswered.  USAID is now examining plans 
to strengthen command and control functions, enhance 
health workers' knowledge, assess the density of poultry 
populations, procure protective equipment, and develop 
compensation and culling plans, should those become 
necessary.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) In response to the heightened awareness and 
concern about avian influenza (AI) in Africa, and 
subsequent to outbreaks in at least four African 
countries, members of the USAID/Senegal health office 
traveled on March 7-10 to areas of Senegal where large 
migratory and indigenous bird populations are found.  The 
sites included Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary and Langue 
de Barbarie National Park, both in the St. Louis region 
near the Mauritanian border; the Sine Saloum Delta and 
Guerero/Sonome Park near Popenguine. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The USAID health officers met with officials at 
the regional and district levels from both livestock and 
health departments.  In general, the livestock officials 
were well informed about AI and largely prepared to 
respond effectively should an outbreak occur. 
Surveillance activities were initiated in November 2005 
and were supplemented in the week preceding our visit by 
the collection of 900 samples from 160 bird species for 
testing.  The sample collection and testing was supported 
by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).  There are 
two laboratories in Senegal that are equipped and trained 
to test for avian flu.  The local institutions, park 
supervisors and livestock officials were using materials 
from their general budget to support the new, intensified 
surveillance and communication activities.  There is an 
expressed need at these local levels for PPE, containers 
for samples and particularly for fuel for the boats that 
are the main vehicles used in monitoring the bird 
populations.  The regional inspector for livestock in St. 
Louis was especially proactive and provided us with a copy 
of a presentation he had delivered to all district and 
regional personnel on avian flu, based on scientific 
information drawn from FAO, WHO and other sources, as well 
as Senegal specific concerns.  Information is reportedly 
being disseminated to villages and local communities, 
which are also implicated in the surveillance process and 
used as sources of unpaid volunteers.  However, the 
response is hampered by constraints; the Director of the 
National Park of Delta du Saloum initiated surveillance 
and communication activities through the local voluntary 
environment guardians, but he has no functioning boat to 
supervise implementation of effective surveillance in the 
islands in the Delta. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Health officials were notably less informed and 
prepared.  Nurses and health workers in the health posts 
located in or near the major parks and bird sanctuaries 
had received no official information or directives from 
the Ministry of Health (MOH), and cited radio and media as 
their sole sources of information.  The USAID team 
distributed to all information about AI in French, and 
will meet with MOH officials in Dakar to stress the 
urgency of communications with health care workers on the 
issue of AI. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Park officials noted that the populations of 
migratory birds who arrive in Senegal from Europe will 
return within the next few weeks.  They also noted, 
however, that many bird species from Senegal's parks 
migrate within Africa and some to countries, such as Niger 
and Cameroon, with confirmed AI cases.  The Director of 
 
DAKAR 00000664  002 OF 002 
 
 
Djoudj National Bird Park also indicated that since 
Senegal's recent importation ban on poultry was 
instigated, there has been an increase in small-scale 
smuggling of chicken parts across the river from 
Mauritania.  This contraband activity is uncontrolled by 
any inspection or commercial service, and has apparently 
dramatically increased in recent weeks along with the 
price of chicken.  Such unintended consequences may call 
into question the wisdom and impact of the importation 
ban. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶6.  (SBU) Many questions about how Senegal would deal with 
an immediate outbreak remain unanswered.  While a national 
coordinating committee has been established under the 
chairmanship of the Minister of Livestock, and information 
from this committee has been successfully disseminated to 
regional and district levels, it is not clear how in 
practical terms, Senegal would deal with an outbreak -- 
who would lead the effort and what the action plan would 
be.  In particular, the most likely trajectory of an 
outbreak is not known, and there do not appear to be in 
place policies related to culling and compensation of 
farmers for affected livestock.  While communications 
about AI have been disseminated to regional and district 
livestock officials and park managers, it is not clear to 
what extent local communities have been informed.  Drawing 
on lessons learned from the locust response, USAID will 
expedite funding to local radio stations and monitor to 
ensure that these messages are received and understood. 
Other media may be needed in addition to local meetings 
with locally elected officials, village chiefs and "sous- 
prefets."  Clearly, communication from health officials 
needs to be improved.  Basic commodities such as PPE, fuel 
for monitoring trips and support for community volunteers 
involved in surveillance are also needed. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) USAID/Senegal plans to take the following 
actions, once approved AI funding is confirmed: assist the 
MOH to communicate with health workers; add information 
about AI to our community health worker network to 
disseminate correct information at the local level; assess 
the density of chicken populations; procure protective 
equipment; strengthen command and control functions and 
develop a compensation policy and subsequent plan for 
culled birds.  In addition, USAID will discuss with the 
GOS the current policy of restricting poultry imports and 
assess whether this policy creates incentives for 
contraband, and if testing and monitoring of imported 
birds and poultry might be a better policy. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Senegal has been proactive in addressing AI in 
the region, chairing from February 22-23 a ministerial- 
level meeting of ECOWAS members in Dakar to harmonize 
measures being taken against avian flu (Ref B).  President 
Wade has called for the establishment of a sub-regional 
committee to curb the spread of the virus, and he raised 
this issue with the Mauritanian Head of State during the 
latter's visit.  END COMMENT. 
 
Jackson