06ISTANBUL393
TUZMEN OUTLINES GOT'S STRATEGY TO BOOST BILATERAL
Thu Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ISTANBUL 000393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TREASURY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS - CPLANTIER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD TU
SUBJECT: TUZMEN OUTLINES GOT'S STRATEGY TO BOOST BILATERAL 
TRADE 
 
 
 Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
This message was coordinated with Embassy Ankara. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Foreign Trade Minister Kursad Tuzmen 
outlined the GOT's strategy to increase bilateral trade with 
the United States in a luncheon address to the 
Turkish-American Business Council (TAIK) on March 10. 
Coopting the Foreign Ministry's "Year of the Americas"-- 
which some TAIK contacts note was originally intended to 
focus on Latin America-- Tuzmen and his Ministry have 
developed a detailed action plan targeting six key states. 
Among the envisioned measures are trade delegations, enhanced 
support for Turkish companies participating in U.S. trade 
fairs, and a "Turquality" project in New York.  Noting that 
the Ministry had succeeded in raising Turkey's trade with its 
neighbors (in the broadest sense) from 19 to 55 billion USD 
over the last six years, Tuzmen set the ambitious goal of 
achieving similar result with the U.S., citing Ahmet 
Ertugen's advice to a youthful Ray Charles-- "if you go after 
pennies you will get pennies; if you go after dollars, you 
will get dollars."  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) More broadly, Tuzmen indicated that Turkey seeks to 
realize 100 billion USD in exports by 2010, up from 73 
billion last year.  Noting Turkey's miniscule share of the 
U.S. market (3/1000's of U.S. imports, by his calculations, 
and less for some states like California), he argued that 
Turkey has neglected the U.S. and needs a specific strategy 
to make up ground.  That strategy, he said, will include both 
target states (New York, California, Texas, Illinois, Florida 
and Georgia-- representing 15 of the top U.S. ports of entry) 
and target sectors.  Increasing the familiarity of U.S. 
companies with Turkish products is a key Ministry objective. 
To that end, the Ministry will help individual firms 
participating in U.S. fairs by increasing its underwriting of 
their participation from 50 to 60 percent of the total cost, 
while it will also send national delegations to eight major 
fairs.  Tuzmen also announced special trade missions to New 
York, Chicago, and San Francisco. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In addition, Tuzman said Turkey will build on past 
efforts to introduce particular products like Turkish 
hazelnuts, marble or leather to the U.S. market, while it 
will also initiate a "Turquality" Project in New York to 
highlight the improving quality of Turkish goods.  Tuzmen 
stressed as well that the Ministry's initiative is not 
limited to increasing trade, it also seeks increased U.S. 
investment in Turkey to further cement the economic ties 
between the two countries.  To that end, investment seminars 
are planned in cities ranging from Chicago to California. 
Finally, Tuzmen noted that the Ministry will turn to 
professional consulting firms to help its efforts, and he 
also gave a plug for the recently concluded agreement between 
the Turkish Union of Chambers (TOBB), USAID, and the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce, arguing that it too will help to make 
clear "Turkey's weaknesses and weak points in the U.S. market 
and provide an opportunity to correct them." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment: TAIK provided a good venue for Tuzmen to 
roll out his U.S. trade strategy.  Some staffers there have 
noted delicately, however, that the Trade Ministry's 
enthusiasm and initiative has shifted the focus of what the 
Foreign Ministry had originally intended to be the "Year of 
the Americas to a more U.S.-centric vision.  End Comment. 
JONES