06KABUL3934
PRT/KUNDUZ: BETTER THAN ITS REPUTATION
Sun Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3979
PP RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #3934/01 2460836
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 030836Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2240
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC//JF/UNMA//
RHMCSUU/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC//J3//
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFIUU/JICCENT MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFIUU/COMSOCCENT MACDILL AFB FL
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 2936
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 6265
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 1616UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KABUL 003934 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/FO, SA/A, S/CR, SA/PAB, S/CT, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN 
OSD FOR BREZINSKI 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76, POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER MARR AF
SUBJECT:  PRT/KUNDUZ: BETTER THAN ITS REPUTATION 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  The German-led PRT in Kunduz is 
one of the most maligned PRTs in Afghanistan, but 
many of the old myths, especially regarding the 
PRT's military effectiveness, no longer apply.  The 
Germans now patrol regularly throughout their area 
of responsibility (Kunduz and Takhar provinces), 
averaging 130 to 150 patrols per week, and routinely 
overnight outside the PRT compound in order to 
access the more remote districts.  In the face of a 
deteriorating security situation over the past few 
months, the Germans have shown no sign of wavering 
in their commitment to the mission.  The attitude of 
the PRT toward the U.S. Department of State (DOS) 
representative has improved significantly since the 
early days when Germany first took over the 
operation in Kunduz, and there has been no 
degradation in treatment even though DOS rep has not 
had any QIP funds to contribute to PRT projects 
since early 2006.  Meanwhile, the bifurcated command 
structure of the PRT, as well as the reluctance of 
the German development agencies to work closely with 
the military on projects, continue to hamper the 
PRT's performance.  Nonetheless, overall, the PRT is 
much improved.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SNAPSHOT OF PRT KUNDUZ 
---------------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) Originally, PRT Kunduz's area of 
responsibility (AOR) included all four provinces of 
the northeast (Kunduz, Takhar, Baghlan and 
Badakhshan), but since the establishment of fully 
independent ISAF PRTs in Puli-Khumri (Netherlands) 
and Feyzabad (Germany) in late 2004 and 2005 
respectively, PRT Kunduz's AOR has encompassed just 
Kunduz and Takhar provinces.  The PRT is 
multinational, with troop contributions from six 
nations other than Germany (Switzerland, Romania, 
France, Netherlands, Belgium, and Hungary), but the 
total number of non-German troops constitute less 
than 10 percent of the total force of 450.  All the 
key leadership and staff positions at the PRT are 
held by Germans and the working language of the PRT 
is German.  (This is in contrast to the German-led 
PRT in Feyzabad, which is truly a multinational 
operation, with English as the working language and 
the Czechs and Danes contributing almost 100 of the 
330 troops and filling the deputy commander and J-3 
slots, respectively.)  There are nine staff in the 
civilian component of PRT Kunduz: three German 
diplomats (the most senior of whom is the civilian 
leader), three German police officers, two officials 
from the German Federal Intelligence Service, and 
the U.S. DOS rep.  The German civilians serve tours 
of varying lengths, from two months to two years. 
 
INTENSE SCRUTINY AS ISAF'S FIRST PRT 
------------------------------------ 
¶3. (SBU) PRT Kunduz was one of the first PRTs 
established by the U.S.-led Coalition in late 2002. 
When NATO took command of ISAF in August 2003 and 
decided to expand beginning in the north, Kunduz 
became ISAF's first PRT.  This occurred in early 
January 2004, at the same time that leadership of 
the PRT was transferred from the U.S. to Germany. 
For several months, Kunduz was the only ISAF PRT. 
As a result, the German operation was under 
incredible scrutiny and comparisons (almost all 
unfavorable) were inevitably drawn between it and 
the OEF PRTs.  However, while much of the criticism 
was deserved early on when the PRT was first 
 
KABUL 00003934  002 OF 005 
 
 
established, it is probably unfair to continue to 
depict the German PRT in this way. 
 
THE TOP FIVE CRITICISMS 
------------------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) The early criticisms focused on five areas: 
 
-- a poor tooth-to-tail ratio at the PRT, where 
there are almost three times as many support troops 
as there are troops who work outside the PRT, and 
too much spent on building a new PRT compound. 
 
-- the lack of military effectiveness due to risk 
averseness, including restrictions on overnight and 
long-range patrolling and burdensome requirements 
for force protection and medical support. 
 
-- the lack of PRT cohesion due to the bifurcated 
command structure, in which the military and 
civilian components operate independently. 
 
-- the almost complete detachment of the PRT from 
the German development agencies, who live off the 
PRT compound and deliberately seek to limit their 
interaction with the military. 
 
-- the reluctance of the PRT command to embrace the 
U.S. reps as full-fledged members of the PRT team. 
 
YES IT'S BIG, BUT... 
-------------------- 
¶5. (SBU)  The German PRT is several times bigger 
than the U.S. contingent it replaced and the German 
tooth-to-tail ratio is not as favorable.  However, 
the Germans do not have an-in-country base like 
Bagram at which to centralize their combat support 
and combat service support assets.  These assets 
must be located at the PRTs themselves.  Plus, there 
are many facilities at PRT Kunduz -- most notably 
the role 2-plus hospital with a staff of 50 -- which 
serve German troops and other internationals and 
Afghans throughout the region.  During the first 
five months of this year, the hospital treated more 
than 2,200 people (both outpatients and inpatients) 
and performed some 35 operations.  One third of the 
patients and most of the serious cases (including 
those involving operations) were Afghans. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) It must also be conceded that the Germans 
have spent a great deal on administrative costs, 
especially in building a brand-new PRT camp, which 
opened in May, on a plateau 15 kilometers south of 
Kunduz.  The 460-hectare camp (reportedly as large 
as the Vatican) has cost 35 million Euros so far 
(more than three times the original estimate) and is 
still not finished.  But this facility has been 
built to German standards and the Germans plan to 
turn it over to the Afghans when the ISAF mission 
ends.  The compound could eventually be used as a 
university campus, which would make it the first 
university in the northeast.  The new camp has also 
given a very positive signal to the Afghans about 
the commitment of the international community, and 
especially the Germans, to continue the ISAF mission 
as long as necessary.  The camp should also make it 
easier for the Bundeswehr to get soldiers to 
volunteer for second, third and fourth tours to 
Kunduz, which will be absolutely necessary to 
sustain a commitment over the long term. 
 
 
KABUL 00003934  003 OF 005 
 
 
BIG IMPROVEMENT ON MILITARY EFFECTIVENESS 
----------------------------------------- 
¶7. (SBU)  When the Germans first arrived in Kunduz, 
they did have very restrictive rules of engagement. 
They did not do foot patrols, they did not stay 
outside the PRT overnight, they avoided patrolling 
during hours of darkness, they rarely ventured 
beyond a 40-kilometer radius of the PRT and they 
reacted to threats and attacks by retreating. 
However, the Germans have learned and adapted and 
become much more proactive.  The 10th German 
contingent, which served at Kunduz from March to 
July of this year, averaged between 130 and 150 
patrols a week, which included mounted patrols all 
night on the major roads. CIMIC (Civil Affairs), 
Psyops, and J-2 (Intelligence) teams traveled 
regularly to all 24 districts in the PRT's AOR.  The 
Germans have long had a safe house in Taloqan, the 
provincial capital of Takhar, but now they are 
procuring a bigger compound to increase their 
patrolling capabilities. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The requirement to have a doctor and 
ambulance within an hour of any deployed unit still 
stands, but the PRT no longer restricts itself to 
using just the six-wheel Fuchs Armored Personnel 
Carrier (APC) as the ambulance, since the Fuchs 
cannot be used on narrow roads or small bridges. 
This means there is essentially no limit to where 
the PRT can go in its AOR. 
 
¶9. (SBU) In the face of a deteriorating security 
situation over the past few months -- which has 
included an unprecedented suicide car bomb attack 
and two ambushes with rocket propelled grenade (RPG) 
launchers -- the Germans have shown no sign of 
wavering in their commitment to the mission.  The 
Germans have responded to each attack by immediately 
returning to the area and engaging with local 
officials and the population.  In the case of the 
two RPG ambushes, the patrols returned direct fire 
on the attackers and the PRT participated in joint 
operations with the local ANA battalion and U.S. 
Special Force mentors to find and arrest those 
responsible. 
 
CONTINUED LACK OF PRT COHESION 
------------------------------ 
¶10. (SBU) One area where that has been no change is 
the PRT's dual command structure.  The PRT is still 
clearly divided into separate military and civilian 
components, with the PRT commander leading the 
former and the senior German diplomat leading the 
latter.  They have completely different chains of 
command, with the commander reporting to ISAF HQ 
through Regional Command (RC) North, and the 
civilian leader reporting to Berlin through the 
German embassy in Kabul.  The PRT commander and 
civilian leader are co-equals in theory, but in 
practice, the commander is the focus of attention 
because the PRT is a Bundeswehr facility and he 
controls almost all of its assets.  But even in 
meetings outside the PRT, where both the commander 
and civilian leader are represented, Afghan 
officials tend to gravitate toward the military 
commander rather than the civilian leader.  Most PRT 
Kunduz commanders have reinforced this tendency by 
not insisting that the Afghans deal with the 
civilian leader on an equal basis. 
 
 
KABUL 00003934  004 OF 005 
 
 
¶11.  (SBU) There is no doubt that this bifurcated 
command system creates duplication of effort and a 
lack of cohesion within the PRT.  Under the 10th 
contingent, the civilian leader complained 
frequently about being marginalized and left out of 
the loop by the PRT commander.  It would be ideal if 
everyone operated under one chain of command, but it 
is unlikely that the either the Bundeswehr or MFA 
will ever agree to formally subordinate themselves 
to the other.  The best one can hope for is better 
information exchange and coordination.  There are 
already mechanisms to facilitate this, but there is 
clearly room for improvement.  The PRT has a common 
internal e-mail system and there are a thrice-weekly 
evening PRT staff meetings in which the civilian 
leader takes part, along with the representative of 
the German Ministry of Economic Cooperation and 
Development (BMZ), the head of the German police 
project and the U.S. DOS rep. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) In the past, the ISAF POLAD has 
complained that political situation reports coming 
from Kunduz through the military clearly have not 
had the input of the civilian component.  Although 
the civilian leader does not fall under ISAF's 
command, he should be able to share many of the 
reports he submits to the embassy and Berlin with 
ISAF.  The civilian leader rarely shares reports he 
generates with ISAF. 
 
GERMAN DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES STILL DETACHED 
------------------------------------------ 
¶14.  (SBU) BMZ and the associated German development 
agencies -- the German Federal Credit Organization 
for Reconstruction (KfW), the German Development 
Service (DeD) and the German Society for Technical 
Cooperation (GTZ) -- are still located off the PRT 
in their own compound.  While the head of BMZ 
participates in PRT staff meetings and coordinates 
closely with the PRT, BMZ still operates 
independently from the PRT, believing that 
development is not the military's business.  If the 
security situation were ever to deteriorate to the 
point that BMZ and its associated agencies no longer 
felt safe operating in Kunduz, they are more likely 
to leave altogether than come to live at the PRT. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) According to BMZ and MFA officials in 
Kunduz, Germany has a budget of about 80 million 
Euros per year for development projects in 
Afghanistan.  Another estimated 30 million Euros of 
German government money is funneled indirectly to 
Afghanistan each year through government-supported 
NGOs and research institutes (like the Konrad 
Adenauer Stiftung). BMZ controls about 50 million 
Euros of the Afghanistan development budget.  While 
the other 30 million Euros is nominally controlled 
by the MFA, much of it is reportedly earmarked for 
certain programs like the Disarmament of Illegal 
Armed Groups (DIAG) (1 million Euros) and the German 
police project (12 million Euros).  In addition, the 
MFA development rep at the PRT has about 60,000 
Euros per year that he or she can spend on small, 
quick-impact projects without prior approval from 
Berlin.  Finally, the PRT commander has access to a 
small amount of money (15,000 to 30,000 Euros) that 
he can use to address immediate needs. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Meanwhile, the PRT CIMIC (Civil Affairs) 
teams continue to travel throughout the AOR, meeting 
 
KABUL 00003934  005 OF 005 
 
 
local authorities and doing comprehensive 
assessments of each district.  However, CIMIC has 
only a bare-bones budget and cannot fund even a 
small percentage of all the worthwhile project 
proposals it develops.  BMZ does not see the CIMIC 
projects as fitting within its overall development 
plans, and therefore funds only about five percent 
of the proposals it receives from CIMIC.  The MFA 
development rep and the PRT commander fund some of 
the CIMIC proposals, but their own budgets are 
rather limited.  In the past, CIMIC counted on the 
DOS rep to help fund some of its projects with USAID 
QIP funds, but those funds have not been available 
since early 2006.  That has sent CIMIC scurrying to 
other NGOs to try to make up the difference. 
 
MUCH IMPROVED ATTITUDE TOWARD U.S. REP 
-------------------------------------- 
¶17. (SBU) The attitude of the PRT toward the U.S. 
DOS rep has improved significantly since the early 
days when Germany first took over the operation in 
Kunduz.  During the 10th contingent, the DOS rep was 
about as integrated into the PRT as he could be 
without compromising his ability for independent 
action.  He was included on the PRT Kunduz internal 
e-mail system and he had a seat at the table for the 
thrice-weekly PRT evening staff meetings.  While the 
commander did not seek out the DOS rep's political 
advice on issues, he was always open to input. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) After insisting for years on an MOU to 
define the U.S. role at the PRT and seeking 
reimbursement for the U.S. share of PRT costs, 
Germany has apparently decided to drop these 
demands.  DOS rep was never approached on these 
issues during the 10th contingent.  At the new PRT 
compound, he was provided private living 
accommodations and separate office space sufficient 
for both himself and the political assistant.  The 
Germans have sought no payment or reimbursement. 
 
¶19. (SBU)  Because of the generally permissive 
security environment in the northeast, the civilians 
at the PRT usually move on their own in armored 
vehicles without military force protection. 
Therefore, the DOS rep did not require much active 
support from the PRT to carry out his duties.  Had 
military force protection been routinely required, 
it is not clear that the PRT would have had the 
assets, or been willing, to provide the necessary 
support. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶20.  (SBU) While the German-led PRT in Kunduz is far 
from perfect, it is significantly better than it was 
at the start and is constantly improving, especially 
in terms of its approach to military operations and 
its engagement with the local populace. Fortunately, 
we have moved beyond the issues that previously 
caused irritation in the U.S.-German relationship at 
the PRT and have forged a strong partnership. 
 
NEUMANN