06KABUL510
SOLICITATION FOR ESF ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Mon Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/FO AMBASSADOR QUINN, S/CT, SA/A 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND, G/TIP, LINDA LEE 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFA-A, CG CJTF-76 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM IR RS BO AF UNGA SEP
SUBJECT: SOLICITATION FOR ESF ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
PROJECTS 
 
REF: STATE 221417 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY.  Post submits the following proposal from 
International Organization for Migration IOM) for Economic 
Support Funded (ESF) anti-trafficking in persons (TIP) 
project.  This is a new project that will cover a ten-month 
period at a cost of USD 277,095.  The target audience are 
journalists working for private and public media 
organizations, the Ministry of Women's Affairs at the central 
level and its regional branches.  This proposal is supported 
by Post as it will enable Afghanistan to implement measures 
to improve the deteriorating TIP condition.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Key elements of the proposal are: 
 
¶A. Title of Project:  Counter Trafficking. 
 
¶B. Name of Recipient Organization/Government Agency: 
International Organization for Migration (IOM). 
 
¶C. Duration of Project:  This is a new project that will last 
for ten calendar months. 
 
¶D. Description:  The project intends to create a sustainable 
link between the media in Afghanistan and the Ministry of 
Women's Affairs (MoWA) to engage in mass information 
campaigns to reduce the exposure of women and children to 
dangers associated with human trafficking.  It envisages the 
participation of MoWA/DoWA (Department of Women's Affairs) in 
reporting individual cases to law enforcement authorities and 
refering victims to appropriate agencies to receive 
assistance.  It also seeks to create a reliable documentation 
and record system with wide reach to compile information on 
human trafficking in Afghanistan.  The major components of 
this project include providing relevant training to members 
of the local media and organizing a training of trainers 
(ToT) to staff from all provincial branches of the Ministry 
of Women's Affairs (DoWA).  The training will develop the 
capacities of the media and MoWA/DoWA in the identification 
of potential and de facto cases of trafficking.  MoWA and its 
provincial branches (DoWA) will receive training to document 
and keep records on reported cases of human trafficking in 
their respective regions and refer victims to appropriate 
government and non-government actors, including IOM, to 
receive assistance.  IOM will facilitate creating and 
sustaining the link between the two major actors and offer 
financial as well as technical assistance for the execution 
of joint activities. 
 
¶E.  Justification:  Afghanistan is confronted with a 
significant human trafficking problem, as recognized by the 
June 2002 "Declaration of the Essential Rights of Afghan 
Women," which highlighted trafficking victims in its first 
section.  According to the US Department of State June 2005 
report, Afghanistan is categorized as a Tier II country - 
meaning that Afghanistan does not fully comply with the 
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking; 
however, it is making significant efforts.  Available data 
indicate that Afghanistan is a country of origin of women and 
children trafficking for purposes of forced labor and sexual 
exploitation, including prostitution.  Reports show that, 
despite the numerous violations of human rights of victims of 
trafficking, very little legal redress is available to 
victims.  Few traffickers have been convicted in the court of 
law in Afghanistan and the Government does not compile and 
keep records for cases brought to court/under investigation. 
There is also an absence of adequate and effective 
legislation that addresses the issue of trafficking, lack of 
investigation skills, delay of the courts in rendering 
judgment, and lack of awareness about human trafficking among 
the general public. 
 
¶F.  Performance indicators: 
      -  A week-long nationwide public information campaign 
against human trafficking jointly carried out by the media 
and MoWA/DoWA reaching a minimum audience of 50,000-100,000 
people. 
      -  At least twenty-five public information materials on 
human trafficking produced and released to the public by 
trained media professionals. 
      -  At least one training session in counter trafficking 
for government partners, including law enforcement agencies, 
organized by MoWA's provincial branches (DoWA) in seventeen 
provinces and reaching a minimum of 340 participants. 
      -  Not less than forty victims of trafficking referred 
by trained MoWA/DoWA contacts to IOM or other service 
provider NGOs to receive various forms of direct assistance, 
including medical, social and economic support. 
      -  MoWA/DoWA begin to record and document reported 
cases of human trafficking at the central and regional levels. 
      -  A minimum of thirty human trafficking cases reported 
by the media to the public. 
      -  A minimum of forty suspected cases of trafficking 
reported to the authorities by MoWA/DoWA contacts who 
received IOM training. 
 
¶G.  Evaluation plan: IOM will assess the performance and 
monitor project progress in terms of its contribution towards 
the intended objectives on a quarterly basis and report to 
the donor.  These reports will reflect the achievements, 
challenges, problems, solutions and alternative strategies 
arising during the project implementation.  It will also 
identify operational difficulties and problem areas and 
propose necessary adjustments throughout the project period. 
The joint committee consisting of media focal points, 
MoWA/DoWA representatives and IOM will meet twice every month 
to review the performance of the project.  At the end of the 
project period IOM will carry out a comprehensive evaluation 
in cooperation with the project partners. 
 
¶H.  Budget breakout: Grand Total = USD 277,095 
      -  Total Staff Salaries = USD 91,500 
      -  Total Office Expenses = USD 25,900 
      -  Total Direct Operational Expenses = USD 21,580 
      -  Total Training and Information Campaign Expenses = 
USD 119,920 
      -  Total Contingency Expenses = USD 5,000 
      -  Total HQ Overhead Expenses = USD 13,195 
 
¶I.  Type and amount of host government contribution, or other 
cost-sharing agreement, if any: None. 
 
¶J.  Proposed funding mechanism:  The donor is expected to 
cover the full cost of the project as detailed in the budget 
breakdown given in H above. 
 
¶K.  Embassy point of contact: The point of contact is Lilieth 
Whyte, Political Officer, US. Embassy Kabul, email: 
whytelr@state.gov. 
 
¶L.  Other Donors, if any: None. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Comment.  A copy of the proposal and budget breakout 
was forwarded to the Department on Feb 1.  End Comment. 
NEUMANN