06KABUL2151
A COURSE OF ACTION TO REBALANCE THE ANP
Fri May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3023
OO RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #2151/01 1321555
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121555Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0166
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 6903
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KABUL 002151 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, SCA/PAB, S/CT, S/CRS, EUR/RPM 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFA-A, CG CJTF-76 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL SNAR PGOV PTER ASEC AF
SUBJECT:   A COURSE OF ACTION TO REBALANCE THE ANP 
 
REF: KABUL 01884 
 
KABUL 00002151  001.2 OF 005 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  The Course of Action plan outlined below is desig 
for implementing  President Karzai?s decision to re-balance the Afgha 
in order to address pressing security issues in the south (reftel). 
by members of the international community involved with building up t 
the Afghan Ministry of Interior (MOI) staff to plan and execute this 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) BACKGROUND AND SCOPE. 
 
The need to re-balance the Police Operating Forces became clear in th 
of  provincial assessment studies, conducted by NSA Rassoul with inpu 
security Ministries and members of the international community.  It w 
concerns raised by several Governors, specifically the Governors of K 
Helmand, to President Karzai.  Once the need to rebalance the police 
apparent, several Courses of Action  were developed and briefed to Pr 
April 21, 2006.  He agreed that something needed to be done and selec 
Course of Action which would initially use the Afghan Highway Police? 
equipment to increase the strength of the Uniform, Border, and Stand- 
rebalancing will take place in conjunction with the necessary pay and 
well as the activation of Police Regional Commands, to better address 
concerns.  However, the Course of Action will not cover overall Minis 
missions or manning in Kabul. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  MISSION STATEMENT.  Assist the Ministry of Interior of Afg 
developing and executing plans to re-balance and re-distribute its po 
urgent security concerns, establish Police Regional Commands and Staf 
national level reform programs during the remainder of CY 2006. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) COURSE OF ACTION DESIGN. 
 
a.  Overview.  Re-balancing is designed to improve the distribution o 
Forces nationally, by moving them from locations and missions where t 
urgently needed to areas and missions where the need is greater.  Spe 
police to the southern provinces of Kandahar and Helmand, and from th 
Highway Police to the Uniform, Stand-By and Border Police, overall na 
and civil security should be improved.  This Course of Action cannot 
without proper political support: it must have the weight of Presiden 
in writing to ensure that all who must plan and execute the re-balanc 
understand the urgency of the situation.  This effort will be directe 
principles from the national level with Afghans, assisted by the inte 
However, much of the detailed execution will be completed by the new 
Commands, with mentorship from the Regional Police Advisory Teams (RP 
expect to begin re-balancing efforts by May 15, 2006, and complete th 
by September 1, 2006.  Ultimately, these re-balancing efforts will fo 
developing a future Tashkil (Afghan staffing pattern) that better ref 
population demands on Afghan security forces. 
 
b.  President of Afghanistan Decision Directive (PDD) Minimum Element 
the proper emphasis behind this task, a Presidential Decision Directi 
Karzai is necessary.  It will focus our efforts, assist in further de 
principles and provide sustaining motivation in a process that will u 
difficult and sometimes frustrating.  Therefore, we will work to ensu 
addresses as a minimum the following elements:  1) the Ministry of In 
balance to meet urgent security needs;  2) the Afghan Highway Police 
source of personnel and resources to accomplish the re-balancing requ 
Ministry of Interior must implement its selected Course of Action wit 
 
c.  Guiding Principles.  Because execution of this plan will be a joi 
Afghan Ministry of Interior and the international community combined 
centralized tasks to the Police Regional Commands, some guiding princ 
established nationally to ensure that purpose and intent are properly 
efficiently executed.  Highlighted below is our list of guiding princ 
the Afghan National Police in CY 2006. 
 
i.  Re-Balancing activities must be properly recorded and captured in 
Tashkils.  One of the reasons this re-balancing effort is currently n 
because of the inadequacies of current and past Tashkils.  The develo 
future Tashkils must include a process to match security forces and r 
law enforcement and security needs based on population and threat. 
 
ii.  The future Tashkil must be modified by better threat and populat 
IAW thorough Provincial Assessments.  The international community and 
MOI  need to pick a single standard to assess threat and population t 
multiple views on where the re-balancing of forces is to occur. 
 
iii.  All fills should be accomplished using the principle of ?closes 
 
KABUL 00002151  002.2 OF 005 
 
 
assignment first.  Because of the nature of Afghan society, it is cou 
to move personnel long distances away from their homes and families t 
police manning requirements.  Coupled with a lack of electronic banki 
would allow individual police to send their pay home to families, mov 
personnel without regard to places of origin would only result in poo 
and an increase in severance from the police forces.   Therefore, our 
emphasize volunteering over forced moves. 
 
iv.  This Course of Action and any other will be affected by pay and 
over time and require those efforts take into account the re-balancin 
 
v.  All personnel should move to new assignments with assigned weapon 
personal equipment.  This will provide for immediate capability upon 
new duty assignment.  The gaining police unit will record and documen 
weapons and equipment of all arriving personnel. 
 
vi.  The MOI should identify which highway security missions previous 
performed by the AHP should be maintained.  These missions should be 
by historical analysis, such as reviews of arrest records and reports 
commercial and private vehicles by Anti-Coalition Militias.  Highway 
assessed as having a high risk of attack should retain security prote 
performed by the Afghan Uniformed Police, Afghan Stand-By Police or A 
Border Police, whichever is more appropriate. 
 
vii.  All Afghan Highway Police personnel, except for a small caretak 
senior leaders, must volunteer for new positions or elect to resign f 
Afghan National Police altogether. 
viii.  To minimize the number of AHP personnel to reassign, and to pr 
mission from growing, the MOI will be pressed to halt all AHP recruit 
 
ix.  Adjust all Afghan National Police fielding and logistics support 
support this Course of Action. 
 
x.  Develop public information programs to highlight the major fieldi 
initiatives, inauguration of Regional Commands and significant person 
assignment actions.  Start by conducting an inaugural  ceremony on Ma 
2006, at the Kandahar Police Regional Training Center that covers act 
Regional Command South, and includes a major display of vehicles, wea 
uniforms and equipment that will be fielded immediately to the Afghan 
Police in Kandahar Province. 
 
xi.  ?Proper Demographic Representation? is the basic model used to f 
recruiting policies for this effort.  It basic tenets are listed belo 
 
¶1.  ?Proper Demographic Representation? was emphasized as a method of 
conducting business by President Karzai and applies to all types of p 
placing special emphasis on operational effectiveness achieved by 
establishing a presence and understanding with the community in which 
the police operate. 
 
¶2.  ?Proper Demographic Representation? consists of three major 
components:  a) maintaining ethnic balance in all police units, promo 
and assignments - for the Afghan Uniform Police this must be done at 
district level and must be a goal of the current plan, and for Afghan 
Police and Afghan Stand-By Police this must be done at least at the 
regional level when feasible; b) fill police ranks, especially the lo 
Afghan Uniformed Police, first through local recruiting, which make i 
easier and should maintain proper local ethnic mix if executed fairly 
ensure that properly equipped police maintain a presence in the areas 
are responsible for and seek to achieve understanding and trust with 
local population. 
 
¶3.  Don?t over-recruit in any one particular area to fill other areas 
one particular ethnic group, already a often-stated concern. 
 
¶4.  Recruiting should use threat study and population analysis report 
accepted by the GOA and the international community. 
 
d.  Timeline.  The initial timeline for executing this Course of Acti 
Further timing details will be developed by the International Communi 
Ministry of the Interior. 
 
      -15 May 06:  RC-South established with Regional Police Advisory 
 
-27 May 06:  Commence Force Re-Balancing; Regional Command- South 
Ceremony with RC-South Commander and Staff, Senior MOI representative 
and local Afghans as well as International Press Coverage?format for 
events. 
 
KABUL 00002151  003.2 OF 005 
 
 
 
-01 Jun 06:  Afghan Stand-By Police Battalion deploys to RC-South per 
from RC-North; provides for two permanent Afghan Stand-By Police Batt 
in RC-South. 
 
      -15 Jun 06:  Phase I Pay Reform begins for the Afghan National 
 
-01 Jun 06:  Rank Reform Phase III complete for all of the Afghan Nat 
Police. 
 
      -01 Aug 06:  All Afghan Border Police Re-Balance actions are co 
 
      -01 Sep 06:  Total Afghan National Police Re-Balance actions ar 
 
      -15 Sep 06:  Institute Phase II Pay Reform for all of the Afgha 
 
e.  Fill Requirements, Priorities, and Strategies.  Because each part 
National Police has different requirements a standard strategy or fil 
used.  This is because in the case of the Afghan Uniform Police, the 
inadequately documents security requirements in RC-South.  Additional 
Tashkil does not determine which police structures should be filled f 
constrained environment.  Therefore the following fill strategies wil 
 
      i.  Fill Strategies by Type of Police. 
 
¶1.  Afghan Uniform Police (AUP).  Fill according to the provinces wit 
the highest threat and lowest ratio of police to the general populati 
only the four highest threat provinces and fill to a level that will 
these provinces online with ratios in provinces that have a low threa 
 
      a.  Kandahar:  current need is approximately 800 Policemen. 
 
      b.  Helmand:  current need is approximately 600 Policemen. 
 
      c.  Uruzgan:  current need is approximately 150 Policemen. 
 
      d.  Paktika:  current need is approximately 300 Policemen. 
 
¶2.  Afghan Stand-By Police (ASP).  Because Afghan Stand-By Police are 
a regional asset, they should be filled by region starting with the P 
with the overall highest threat and lowest Police to population ratio 
Using that thought process listed below are the actions and fill prio 
for the Afghan Stand-By Police. 
 
      a.  RC-South. 
 
i.  Move one Afghan Stand-By Police Battalion from RC- 
North (5th Bn in Konduz) permanently to RC-South and 
man to 100 percent:  current need is approximately 140 
policemen. 
 
ii.  Fill existing RC South Afghan Stand-By Police 
Battalion to 100 percent (2d Bn in Kandahar):  current need 
is approximately 221 policemen.. 
 
b.  Fill remaining Afghan Stand-By Police Battalions to 
100 percent 
 
i.  ASP Bn in RC Central (6th Bn):  current need is 
approximately 176 policemen 
 
ii.  ASP Bn in RC East (1st Bn):  current need is 
approximately 372 policemen. 
 
iii.  ASP Bn in RC West:  current need is approximately 
100 policemen. 
 
iv.  ASP Bn in RC Central (7th Bn):  current need is 
approximately 378 Policemen. 
 
v.  ASP Bn in RC Central (8th Bn):  current need is 
approximately 376 policemen. 
 
vi.  ASP Bn in RC North (4th Bn in MeS):  current need is 
approximately 343 policemen. 
 
¶3.  Afghan Border Police (ABP).  Fill in accordance with the new Tash 
which does adequately describe Border Police requirements. 
 
KABUL 00002151  004.2 OF 005 
 
 
 
a.  RC South?4th and 5th ABP Bde?s:  Current shortfall is 
approximately 1056 policemen. 
 
b.  RC East?2nd and 3rd ABP Bde?s:  Current shortfall is 
approximately 848 policemen. 
 
c.  RC West?6th ABP Bde:  Current shortfall is approximately 
672 policemen. 
 
d.  RC Central?1st ABP Bde:  Current shortfall is approximately 
583 policemen. 
 
e.  RC North?7th and 8th Bde?s:  Current shortfall is 
approximately 923 policemen. 
 
      ii.  Fill (Man, Equip, Train) Priorities from 1 to n. 
 
      ¶1.  AUP in Kandahar. 
 
      ¶2.  AUP in Helmand. 
 
      ¶3.  5th ASP Battalion with move to RC-South. 
 
      ¶4.  2d ASP Battalion in Kandahar. 
 
      ¶5.  6th ASP Battalion. 
 
      ¶6.  AUP in Uruzgan. 
 
      ¶7.  AUP in Paktika. 
 
      ¶8.  4th and 5th ABP Brigades in RC-South. 
 
      ¶9.  2nd and 3rd ABP Brigades in RC-East. 
 
      ¶10.  1st ASP Battalion in RC-East. 
 
      ¶11.  6th ABP Brigade in RC-West. 
 
      ¶12.  3rd ASP Battalion in RC-West. 
 
      ¶13.  1st ABP Brigade in RC-Central. 
 
      ¶14.  7th ASP Battalion in RC-Central. 
 
      ¶15.  8th ASP Battalion in RC-Central. 
 
      ¶16.  7th and 8th ABP Brigades in RC-North. 
 
¶17. 4th ASP Battalion in RC-North. 
 
iii.  Therefore, the total personnel requirement for all type of poli 
balanced is approximately 8,038. 
 
f.  Sourcing Strategies.  After identifying the requirements, the sou 
requirements will be defined.  There are four major potential sources 
accomplish the re-balancing tasks.  All of these are limited by the i 
willingness to serve outside a certain radius of his ancestral homela 
sources we must first seek volunteers from the existing forces that w 
to other Police Forces with greater need and attempt to keep the volu 
home as possible. 
 
i.  Afghan Highway Police Manpower.  The first manning pool to explor 
Afghan Highway Police.  They are currently located in 298 fixed check 
locations along the Ring Road and along spur roads that lead to the 1 
border crossing points.  It currently has approximately 5,945 personn 
operating forces that could be available for placement in the Uniform 
and Stand-By Police.  Given that not all of these personnel will elec 
policeman and move to a new job and location, the number available wi 
something less than 5,945.  However, it must be clear to AHP personne 
must move to a new police function or lose their job. 
 
ii.  Afghan Security Force (ASF) Recruiting.  There are approximately 
personnel along the Afghan-Pakistan Border that may still want to vol 
some type of national service.  Some of these 800 will want to join t 
remainder may want to joint the ANP?presumably the Border Police firs 
Therefore, the Afghans must capitalize on the existing programs to de 
 
KABUL 00002151  005.2 OF 005 
 
 
the ASF into our high priority requirements in RC-South, most likely 
Afghan Border Police Brigades. 
 
iii.  Move Personnel from Over-Manned  to Under-Manned Areas.  This s 
is the least desirable because it is least likely to be effective.  M 
policemen will not volunteer to move long distances away from their c 
homes.  However, the Afghan Uniformed Police is over-manned, primaril 
North, and the Afghans could ask for volunteers to relocate to RC-Sou 
Uniformed Police are under-manned, according to the threat and popula 
studies. 
 
iv.  Local Hire and Send to RTC for Training.  The most likely source 
manpower after re-assigning AHP personnel is a policy of local hire. 
receive something near 5,900 personnel from re-balancing the Afghan H 
Police, then we will need to local hire approximately 2,100 new polic 
in several locations?primarily in RC-South.  However, the Afghans mus 
prepared to local hire up to the entire requirement of 8,038 personne 
ordered to ensure re-balancing does occur. 
 
g.  Assisted Implementation Phasing.  Given that re-balancing will be 
phasing our efforts will most likely assist in more efficient executi 
start in the areas of greatest need?that have the greatest security i 
South must be the focus of initial re-balancing efforts.  The other R 
Police Operating Forces will be successively re-balanced on a similar 
In all of this the MOI will be assisted by those international commun 
personnel with Police expertise.  Additionally, the Afghan Regional C 
assisted by Regional Police Advisory Teams (RPATs), concerned with th 
and execution of re-balancing tasks in the regions and provinces. 
 
      i.  Phase 1?starts 15 May 2006.  (RC-South) 
 
      ¶1.  Establish all of the Regional Commands. 
 
      ¶2.  Begin Re-Balancing Tasks in RC-South. 
 
¶3.  Deploy one Permanent Afghan Stand-By Police Battalion to RC-South 
(5th ASP Bn); provides for two permanent Afghan Stand-By Police 
Battalions in RC-South. 
 
      ¶4.  Rank Reform Phase III complete. 
 
      ii.  Phase 2?starts 15 June 2006.  (Other RCs) 
 
      ¶1.  Complete Phase I Pay Reform. 
 
¶2.  Take lessons-learned from re-balancing activities in RC-South and 
apply to the other Regional Commands. 
 
¶3.  Afghan Border Police Reforms completed not later than 01 August 
¶2006. 
 
¶4.  All re-balancing actions in all of the Regional Commands must be 
completed not later than 01 September 2006?complies with budgeting 
demands. 
 
      iii.  Phase 3?starts 15 September 2006. 
 
      ¶1.  Institute Phase II Pay Reform. 
 
¶2.  Take lessons-learned from rebalancing coupled with agreed upon 
Threat and Population Studies and begin to develop a new Tashkil that 
will capture more realistic Security Forces requirements across 
Afghanistan. 
 
NEUMANN