06KHARTOUM367
Southern Sudan:  Justice Ministry Sets Agenda
Tue Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7062
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0367/01 0451906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141906Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1450
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000367 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ASEC SU
SUBJECT:  Southern Sudan:  Justice Ministry Sets Agenda 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  The Ministry for Legal Affairs will address 
the full range of rule of law issues, with a focus on 
regulating southern lawyers, and on writing, 
disseminating, and prosecuting the laws passed by the 
Southern Legislative Assembly.  In a meeting on February 
9, Dr. William Kon Bior, Under Secretary for Justice in 
the Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS), explained that 
the south faces an acute shortage of lawyers because most 
Sudanese practice Sharia law in Arabic.  Kon laid out a 
program to send Sharia-trained lawyers to neighboring 
countries for 15-month conversion courses.  He also 
discussed plans to establish a training institute to 
teach Southern Sudanese law to lawyers trained abroad and 
prepare them for the bar exam.  In discussing the justice 
system, he said that 90 percent of legal cases would be 
handled by the customary courts, with regular courts 
handling commercial contracts and constitutional issues. 
End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
The Structure of the Ministry 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Directorates within the Ministry of Legal Affairs and 
Constitutional Development will include the Prosecutor 
General's Office, the Auditor General's Office, the 
Legislation Directorate, the Directorate for Research and 
Training, and separate directorates for contract law 
(including contract registration) and coordination of 
customary law.  The Attorney General, now independent, 
will be brought in soon. 
 
¶3.  The Legislative Directorate will be responsible for 
drafting laws to present to the Southern Legislative 
Assembly.  The first set of laws they plan to draft will 
cover elections and commercial transactions, taxes, 
procurement, and financial regulation.  Once the assembly 
convenes this March, they will also review the 43 laws 
previously passed by the SPLM. 
 
----------------------------- 
Most Cases Resolved by Chiefs 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Kon explained that 90 percent of legal cases would be 
handled by the local chiefs.  Executive Chief Courts, 
with one area chief appointed as judge, will resolve most 
cases, including criminal cases, using traditional 
guidelines in a process similar to binding arbitration. 
In the few cases, expected to be less than 5 percent, 
that the executive chief fails to reach a decision, or 
makes a decision that is contrary to the law or 
traditional practice, the aggrieved party can appeal to 
the Regional Chiefs Court, a panel of 3 executive chiefs. 
This is the final court of appeal for cases that go 
before customary courts.  Commercial law and 
constitutional issues will be handled by a separate 
common law court system. 
 
¶5.  POLOFF asked how the government would safeguard human 
rights, particularly the rights of women, within the 
context of the customary courts.  Kon said that it plans 
on sensitizing chiefs to these issues, but that true 
protection of minority rights and women's rights must 
come from internal societal changes.  Once the society 
accepts the importance of protecting these rights, the 
decisions of the chief will reflect this. 
 
------------------------- 
Training Southern Lawyers 
------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Kon expressed concern over the shortage of lawyers in 
Southern Sudan.  Most Sudanese lawyers have been trained 
to practice Sharia law in Arabic, so Kon estimated that 
there were currently only about 23 lawyers qualified to 
practice law in the south.  Most of these lawyers already 
work for the Government of National Unity (GNU).  Kon 
will try to recruit these lawyers to work for the GoSS 
Ministry of Legal Affairs, which has an immediate need 
for 90 qualified lawyers, one in each of the 10 states 
and 80 counties. 
 
¶7.  The Ministry plans on resolving the lawyer deficit by 
focusing on two groups:  Sudanese lawyers trained in 
Sharia law and lawyers trained abroad in common law.  For 
those trained in Sharia, the GoSS is setting up 15-month 
programs in Kenya and Uganda that includes 6 months of 
English training and 9 months of training in common law. 
For lawyers trained in the common law overseas, the 
Ministry plans on establishing an Institute for Legal 
Studies.  This institute will prepare foreign lawyers for 
the southern bar exam.  Additionally, the institute will 
 
KHARTOUM 00000367  002 OF 002 
 
 
offer courses in several specialized fields including 
corporate registration, patent law, and property rights. 
When necessary, the GoSS will also send lawyers abroad 
for specific degrees. 
 
¶8.  Kon welcomed international expertise in setting up 
the institute and the conversion programs.  He cautioned, 
however, that he sees little use in short training 
seminars.  He said that the GoSS needed train-the-trainer 
programs and other approaches that build capacity and 
reduce dependence on future assistance. 
 
¶9.  Bio Note:  Kon first studied law at the University of 
Khartoum and then worked for the Attorney General of 
Sudan.  He holds three advanced law degrees and a PhD 
from different English universities.  A Bor Dinka, Kon 
claims to be a founding member of the SPLM/A.  He worked 
with Michael Makuai as a legal advisor throughout the 
war. 
 
HUME