06KHARTOUM1595
ESTABLISHING AN EMBASSY FIELD PRESENCE IN EL FASHER --
Sun Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1595 1901108
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 091108Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3575UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/RSA, AF/EX, AND S/CRS 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL AMGT US SU
SUBJECT: ESTABLISHING AN EMBASSY FIELD PRESENCE IN EL FASHER -- 
UPDATE AND LOGISTICAL CHALLENGES 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 6. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  ARC officers established a rudimentary field 
presence in El Fasher with communications, transportation, and 
working capabilities adequate in the short term.  Limitations to 
medium and long term operations include the lack of appropriate 
radio programming, office equipment, and insufficient work space to 
accommodate meetings, interpreters, and expanded ARC operations. 
End summary. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Active Response Corps (ARC) officers Eythan Sontag and Brad 
Purinton arrived July 2 in El Fasher, where they will provide an 
Embassy field presence for at least 90 days.  The immediate focus in 
El Fasher is three-fold: First, establish adequate living and 
working quarters to serve as a base of operations; second, develop 
contacts with Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA) signatories, AMIS, the 
UN, and the NGO community to gain greater situational awareness; and 
third, proceed as quickly as possible, in collaboration with the 
African Union and OTI, in standing up the DPA Implementation Office. 
 Recent activities related to the second two tasks are described 
septel. 
 
¶4. (SBU) ARC officers and S/CRS Senior Security Advisor Tod Wilson 
are currently occupying small connex spaces (each room is 
approximately 8 feet by 12 feet) on a PAE compound close to the AMIS 
camp.  ARC officers converted one space into rudimentary working 
quarters, which serves as a temporary office, dining room, and 
meeting area.  While sufficient in the short term, the current 
living and working conditions pose a number of limitations for 
medium and long term operations.  PAE, while accommodating, has 
indicated repeatedly that its space is in high demand with other 
short-term visitors.  Additionally, the tiny work area - already 
full with office equipment, communications gear, ARC officers (plus 
Tod Wilson), and the two recently hired translators - precludes 
holding any sizeable (more than one person) meetings there.  Another 
consideration is that the work space is the only suitable holding 
area for the interpreters; when ARC officers leave the premises, 
interpreters may be left for short periods of time unattended, which 
presents a less than ideal situation regarding information and 
equipment security.  (NOTE:  ARC officers have no reason to believe 
that the interpreters are untrustworthy, but only seek to raise this 
point to underscore some of the necessary improvisations given the 
current living/work conditions.  END NOTE). 
 
¶5. (SBU) In addition to the interpreters, El Fasher field officers 
also have two rented vehicles with local drivers at their disposal. 
ARC officers understand that two replacement (later model) vehicles 
have been acquired through the Embassy and will be shipped 
imminently to El Fasher.  Communication capabilities are improving, 
though there remain radio issues to resolve.  The PAE camp has 
limited accessible Internet access (three LANs in the cafeteria), 
which serves as a back-up to the two BGANs in the field.  BGAN 
connectivity is generally reliable, though often slow.  Access to 
and use of the Department of State Intranet (ONE) system is so slow 
as to be nearly ineffective (there is a significant delay in 
opening, typing and retrieving email/documents; it may take up to 
ten minutes to send a two-line email and much more time to access 
Intranet sites and/or folders).  Telephone capability include local 
cell phones, and Thuraya, BGAN and Iridium satellite voice 
communications; all work generally well, though local cell phone 
service frequently fails after 2200 hours (local).  Programming 
handheld radios remains a challenge.  While UNMIS granted 
authorization to several of their internal nets, neither the Embassy 
nor the ARC has the appropriate programming equipment to load the 
frequencies.  UNMIS advised acquiring a "code plug," which would 
allow them to program the radios.  ARC officers are also awaiting a 
response on programming equipment requested from Washington. 
 
¶6. (U) Action requested:  Embassy Field Office El Fasher requests 
that radio programming equipment previously requested per Ref A be 
expedited for delivery to Post. 
 
¶7. (U) Field Office El Fasher thanks Department in advance for its 
continued assistance and support. 
 
HUME