06KHARTOUM817
Juba Shows Signs of Inflation in March
Mon Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0012
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0817 0930716
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030716Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2159
INFO RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0685
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 0050UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000817 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PREF SOCI PINR SU
SUBJECT:  Juba Shows Signs of Inflation in March 
¶1.  A market survey in Juba taken the second week of 
March shows some signs of inflationary tendencies. 
Overall prices jumped nearly 8 points from a similar 
survey taken in February.  Food and beverages led the way 
 
with a rise of 8.5 percent, although this was partially 
offset by a small decrease in the household goods sector. 
Apparel also saw a small rise, with prices in the 
transportation and entertainment sectors remaining level. 
 
¶2.  The rise in prices could be attributed to an erratic 
and undeveloped supply chain, as well as increased 
insecurity on the Yei-Juba road (most goods are trucked 
in through from Uganda through Yei).  The current survey 
was taken before the rains began to effect road travel, 
so another increase in April is expected. 
 
¶3.  This does not necessarily translate to an 8 percent 
rise in the real cost of living in Juba, as there is a 
high degree of flexibility in purchasing patterns, and 
many households are completely outside the monetary 
economy, relying solely on bartering and subsistence 
farming. 
 
¶4.  Methodology:  A local employee of the USG completed 
the price survey.  Prices of goods were then adjusted 
based upon an estimation of the frequency of purchase for 
an average family of four in one month.  Due to the ad 
hoc nature of data collection, these numbers are only 
intended to be used as a general guide to capture market 
conditions in Juba.  Figures should not be compared to 
other inflation indexes.  Furthermore, because prices are 
so low and the basket of goods for an average household 
so limited, small changes in pricing will lead to a 
larger percentage change than in more developed economies 
with broader selections of goods available.  Once it is 
fully operational, the Bank of Southern Sudan plans to do 
a more precise and detailed consumer price index. 
 
STEINFELD