06KHARTOUM1153
Update on Darfur Security and Humanitarian
Mon May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5245
OO RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1153/01 1351638
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151638Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2819
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001153 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR D, AF/FO, AF/RSA, AND AF/SPG 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/EA AND DCHA SUDAN GROUP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MOPS KPKO PREF UN AU SU
SUBJECT:  Update on Darfur Security and Humanitarian 
Access - May 15, 2006 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 01104 and previous 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Demonstrations continue in several 
locations in Darfur; incidents in Kas, South Darfur, 
resulted in the deaths of at least two individuals. 
Several jinjaweed attacks took place in South Darfur, and 
a large-scale jinjaweed-SLA battle took place in West 
Darfur.  NGOs and UN agencies are working to respond to 
IDP and refugee movements within South Darfur and from 
Chad.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Security Update (Source - AMIS and USAID): 
 
¶A.  On May 11, MGS Nyala conducted a confidence building 
patrol to Menawashi and Mershing.  At Menawashi, the team 
was informed of an attack on a commercial truck at 
Amarjadeed on May 11, allegedly by jinjaweed.  Casualties 
are estimated to include two dead, six injured; 14 women 
were raped. 
 
¶B.  On May 11, a passenger truck traveling from Nyala to 
Kas was attacked by armed men suspected to be jinjaweed 
near Kas.  The armed men robbed the passengers of their 
valuables, and two of the passengers, Abdalla Khirab and 
Mohammed Humid Jibrin, were shot and died later as they 
were being carried to Kas hospital. 
 
¶C.  On May 8, a group of jinjaweed launched an attack on 
an SLA camp in Beida Habilla.  The attack lasted  several 
hours and recorded heavy casualties on both sides.  About 
40 jinjaweed wounded in the attack were taken to El 
Geneina General Hospital, from where some of them were 
later flown to Khartoum on board two specially arranged 
flights for further treatment.  The actual number of 
those receiving treatment and those flown to Khartoum 
could not be ascertained, as the team was not allowed 
access into the hospital wards.  The team was also 
informed that the jinjaweed within El Geneina have 
mobilised themselves and were seen moving towards Beida 
Habilla for a repraisal attack on the SLA. 
 
¶D.  South Darfur - The UN has declared Kalma IDP camp a 
"no go" area for UN agency personnel until demonstrations 
protesting the DPA subside.  On May 14, the USAID Field 
Officer in Nyala reported that the AU has withdrawn from 
all IDP camps surrounding Nyala, including Kalma, Al 
Salaam, Al Sereif, Otash, and Dereig.  UNDSS reported 
that a group of six unknown armed men entered Dereig IDP 
camp after sunset on May 10 and abducted the camp's chief 
sheikh along with his brother.  The kidnappers 
transported them to an undisclosed location near the 
airport and beat them severely.  Both men were 
hospitalized following the incident, with the chief 
sheikh being released the next day.  The same group 
entered the camp two more times during the night, 
kidnapping and beating two more sheikhs and haphazardly 
firing their weapons to intimidate the camp's population. 
Following the incident, GNU police stated they heard 
nothing, saw nothing, and reported nothing over the 
course of the night. 
 
¶E.  On May 13, MGS Kas reported that about 3500 
demonstrators from Kas IDP camp demonstrated in front of 
AMIS camp.  The demonstrators arrived with a dead body, 
alleging that the boy was killed by GOS police.  The 
demonstrators rioted and killed a GOS Police Sergeant 
dressed in civilian clothes.  The demonstrators also 
demanded that the GOS should release three prisoners that 
were detained earlier in the morning.  The other group of 
demonstrators went to the AMIS borehole, about 400 m from 
the camp, and put stones and other items in the water 
tanker that was drawing water.  The MGS reported that one 
demonstrator, a woman, was killed by the GOS as the 
demonstrators were withdrawing to their camp. 
 
¶F.  On May 13, MGS Geraida conducted a verification and 
confidence building patrol to Malwi and Abulala, where 
they learned that a group of unknown armed men on horses 
and two Land Cruisers had raided Malwi and killed a 25 
year-old man and looted livestock belonging to locals on 
May 13.  The assailants reportedly threatened to re- 
attack Malwi, a Bergit settlement, for final destruction. 
The assailants were said to be armed with AK47, G3 
rifles, and machine guns.  Malwi had about 7000 to 8000 
people before the attack; the team observed only about 20 
people presently living in the village. The team was 
informed that the other inhabitants had fled to Ambol and 
Geraida. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001153  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶G.  On May 13, AMIS personnel in Abu Shouk and Al Salaam 
IDP camps indicated that IDPs attempted to burn the 
civilian police station.  A group of roughly 600 people 
stormed the station and succeeded in setting fire to part 
of the tarpaulin fencing and caused damage to one AMIS 
vehicle packed at the station.  The monitors at the 
station were immediately evacuated to Civpol 
Headquarters.  UNDSS reported that AU vacated the camp 
and is no longer conducting patrols.  Another 
demonstration is planned for May 15.  UNDP reports that 
three women and 20 men who participated in the May 13 
demonstration were arrested for disturbing the peace and 
are scheduled to appear before a judge on May 15. 
 
¶3.  Humanitarian Access Update (Source - AMIS and USAID): 
 
¶A.  On May 12, about five hundred new IDPs from Tuwail 
village arrived at Geraida after an attack on the village 
by jinjaweed militia on May 11.  The jinjaweed looted 
livestock and other properties 
 
¶B.  On May 13, a civilian police detail determined that 
about 1000 IDPs had left Otash camp for their various 
towns and villages in Southern Sudan.  The team was also 
found that on May 11 about 50 families comprising 150 
persons had arrived from Umjogena, south of Nyala. 
 
¶C.  MSF-Holland reports an influx of Chadian refugees 
crossing the border near the Um Dukhom area as well as a 
concurrent increase in attacks on aid agencies traveling 
the roads in the area. 
 
¶D.  Due to a steady increase in IDP arrivals to Nyala, 
OCHA is convening a meeting on May 15.  Several thousand 
IDPs have arrived to the area over the last week alone. 
OCHA plans to conduct assessment site visits to the major 
camps around Nyala to determine accurate numbers of new 
arrivals, where these new IDPs have come from, when they 
arrived, the reason for their displacement, camp 
capacity, and humanitarian response capacity required to 
accommodate these new arrivals.  Agencies will discuss 
how best to respond to the increasing number of new 
arrivals, especially within the context of the return and 
resettlement work plan recently published by the South 
Darfur government.  In response to this work plan, OCHA 
will reactivate the South Darfur Returns Working Group to 
address how agencies will function in this new 
operational environment and how the humanitarian 
community can best engage the government as it seeks to 
emphasize the rapid return of IDPs to their points of 
origin throughout South Darfur. 
 
HUME