06KHARTOUM1098
Update on Darfur Security and Humanitarian
Tue May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO8299
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1098/01 1291215
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091215Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2696
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001098 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR D, AF/FO, AF/RSA, AND AF/SPG 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/EA AND DCHA SUDAN GROU 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MOPS KPKO PREF UN AU SU
SUBJECT:  Update on Darfur Security and Humanitarian 
Access - May 9, 2006 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 01090 and previous 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Tensions continue in the Kalma IDP camp in 
the wake of the May 8 death of an AU interpreter in 
riots, with the SAF and Arab militia reportedly cordoning 
off the area.  NGOs, however, continue to provide basic 
services.  The AU has also received reports of attacks 
over the past three days in Labado, Abgaragel, Kalaka, 
and Dagama.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Security Update: 
 
¶A.  On May 8, a USAID field officer received unconfirmed 
reports that the SAF and Arab militia have established a 
cordon around Kalma IDP camp, ostensibly to maintain 
security.  UNDSS sent a security assessment team to Kalma 
camp at 0900 on May 9. 
 
¶B.  On May 8, unconfirmed reports indicate that Arab 
militias supported by the SAF attacked the town of 
Labado, approximately 60 km east of Nyala.  Aid agencies 
in the region indicated that they treated 32 war-wounded 
from the confrontation, many of them in serious 
condition.  The AU will investigate on May 9. 
 
¶C.  On May 7, MGS Nyala conducted a confidence building 
patrol to El Salaam IDP Camp, and determined that there 
were roughly 470 new IDPs from Donkey Dereissa, 
Abgaragel, Joghana, and Birkatulli.  Hearing gunshots, 
the team proceeded to Kashalongo to try and confirm the 
exact location of the shooting; they met villagers from 
Abgaragel fleeing towards El Salaam who alleged that they 
had been attacked by armed Arab militias.  The villagers 
further alleged that the attackers killed an unknown 
number of villagers, abducted some of them, and stole 
their animals. 
 
¶D.  On May 7, MGS Khor Abeche conducted a confidence 
building patrol to Kalaka.  A sheikh and an SLA commander 
alleged that about 300 mounted attackers who raided the 
village on May 5 had worn SAF camouflage uniforms and 
were armed with AK-47 rifles and RPGs. 
 
¶E.  On May 6, MGS Nyala conducted a confidence building 
patrol to Abgaragel, where the team observed that three 
quarters of the village was burned and the area was 
abandoned.  A witness said the attackers struck from the 
south in seven to eight vehicles; they were alleged to be 
SLA members.  They attacked the police camp; and about 
seven or eight police officers were killed and three 
injured during the exchange of gunfire.  Two police 
vehicles were destroyed in the process.  On the following 
day, the witness added, the police went back to the 
village aboard four vehicles to collect the deceased, and 
started shooting indiscriminately as well as burning huts 
out of frustration. 
 
¶F.  On May 6, MGS Geraida conducted a confidence building 
patrol to Dagama village and reported that the village 
was deserted, with most of the houses burned and property 
scattered around the compound.  Four gunshots were heard 
from some abandoned houses behind the water point in the 
village. The team stopped to observe and later saw some 
people on horses numbering about 30, armed with assorted 
weapons and with drums to collect water on the horse 
cart.  The jinjaweed, who claimed to be Mahadi tribesmen 
from Dito, have dominated Dagama village to control the 
water point, scaring the villagers away to Geraida IDP 
Camp. 
 
¶G.  On May 5, MGS Shangil Tobaya held a meeting with the 
SLA commander and the local leadership; the MGS commander 
was concerned with the disturbing events in Shangil 
Tobaya IDP camp, where it was alleged that the SLA 
members were abducting and forcefully recruiting young 
men into their army.  The SLA commander of the area told 
the MGS commander that the SLA were merely rounding up 
its soldiers who had over stayed in the IDP camp while on 
vacation from Abuhamura and the SLA was returning them to 
their post.  This operation was misunderstood by locals, 
who became apprehensive and fled to the MGS. 
 
¶3.  Humanitarian Access Update: 
 
On May 9, Three NGOs - MSF-Holland, ACF, and MDM - sent 
small assessment teams into Kalma IDP camp; a number of 
NGOs continue to provide services there, despite UNDSS 
classification of it as a "No-Go" area.  The Wali of 
South Darfur has called a noon meeting to discuss the 
 
KHARTOUM 00001098  002 OF 002 
 
 
situation in Kalma camp. 
 
¶4.  Comment:  USAID Field Office will attend the Wali's 
meeting and provide a read-out; it will also participate 
in the regularly scheduled Kalma Camp Coordination 
meeting on May 9.  End comment. 
 
HUME