06KHARTOUM2818
Sudan: Letter to Sec. Rice from FM Lam Akol on Guantanamo
Thu Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #2818 3412034
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 072034Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5520UNCLAS KHARTOUM 002818 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PTER US SU
SUBJECT:  Sudan: Letter to Sec. Rice from FM Lam Akol on Guantanamo 
Detainee 
 
¶1. (SBU) On December 6, Embassy Khartoum received a letter dated 
December 4 from Foreign Minister Lam Akol regarding the status of 
Guantanamo detainee Sami Mohy El din Mohammed Al Hajj, an Al-Jazeera 
cameraman. 
 
¶2. (SBU) the text of the letter is as follows: 
 
(Begin text) 
 
I am writing to you in relation to the Sudanese citizen Mr. Sami 
Mohy El din Mohammed Al Hajj who was arrested in Afghanistan few 
years ago while he was covering the events there as a journalist, or 
more precisely, a cameraman for Aljazeera Television and was since 
then detained in Guantanamo Bay by the US Law Enforcement Agencies. 
Mr. El Hajj is listed in the detention under No. US9SU-000345DP. 
 
To the best of our knowledge and belief, Mr. Al Hajj is held in 
detention without charge in Guantanamo Bay for a very long period of 
time and without any clue as to the nature of the crime he is 
alleged to have committed or any indication as to a time frame for 
his trial. 
 
I wish hereby to convey the deep concern of the people of the Sudan 
and the family and friends of Mr. El Hajj about his health in 
Guantanamo.  It is likely that, Mr. El Hajj might have been 
mistakenly arrested as a combatant in Afghanistan.  The information 
gathered about his character reveal that he is a person of good 
record and that he was just doing his job as a cameraman when 
arrested.  Of course, if there is any prima facie evidence to the 
contrary, the Government of the Sudan would welcome his transfer to 
his country of nationality for the due process of law to take 
place. 
 
Therefore, we would kindly request the intervention of your esteemed 
Department with the relevant US Authorities in Guantanamo to assess 
the position of Mr. El Hajj and to facilitate his immediate release 
for him to travel to Sudan.  I trust the Minister of Foreign Affairs 
of the sisterly State of Qatar could assist in this matter. 
 
I am convinced that the disturbing unconfirmed information about the 
deteriorating health and morale of Mr. El Hajj will prompt your 
Department to take an immediate action on humanitarian grounds, and 
we are hopeful that Mr. El Hajj will soon join his family and 
friends in Sudan. 
 
I avail myself of this opportunity to thank you in advance and to 
renew to your Excellency the assurances of my highest esteem. 
 
(End text) 
 
HUME