06KHARTOUM1028
CG Juba Round-up - April 30
Mon May 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1028 1211223
ZNR UUUUU ZZH ZDK CITE RUEHCB SVC 2860
O 011223Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2570
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 001028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SOCI ECON PINR EPET SU
SUBJECT: CG Juba Round-up - April 30 
 
¶1.  CRS Officially Reopens Juba Office:  The president of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Catholic Relief Services (CRS) worldwide, Ken Hackett, 
was in Juba this week to officially reopen the CRS office 
in Juba, closed since 1976.  CRS has maintained a 
continuous presence in Southern Sudan since 1973, but it 
has been running its programs out of Khartoum and then 
Nairobi for the past 30 years.  At the inauguration of 
the office, Juba Archbishop Paolino Lukudu Loro warned 
all NGOs that they should not spend all their money 
building compounds for themselves and leave only the 
scraps to help people, that they should not allow their 
mission of helping people to be manipulated by local 
politicians, and that they should take the time to train 
Sudanese to help with development rather than bringing in 
foreigners.  Before the event, Mr. Hackett met with the 
Acting Consul General (A/CG), asking about security, CPA 
progress, and the SPLM's actions in Darfur.  A/CG told 
Mr. Hackett that the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) 
remained a problem in the South, but ethnic fighting was 
probably a more serious long-term problem, that the CPA 
was moving more slowly than anyone wanted, but it was 
moving, and that the USG has been consistently delivering 
the message to the SPLM that resolving the Darfur crisis 
would be in its best interests, because it is drawing 
attention and resources from the South. 
 
¶2.  Fuel Shortages in Juba:  With little warning, diesel 
fuel has become completely unavailable in Juba, 
threatening NGO, government, and commercial operations 
and raising prices at the local market.  Diesel is 
normally shipped from the northern port of Kosti by 
barge, a journey which takes about two weeks.  The 
problem has been compounded by supply problems in Uganda 
and Kenya, the alternate sources of fuel for the region. 
While there is reportedly a fuel barge in Torit, it is 
unclear whether its fuel is destined for Juba and how 
helpful it will be when it arrives.  The UN expects this 
shortage to last for at least another two weeks. 
 
¶3.  Attorney General Joins Legal Affairs Ministry:  The 
Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS) Ministry of Legal 
Affairs and Constitutional Development has now taken over 
the role of the attorney general's office.  As of April 
27, Minister Michael Makwei is the GoSS Attorney General, 
and former Attorney General Majok Mading Majok has become 
the Under Secretary for Justice.  The previous Under 
Sec retary for Justice, William Bior, has left the 
government and has entered into private practice. 
 
¶4. Rebecca Garang Moving:  The house where Rebecca Garang 
currently lives belongs to the Government of Southern 
Sudan, and was the official residence of the head of the 
Government Coordinating Council when Juba was a garrison 
town.  Garang moved into the house with her husband when 
he was named President of Southern Sudan, although Rumbek 
was then being considered for the southern capital.  Now 
that Salva Kiir is president, Garang reportedly plans on 
leaving once renovations are complete on her new house 
down the street.  The GoSS has not decided what to do 
with the house once it is empty, as Kiir is reportedly 
reluctant to take it for fear of appearing to displace 
the popular Garang forcibly. 
 
STEINFELD