06KHARTOUM447
SUDAN PRESSES OPPOSITION TO INTERNATIONAL
Tue Feb 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3830
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0447/01 0521527
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211527Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1565
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000447 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KPKO UN AU SU
SUBJECT: SUDAN PRESSES OPPOSITION TO INTERNATIONAL 
INTERVENTION ON MULTIPLE FRONTS 
 
REF: A. KHARTOUM 440 
 
     ¶B. KHARTOUM 439 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Facing mounting pressure for increased 
international intervention, the Government of National Unity 
(GNU) has started a broad effort to resist UN and 
International Criminal Court (ICC) action.  Over the past 
week, this campaign has included media events, newspaper 
articles, engagement with CODEL Pelosi, summoning of UN 
Special Representative (SRSG) Jan Pronk to the MFA, and 
meeting with AU Commission Chairperson Alpha Oumar Konare. 
Throughout, the GNU message had been consistent: there is no 
genocide in Darfur, only conflicts over resources; the crisis 
can be resolved without UN intervention; and foreign 
governments are using Darfur as an excuse to pressure Sudan. 
The most recent media reports have also begun to include 
warnings that the Darfurians would react poorly to UN troops, 
and that the UN peacekeepers would face great difficulties. 
On February 22, Foreign Minister Lam Akol will address 
parliament on the issue of foreign intervention, followed by 
a vote on a draft resolution condemning any deployment of 
international troops without government approval.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
CODEL Pelosi and the Diplomatic Front 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The media coverage and press releases covering the visit 
of CODEL Pelosi emphasized Sudan's desire to dispel what it 
considers the myths of Darfur.  Before the CODEL's arrival, 
MFA Spokesperson Jamal Muhammed Ibrahim said that he welcomed 
the visit so that the delegation could see the reality for 
themselves, rather than rely on negative reports from members 
of Congress who are "propagating (these reports) for the sake 
of imposing sanctions against Sudan ... and affect the 
ongoing negotiations in Abuja."  In the CODEL's meetings with 
GNU Vice President Ali Osman Taha (ref A), Taha repeated that 
message and emphasized the official government position, that 
Darfur is not genocide, but rather a conflict over pastures 
and water resources.  The CODEL's meeting with Taha received 
coverage in the local press, with an emphasis on the VP's 
statements. 
 
¶3.  When the CODEL arrived in Darfur, they were greeted by 
the Wali (governor) of North Darfur, who had arranged for a 
big media event-rather than a private meeting, as expected-- 
and explained the true nature of the Darfur problem.  Again, 
he characterized it as a development and resource problem and 
said that the Darfurians could actually resolve the problem 
themselves if left alone.  His lesson included a 12-page 
report, complete with charts and graphs, that explained his 
version of the conflict's history, outlined everything the 
government had done to try and resolve it, and went over the 
rebel's efforts to prevent peace. 
 
-------------- 
Pronk Summoned 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  In other diplomatic efforts to forestall intervention, 
the government summoned SRSG Pronk to the foreign ministry to 
warn him that he should not try to exceed the UN mandate. 
According to the press, acting Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Ali Ahmad Karti protested what the GNU characterized as a UN 
effort to undermine Sudanese sovereignty and defame the 
country (septel).  He stated that the GNU is willing to work 
with the UN, but only if it functioned within its mandate. 
President Bashir met with Commissioner Konare several days 
ago in Khartoum to stress the position that Africans should 
solve African problems. 
 
------------------------------ 
Bashir Confident in Judiciary 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  In a separate event, commemorating the diamond jubilee of 
the Sudanese judiciary, Bashir expressed his confidence in 
the judiciary and said that it was the only body that could 
fairly prosecute war crimes in Darfur.  He said the judiciary 
has proven that they can provide fair and speedy trials that 
safeguard human rights and the right of defense. 
 
------------------ 
Full Media Assault 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  Numerous articles in every major newspaper have included 
articles, interviews, and editorials objecting to further 
intervention (ref B).  Foreign Minister Lam Akol countered 
Secretary Rice's recent statements on the continuing genocide 
 
SIPDIS 
 
KHARTOUM 00000447  002 OF 002 
 
 
by saying that only the AU on the ground is qualified to 
judge the situation, and pointing out that only the U.S., and 
not the AU or UN, have claimed it is genocide. 
 
¶7.  Official government spokespersons are always careful to 
express a willingness to consider UN intervention if they can 
be convinced it is justified.  However, government-controlled 
civic institutions, including the Journalists Union, the 
Legal Accountants Union, and the Coordination Council of 
Professionals Unions, have announced that they reject 
international forces under any pretext (ignoring the fact 
that the current AMIS mission includes 27 countries). 
 
¶8.  Newspaper reports and statements on the possibility of UN 
intervention have also begun to take a more aggressive stand. 
 Speaker of the National Assembly Ahmed Ibrahim El-Tahir said 
that international forces would become a target for violence 
from angry Darfurians, who would not welcome a foreign 
occupation.  Major General Salah Abdalla Mohammed Ghosh, head 
of the National Security and Intelligence Service (NSIS), 
told a graduating class of NSIS officers that Darfur would 
not be a comfortable place for foreign troops. 
HUME