06KIGALI716
MILITARY PROSECUTOR DISCUSSES HIGH PROFILE CASES
Fri Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0716/01 2021047
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211047Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3031
INFO RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITYUNCLAS KIGALI 000716 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/C 
EUCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KAWC KJUS PGOV RW
SUBJECT: MILITARY PROSECUTOR DISCUSSES HIGH PROFILE CASES 
 
REF: A. KIGALI 687 
     ¶B. 05 KIGALI 411 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary.  On 19 July poloff met with Major Christophe 
Bizimungu, Rwandan Defense Force (RDF) Chief Prosecutor, to 
discuss the status of three high profile cases currently 
being handled by his office.   Bizimungu presented a detailed 
case against Colonel Patrick Karegeya, former head of the 
External Intelligence and Security Department, and confirmed 
that the prosecution had appealed the sentence.  Bizimungu 
provided less information and insight on the trials of Major 
General Laurent Munyakazi and Major Ben Karenzi as both are 
currently underway, but he noted that strong cases will be 
presented by the prosecutor as they proceed.  End summary. 
 
Karegeya,s Insubordination 
-------------------------- 
¶2. (U)  Major Bizimungu confirmed that Colonel Patrick 
Karegeya, former National Security Service Director General 
of the Department of External Intelligence and Security, is 
appealing his sentence of loss of rank and 18 months in 
prison and asking for a complete dismissal of the charges. 
(Note.  Initially, the press reported a sentence of one year, 
eight months. End note.)  The prosecution is asking for a 7 
and a half year prison sentence in addition to the demotion 
from Colonel to civilian. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Bizimungu, the prosecutor who argued the case, 
showed poloff some of the documentation that he used in the 
trial to prove the insubordination and desertion charges and 
he outlined the timeline of the events.   He confirmed that 
there were no written orders delivered to Karegeya (ref A), 
but said that testimony, private correspondence and records 
confirming the cancellation of Karegeya,s official cell 
phone all prove that verbal orders were given to him by Chief 
of General Staff James Kabarebe at Kabarebe,s home in Kigali 
on 11 April.   Desertion was added to the charge of 
insubordination because he did not report for duty for over 
one month from the date the verbal orders were issued. 
 
 
Former Commander Tried in Tribunal and Public 
--------------------------------------------- 
¶4. (U)  The trial of former Second Division Commanding 
General MG Laurent Munyakazi, is continuing in a dramatic and 
public manner.  Munyakazi, charged with 13 counts of 
Genocide, was judged to be a Category One Genocidaire in a 
gacaca hearing last year (ref B).  (Note.  Accused 
genocidaires are classified into three categories, Category I 
being the most grievous.  End note.)   It is alleged that 
then LtCol Munyakazi, as Commander of the "Groupe Mobile", 
did not prevent Interahamwe killings, was complicit in the 
killings by the soldiers under his command and committed 
murders himself.   Munyakazi does not deny that acts of 
genocide occurred by Interahamwe and his troops in his area 
of responsibility, but claims that he was powerless to 
prevent the killings and denies that he personally took part 
in any genocide related activities. 
 
¶5. (U)  The local press has been following the trial closely 
and reporting in explicit detail the testimony of survivors 
accusing Munyakazi of the worst types of genocide crimes. 
 
Expired Drugs, Family Ties and South Korea 
------------------------------------------ 
¶6.  (U) Dr. Ben Karenzi, former Secretary General of the 
Ministry of Health and an active duty Major in the RDF, was 
arrested on 23 July and charged with falsifying documents, 
selling expired drugs, and storing drugs in an unlawful 
place.   His co-defendants include his brother Amos 
Kamugisha, the Honorary Consul of South Korea to Rwanda and 
Vedaste Munyankindi, Director of the Pharmacy Department in 
the Ministry of Health.  The men are accused of operating an 
unlawful pharmaceutical drug business out of Kamugishsa,s 
Kigali residence- on the same compound as his South Korean 
consular office.  According to the Rwandan National Police, 
some of the pharmaceuticals were expired, a detail that has 
been stressed in the local press.  Bizimungu confirmed that 
Karenzi is being held in the Mulindi Military detention 
center but did not offer additional details or insight as the 
case is currently under investigation. 
 
¶7. (U) On a separate but related note, when Karenzi was 
relieved of his position as Secretary General on 14 July, he 
was replaced with Caroline Kayanga, the wife of LTG Charles 
Kayonga, the RDF Land Forces Chief of Staff. 
¶8. (SBU)  Comment.  Despite the natural inclination to 
question the true motives behind these three high profile 
trials, it may be that the cases have been brought forward 
solely because of their merit.  Former insider Karegeya has a 
reputation for being very smart, but also very opinionated 
and independent.  It is unfortunate for him, but it is 
neither unrealistic nor surprising to believe that he acted 
the way the prosecution argued he did. 
 
¶9. (SBU)  The real question in Munyakazi's case is not the 
extent that he was involved in the genocide, but why it took 
so long for the charges to be made.  As a Division Commanding 
General, he clearly served in the RDF as a competent and 
loyal officer, so why did it take so long for his history to 
catch up to him?  Bizimungu's explanation was that "gacaca 
has opened the public's attitude" and the process has matured 
to the point that the population is now willing to come 
forward to stand as witnesses.  He also noted the testimony 
of former soldiers and Interahamwe in prison gacaca hearings 
that has implicated Munyakazi. 
 
¶10. (SBU)  It is premature to analyze the case of Karenzi as 
it is currently being investigated.  As always, there are 
rumors as to the "real reason" for the charges.  However, if 
the accusations are proved, this would be an encouraging 
action by the GOR to continue to pursue high-level officials 
guilty of corruption.  End comment. 
THURSTON