06KIGALI482
Catholic Archbishop Notes Improved Church-State
Thu May 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0022
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #0482 1381633
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181633Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2784UNCLAS KIGALI 000482 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/C AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KDEM SOCI RW
SUBJECT:  Catholic Archbishop Notes Improved Church-State 
Relations 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  During a May 17 discussion with polchief on 
religious freedom in Rwanda, the Catholic Archbishop of 
Kigali noted that relations between the GOR and the Catholic 
Church have improved, with greater collaboration on social 
services and other services, such as security.  He noted, 
however, that the Church would like the GOR to clarify its 
legal status and to update the agreement under which the 
Church operates primary and secondary schools to clearly 
define their respective roles.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  During a discussion on religious freedom May 17, 
Catholic Archbishop of Kigali, Thaddee Ntihinyurwa, told 
polchief that relations between the GOR and the Catholic 
Church were better this year.  There were no "malevolent" 
comments made by the GOR and no restrictions on construction 
of new churches.  The GOR collaborated with the Church on 
social services, such as health and education, and provided 
other services, such as security for the inauguration of a 
bishop, upon request. 
 
¶3.  Ntihinyurwa noted, however, some areas in which the 
Church would like to see further progress.  For example, the 
Church would like the GOR to update the Education Convention 
Agreement, under which the Church operates primary and 
secondary schools, to clearly define the respective roles of 
Church and government in parochial schools.  The Church 
would also like the GOR to clarify its legal status, which 
under the current law governing non-profit organizations is 
equated with that of small non-profit organizations.  He 
commented that the Church had participated in revising a 
draft law on religious organizations that is currently under 
review at the Ministry of Local Government. 
 
¶4.  The Archbishop estimated that the Catholic Church in 
Rwanda currently numbers 4 million followers, or 53-56 
percent of the population.  While the Church recognizes a 
neo-Catholic movement called the "Mouvement Sacerdotal 
Marial," the Movement is not officially registered with the 
GOR.  Its teachings and practices are characterized by 
fervent worship, including long periods of fasting and 
praying.  Archbishop Ntihinyurwa said he has cautioned 
members of the Movement to limit their preaching to tenets 
of the Holy Gospel in order to avoid controversy. 
 
¶5.  Laurent Kalibushi, a former leader of the Movement, 
described it as a spiritual movement founded in Italy in 
1973 that took root in Rwanda in 1986.  Following the death 
of the Movement's Rwandan leader during the 1994 Genocide, 
Kalibushi re-launched the movement in October 1994 and 
served as its leader from 1995 to 1997.  He noted that the 
Movement has spread to almost every diocese in Rwanda, but 
is not popular among the clergy because the "Movement is 
spiritually too demanding," requiring extended periods of 
fasting and praying. 
 
¶6.  Archbishop Ntihinyurwa indicated that the Catholic 
Church encourages prayer group meetings in private homes as 
well as night gatherings, and that there are no government 
restrictions on their right to do so.  (Note:  Previously, 
in the immediate aftermath of the civil war and 1994 
genocide, there were prohibitions on night gatherings of 
religious or any other group without prior approval of the 
government.  End note.) 
 
Arietti