06NDJAMENA1393
LETTER FROM CHAD FOREIGN MINISTER TO THE SECRETARY
Tue Dec 05 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNJ #1393 3391629
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051629Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4654UNCLAS NDJAMENA 001393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CD PGOV PREF PREL SU
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM CHAD FOREIGN MINISTER TO THE SECRETARY 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  The Embassy received a letter dated December 5, 2006 
from the Minister of Foreign Affairs for transmission to the 
Secretary of State.  Unofficial translation follows: 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Madam Minister, 
 
I write to you after returning home to Tchad following a 
fruitful and friendly exchange during the meeting which you 
had the kindness to accord me in your office November 28 at 
17:30 as well as the in-depth discussion which I had with 
your Assistant Frazer in the company of a number of staff 
members. 
 
I would like first of all to thank you and thank your staff 
as well as the United States Government for the hospitality 
and warm reception which was accorded to me.  I would be 
remiss if I failed to thank  -  through you - the medical 
team of the George Washington Hospital which diagnosed a 
serious inflammation of my gall bladder and which perfomed 
the operation professionally and effectively 
 
I would like as well to underline that our meeing ame at 
good time in view of the redynamism f the friendly relations 
and mutually advantageou cooperation between our two 
countries. It is a ood time as well for us to congratulae 
ourselves on our cooperation in the petroleum sector and the 
universal struggle against terrorism. 
 
In addition, I would like to assure you that President Idriss 
Deby Itno salutes your personal receptivity, and that of your 
country, to support Chad as it reinforces democracy by 
striving for a political dialogue between political actors 
which have renounced violence and to assist Chad in its 
resistance to the efforts by the Khartoum regime to 
destabilize it and the region, as well as to export the 
Darfur conflict.  For these reasons, my President has 
recently reaffirmed his openness to strengthening a political 
dialogue and to announce our acceptance of a security and 
humanitarian presence in the east of Chad under the auspices 
of the United Nations to protect the refugees and displaced, 
as well as the frontiers between Chad and the Sudan on the 
one hand, and Chad, the Central African Republic and Sudan on 
the other hand.  Your Ambassador was informed of this by the 
President of the Republic even before it was announced to the 
press. 
 
My President salutes and supports the leadership of his 
counterpart, President Bush, to halt the genocide in Darfur 
and to bring UN forces there.  Chad, as a member of the 
international community, will fully play its role with your 
country and the rest of the world to put an end to this 
humanitarian crisis, protect its population, and secure its 
territory. 
 
As I write this letter, my country faces new invasions by 
mercenary groups supported by Sudan and other terrorist 
forces.  The aim is to put an end to our democratic process 
which is in the process of consolidation by upending 
legitimate institutions and replacing them with a regime 
loyal to Khartoum. 
 
In the difficult moments which my country faces, I know that 
in the future it can count on your personal support, that of 
President Bush and of his Administration to help it confront 
the war which is imposed on it by Sudan. 
 
Please accept, Madam Minister, the assurances of my very 
highest consideration. 
 
Sincerely and cordially 
 
(signed) 
Ahmad Allam-Mi, 
 
WALL