06PARIS3722
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Middle East - Palestine - Hamas -
Mon Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 003722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR 
ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Middle East - Palestine - Hamas - 
Olmert Iran Nuclear Stalemate Iraq - Allegations On Haditha 
PARIS - Monday, June 05, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Middle East - Palestine - Hamas - Olmert 
Iran Nuclear Stalemate 
Iraq - Allegations On Haditha 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Liberation devotes its lead to the "Specter of a Civil War" in the 
Palestinian territories and the ultimatum (expiring today) that 
Mahmoud Abbas gave Hamas, just as Prime Minister Olmert presented 
Egypt's Mubarak his West Bank pull out plan. The editorial 
emphasizes the growing chaos which has followed on the heels of 
Hamas's election, "fueled by an economic blockade orchestrated by 
the West... Last evening Olmert took the measure of the worsening 
situation. It would be good if others did as well." An op-ed  by two 
noted French intellectuals entitled "No to Boycotting Hamas" in 
Liberation suggests that "a humanitarian approach alone is not 
sufficient" to help the Palestinians... In order to "invite Hamas to 
abandon terrorism in favor of negotiations, there has to be more 
than just denying it its legitimacy." Le Figaro reports that "Olmert 
Is Ready to Negotiate With Abbas" and that "between Egypt and 
Israel, the honeymoon is on."  (See Part C) 
 
Today's Le Figaro reports on its front page "Khamenei's response" to 
the West's offer: "Iran Will Not Give In," and adds in its 
page-three article: "The Ayatollah Supports Tehran's Hard Line 
Approach." (See Part C) 
 
Several outlets over the weekend continued to report on the "Haditha 
blunder." Le Figaro reports on "Baghdad's Concerns over U.S. 
Blunders."  Both Le Journal du Dimanche and Le Figaro quote U.S. 
General Peter Chiarelli who has asked his staff "to teach ethics to 
U.S. soldiers." (See Part C) 
 
The weekly Le Figaro Magazine devotes its "Profile of the Week" to 
the U.S. Ambassador to NATO Victoria Nuland. "Victoria Nuland is 
precise and skillful... she hails from the entourage of the hawks at 
the White House and from them she has retained a penchant for 
pragmatism and idealism... Victoria Nuland is in line with Irving 
Kristol's... conception of neo-conservatism: progressive, not 
nostalgic, optimistic not defeatist. She is of those who know what 
they want and intend to get there." 
Saturday's Le Figaro edition led with: "How Islamists Recruit in 
France." Jean Chichizola's report is based on a recent document 
edited by France's intelligence services (RG): "The recruiting is to 
a large extent done in the 'banlieus' (suburbs) among youth from the 
Maghreb and black Africa who suffer from the worsening economy." The 
RG notes that "radicalization happens at an increasingly early age" 
and that "prisons offer a fertile ground for recruitment." 
 
On the domestic front, Le Journal du Dimanche carries an opinion 
poll on a "potential replacement for PM Villepin." While 39% of 
those polled still say they "trust in the Prime Minister's abilities 
to lead France until the next presidential election," Nicolas 
Sarkozy comes out in the lead as a possible replacement with 39% of 
the votes. Second comes Jean Louis Borloo, the Labor Minister, with 
25% of the votes; Defense Minister Alliot-Marie is third with 13%. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Middle East - Palestine - Hamas - Olmert 
 
"Irresponsible" 
Antoine de Gaudemar in left-of-center Liberation (06/05): "Since 
Hamas's election, chaos has become even worse in Palestine's 
autonomous territories. Between the economic blockade - albeit 
called by another name - orchestrated by Israel and the West, and 
internal violence born out of the Hamas-Fatah rivalry, Palestine is 
slowly sinking into a crisis that looks very much like a civil war. 
Those who oppose an independent Palestinian state would be wrong to 
rejoice over a situation that will only lead to radicalization and 
terrorism... By pursuing its blockade... the western world, and 
particularly the European Union, is playing with fire. Whatever one 
may think, Hamas was legitimately elected... If one still believes 
in peace for this region, letting its civilian population sink 
deeper into despair by cutting its food supplies is doubly 
dangerous. First, because civilians should not pay for the errors of 
their governments. Second, because Abbas may be about to succeed 
where the international community has failed. The threat of a 
referendum is putting his rival in a difficult situation. When 
Olmert said yesterday that he 'would keep Palestine from falling 
into a humanitarian crisis,' he appeared to have measured the 
seriousness of the situation. Others should do likewise." 
 
"Olmert Ready to Negotiate with Abbas" 
Marc Henry in right-of-center Le Figaro (06/05): "Olmert is well 
aware of the difficulties he is facing and has given up on sending 
an ultimatum to Abbas. The negative reactions in Europe and in Arab 
countries, allied to the U.S., which followed his initial remarks 
after taking office have made him much more cautious. For him, the 
important thing is to give tokens of goodwill even if its means 
taking action at a later date." 
 
"No to a Boycott of Hamas" 
Esther Benbassa of the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes and Francois 
Burgat of the Center for Strategic Research in left-of-center 
Liberation (06/05): "Where does the border between Islam and 
terrorism, between Muslims who can be trusted and Bin Laden's 
agents, between the 'good citizen' and the 'bad extremist' lie? Upon 
reading dominant speeches in Europe and in France, it has become 
increasingly difficult to answer the question... The humanitarian 
approach to Palestine is not enough. In time it will even become 
counter-productive. It demands impossible diplomatic and legal 
contortions... Denying Hamas its legitimacy is a setback for peace: 
there are other ways to invite Hamas to divest itself of its 
terrorist guise. How is it possible to justify such a boycott of a 
legitimate vote and thereby deny what international law dictates? 
How is it possible for this unilateral western stance to triumph so 
easily? ... The lack of protest may stem from old and instinctive 
fears of the 'other,' who 'speaks Muslim' and is by definition a 
believer in theocracy... In order to invite Hamas to abandon 
terrorism in favor of negotiations, there has to be more than just 
denying it its legitimacy." 
 
Iran Nuclear Stalemate 
 
"Khamenei Supports Tehran's Hardliners" 
Le Figaro (06/05): "Iran will not give in. Iran's religious leader 
reiterated that Iran would 'give in neither to the enemy's threats 
nor to its bribes...' His position is not really a surprise... 
Meanwhile, Tehran seems to be wagering on differences of interests 
between the U.S. on one hand and the Europeans and the Russians on 
the other. But yesterday Secretary Rice minimized the threats posed 
by Tehran, especially those concerning energy: 'after all, Tehran is 
also dependent on its oil revenues,' she said." 
 
"Time to Reward Iran?" 
Gilles Delafon in right-of-center Le Journal du Dimanche (06/05): 
"This latest effort to resolve the Iranian nuclear crisis has 
probably more of a chance of succeeding. When Javier Solana travels 
to Iran tomorrow... he will be facing a difficult task because Iran 
has already rejected the initial condition: suspending its nuclear 
enrichment. But the text agreed to in Vienna on Thursday leaves an 
opening: at no time does it mention either threats or sanctions... 
But the main advance lies elsewhere: in the fact that the UNSC has 
concentrated on what rewards to grant Iran if it accepts the deal. 
After 27 seven years of no dialogue, the time has come for an open 
relationship with potential benefits such as the lifting of many 
economic sanctions... This is a good response to Iran's recent 
letter to President Bush. If there is no agreement this time, Iran's 
intransigence could lead Russia and China to be less accommodating 
and open the door to possible sanctions. The ball is in 
Ahmedinejad's hands. It is up to him to say whether he prefers to 
remain the leader of an anti-American crusade or ensure his people's 
well-being." 
 
Iraq - Allegations On Haditha 
 
"Baghdad Concerned Over America Blunders" 
Thierry Oberle in right-of-center Le Figaro (06/05): "After Haditha, 
Ishaki... The latest revelations and videos are fanning the fires of 
uneasiness which have gripped the Iraqi authorities... Prime 
Minister Maliki has called for an investigation and the Council of 
Ministers has accused the U.S. of 'human rights violations...' The 
Haditha incident looks like it may be the darkest episode of the 
Iraqi occupation by U.S. forces... The investigation could well 
finger high-level U.S. military officials for having tried to cover 
up the incident." STAPLETON