06PARIS3114
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Russia Versus the U.S. -
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 003114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC 
FOR ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; 
MOSCOW/PA; ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Russia Versus the U.S. - 
Dick Cheney's Remarks Hamas - Palestinian Aid UN Human 
Rights Council 
PARIS - Thursday, May 11, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Russia Versus the U.S. - Dick Cheney's Remarks 
Hamas - Palestinian Aid 
UN Human Rights Council 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The Clearstream scandal continues to attract the attention 
of all front pages, including that of the IHT. While Le 
Figaro and Les Echos underscore Chirac's attempts to "Dowse 
the Fires of Rumors," Liberation devotes its lead to the 
man suspected of being the ("Crow") secret informant, and 
who temporarily stepped down from his EADS post in order to 
"devote his efforts to defending himself." La Croix's front 
page points to the "Six Key Issues" which explain the 
affair and which are analyzed inside. In Le Figaro John 
Vinocur pens an op-ed denouncing France's 'immobility' 
which he says "is the real scandal, not Clearstream: 
Concentrating on this scandal is distracting France from 
the fundamental causes of its misery." 
 
Le Figaro's second lead story is devoted to Putin's 
"resistance against the American 'wolf'" in reference to 
Putin's national address yesterday in which he presented 
the U.S. as "Russia's rival." The editorial is entitled 
"Russia Sure of Itself." (See Part C) Le Figaro carries an 
op-ed penned by Secretary Rumsfeld entitled "Faced with the 
New Challenges, America's New Alliances" which addresses 
America's partnership with Russia: "The U.S. is in the 
midst of a significant transformation of its military 
positions and partnerships. NATO has been rethought. and 
while today we concentrate on Iraq and Afghanistan, in the 
coming years our priorities will change, in part due to 
choices made by other nations. Take Russia: our cooperation 
in security issues has never been better. But Russia is 
less cooperative in other matters, such as the energy 
sector. The same goes for China." 
 
Liberation and Le Figaro report on the "serious situation 
in Gaza" (Liberation) and the "threat of a catastrophe" (Le 
Figaro) if financial aid does not resume. One report in Le 
Figaro notes the "divergence of views" between the U.S. and 
Europe. (See Part C) 
 
The weekly column in Le Figaro by Alexandre Adler is 
devoted to the "coincidental fact that in France and the 
U.S. intelligence services, the CIA and the DGSE, are 
presently suffering from a lack of public trust. In the 
U.S., the head of the CIA was forced to step down; in 
France, the most renowned and prestigious intelligence 
officer, General Rondot, is on hot coals in the Clearstream 
scandal." Adler traces the creation of the new agency 
headed by John Negroponte, "a Tsar of intelligence," and 
analyzes the "growing number of Pentagon-led special 
operations which have absorbed all of the CIA's 
paramilitary sector, as in Iraq and Afghanistan." Adler 
also notes that "the nomination of Michael Hayden to head 
the CIA consecrates, at least symbolically, the 
subordination of the agency's operators to the 
technocrats." 
 
Le Monde devotes its editorial to the UN Human Rights 
Council and the effects of "realpolitik." (See Part C) 
 
Financial daily La Tribune devotes its lead to France's 
"economic attractiveness" for foreign investors. A graph in 
La Croix shows the U.S. as the number one investor in 
France and responsible for the creation of 29% of total 
jobs last year, up from 8,248 in 2004 to 8,756 in 2005. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Russia Versus the U.S. - Dick Cheney's Remarks 
 
"Russia Sure of Itself" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (05/11): 
"Dick Cheney's fierce criticism of Russia has served Putin 
well. It allowed him to appear before his people in full 
control of the international situation. Putin can indeed 
feel secure: his popularity ratings are close to 70%, while 
President Bush's is down to 31%. Growing oil prices have 
finally given Russia the means to serve its ambitions. 
Cheney's attacks on his energy 'blackmail' had no effect on 
the master of the Kremlin. Putin knows that part of the 
American political class is pressuring Bush to adopt a 
harsher tone towards Moscow. In answer to Cheney's remarks, 
which were reminiscent of the Cold War, Putin preferred 
irony. calling America 'comrade wolf.' But the gist of 
Putin's speech lies elsewhere: in the defense of a stronger 
Russia economically and militarily. And so the question is: 
what attitude to adopt towards an increasingly strong 
Russia but one which is moving away from our democratic 
model? The debate is on between the U.S. and Europe. While 
both have made the same diagnosis, all will not follow 
Cheney in his confrontation with Moscow. We must convince 
Putin that a Russia sure of itself will be even stronger 
thanks to civil liberties and democracy." 
 
"Putin Assails the American 'Fortress'" 
Virginie Pironon in left-of-center Liberation (05/11): "The 
criticism is barely veiled and the cutting remarks wisely 
sprinkled in advance of the G8. Yesterday Putin could not 
resist the temptation of rebutting America's recent 
criticism made by Vice President Cheney as he accused 
Russia of trampling democracy and of using its energy 
resources for blackmail. For the master of the Kremlin 
faced with the 'fortress' erected by the U.S., Russia needs 
to assert itself as a military and economic power. Putin 
ended with a final barb aimed at the U.S. when he said that 
Russia's membership in the WTO should not be the subject of 
'bartering.'" 
 
"Putin for a Strong Russia" 
Benjamin Quenelle in Catholic La Croix (05/11): "Although 
Putin did not directly address Dick Cheney's accusations, 
everyone in the audience had in mind the American Vice 
President's criticism of Russia's missteps with democracy. 
Putin in fact answered Washington's criticism, which Moscow 
interprets as a return to the Cold War, with relative 
disdain." 
 
Hamas - Palestinian Aid 
 
"A Minimal Agreement" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (05/11): "The 
European Union has been tasked with putting together the 
funds earmarked for the Palestinians and to be overseen by 
an international institution. Jacques Chirac's idea has 
been retained, albeit with modifications. But there is no 
assurance that the new system will allow payment of back 
salaries to government employees. The Americans remain 
reticent about subsidizing a public service which is 
managed by Hamas, a terrorist group which has yet to give 
up violence and recognize Israel. The Bush administration 
sees less reason for alarm than the Europeans when it comes 
to the developing crisis in the territories, and puts the 
onus on Hamas. The U.S. is pressuring banks to stop the 
transfer of 70 million dollars allocated by Arab nations. 
Says a European diplomat about the different analyses made 
by Washington and the EU: 'Our intent is not to make Hamas 
fail, but to lead it to change.' Meanwhile, 10 million 
dollars worth of medicine and medical equipment from the 
U.S. is on its way to the territories." 
 
"The Quartet Wants to Avoid Chaos" 
Left-of-center Liberation (05/11): "Faced with the 
projected humanitarian tragedy and the growing concerns 
that chaos is imminent in the territories, the West has 
made a few concessions. Secretary Rice announced that 10 
million dollars worth in medical supplies would be 
allocated by Washington." 
 
UN Human Rights Council 
 
"Realpolitik at the UN" 
Left-of-center Le Monde in its editorial (05/11): "China, 
Cuba and Saudi Arabia are among the 47 countries asked to 
make up the new UN Human Rights Council. This poses the 
question of the credibility of this new organization, which 
is a product of the reformed UN. The member states, France 
among them, seated on this Council will have to make a 
solemn oath to respect Human Rights and be open to regular 
inspections of the practices in their countries. 
Washington, which considered the reform to be too lax. is 
opposed and will not have a seat on the Council. In the 
case of this new council, realpolitik prevailed. And Cuba 
already sees it as a 'crushing victory' over the U.S." 
STAPLETON