06PARIS1006
UNESCO: INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE CONVENTION
Thu Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161548Z Feb 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 001006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNESCO NOVO AND SIEKMAN 
 
E.O. 12958:    N/A 
TAGS: SCUL AORC UNESCO
SUBJECT:  UNESCO: INTANGIBLE CULTURAL HERITAGE CONVENTION 
REACHES RATIFICATION, DG OUTLINES NEXT STEPS 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  On February 9, 2006 UNESCO hosted an 
information session for member states on the Convention for 
the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. 
Director General (DG), Matsuura and Assistant Director 
General (ADG) for Culture, Bouchenaki outlined the next 
steps for the implementation of the convention. At this 
point, 32 states have ratified the convention, two more than 
the number needed for it to go into effect.  Other 
delegations announced at the meeting their intention to 
ratify before March 20, 2006.  Next steps include the 
election in June 2006 of an Intergovernmental Committee 
(IGC) that will set operational guidelines and establish a 
list of examples of intangible cultural heritage that merit 
safeguarding, as well as, integrate the existing list of 
"100 Masterpieces".  Funding will also be explored.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  At a February 9 information session, the DG informed 
delegations that UNESCO will hold the first meeting of the 
states parties to the Intangible Cultural Heritage 
Convention June 27-29, 2006.  He stressed that delegations 
that want to participate as states parties must file their 
ratification before March 20, 2006.  UNESCO welcomes all 
other member states to attend the June meeting as observers. 
The two most important items on the agenda for this meeting 
are 1) the election of the 18 member IGC, that will oversee 
Intangible Cultural Heritage at UNESCO, and 2) the plan for 
the funding of activities within the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage Convention.  The Ambassadors of Benin and Grenada 
expressed concern that countries that cannot get the 
convention ratified by March 20 will not be able to 
participate in setting up the rules and regulations that 
govern the convention.  (COMMENT:  Funding issues were not 
explored in the briefing and they were not the subject of 
participants' questions.  END COMMENT.) 
 
¶3.  The DG stated that the first IGC will be made up of 18 
members and will increase to 24, once 50 states parties have 
ratified the convention.  To ensure geographic distribution, 
the IGC will reserve two seats for each region.  Committee 
member states will be elected to a four-year term, renewable 
once.  Half of the first IGC will be elected to a two-year 
term and its first meeting will be held in September 2006, 
the specific dates and venue to be determined.  At the 
September meeting, the committee will set operational 
guidelines.  It will also have the task of defining the list 
of examples of intangible cultural heritage requiring urgent 
safeguarding.  This list will take into account geographical 
representation, as well as, the guidelines for when and how 
Intangible Cultural Heritage needs protection. 
 
¶4.   ADG Bouchenaki reported that the list of 100 
Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity 
will automatically be integrated into the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage list, regardless of whether the country 
from which the masterpiece originates is a state party to 
the Intangible Cultural Heritage Convention. Countries 
represented on the list of "100 Masterpieces" comprise two- 
thirds of the current states parties to the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage Convention.  (NOTE:  The U.S. is not 
represented on the 100 Masterpieces list.  END NOTE.)  The 
ADG also briefly mentioned previous discussions relating to 
a possible proposal to include the Smithsonian Institute's 
summer festival on the list of Masterpieces, but he did not 
elaborate. (COMMENT:  This was the first time the Mission 
heard mention of this possibility.) 
 
¶5.   According to the DG, the amount of funding from 
delegations will be explored at the June 2006 meeting.  He 
also stated the amount would not exceed one percent of the 
states parties' assessed contributions.  Voluntary 
contributions above this amount, however, will be accepted 
and play an important role in implementation. 
 
¶6.   The Ambassadors of Algeria and Japan proposed hosting 
the first IGC meetings in their countries.  Both also 
expressed interest in being elected to the IGC.  The DG 
diplomatically stated that their proposals would be 
reviewed, but indicated that he personally welcomed them. 
The Ambassador of Grenada urged the committee to consider 
convening some of the IGC meetings at UNESCO Headquarters in 
Paris, rather than in foreign cities due the to burden the 
high expense of traveling will impose on less wealthy 
countries.  Many delegations responded to this with applause 
and approval.  ADG Bouchenaki acknowledged Grenada's request 
and agreed to consider possible solutions. 
 
¶7.   Countries announcing at the meeting their intention to 
ratify the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible 
Cultural Heritage before the March 20, 2006 deadline 
included:  Brazil, Belgium, Paraguay, and Hungary. 
Oliver