06PARIS3555
EPA ADMINISTRATOR BROADENS FOOTPRINT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
Fri May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO9405
PP RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB
DE RUEHFR #3555/01 1461447
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261447Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7840
RUEAEPA/EPA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/THE WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHZN/EST COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 003555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G: U/S DOBRIANSKY, OES: A/S MCMURRAY 
STATE ALSO FOR OES/ENV, OES/GC, EUR, EUR/WE 
WHITE HOUSE FOR CEQ CHAIRMAN CONNAUGHTON 
EPA FOR CHIEF STAFF INGEBRETSON, OIA: ASS'T ADMINISTRATOR AYRES 
DOE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE TECHNOLOGY OFFICE, ATTN: RMARLAY 
 
E.O. 12356:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV TRGY PREL KPAO FR
SUBJECT:  EPA ADMINISTRATOR BROADENS FOOTPRINT OF ENVIRONMENTAL 
TALKS WITH FRENCH 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Environmental Protection Administrator Johnson engaged 
in public outreach and bilateral talks in Paris, May 16-17, in 
addition to OECD meetings (septel).  In these events, the 
Administrator presented the range of U.S. environmental efforts, 
including innovative practices and new measures, such as those 
controlling mercury emissions from coal-fired power plants.  While 
energy efficiency was a major theme in bilateral discussions with 
French Ecology Minister Olin, French officials made no reference to 
U.S. non-accession to the Kyoto Protocol.  Olin raised - as she had 
with Ambassador Stapleton earlier in the year - concerns about the 
U.S. position on replenishment of the Global Environmental Facility. 
 Of particular note, Olin said that the French government no longer 
planned to push for the creation of a 'United Nations Environmental 
Organization' a la WTO.  However, she said France would seek other 
ways to engage senior levels in the United Nations system on 
environmental topics.  She asked whether the U.S. might be 
interested in discussing how best to accomplish this.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.    On May 17, Administrator Johnson, his delegation (Acting 
Assistant Administrator Hazen, Office of Prevention, Pesticides, and 
Toxic Substances, Chief of Staff Ingebretson, Public Affairs Officer 
Lybbert, and Program Manager for Europe Phillips) and Embassy ESTH 
Counselor met with Ecology and Sustainable Development Minister 
Nelly Olin, and a delegation composed of her senior staff and 
Foreign Ministry officials, including France's Ambassador-at-Large 
for the Environment Gauer.   This meeting constituted the first 
broad bilateral exchange the two cabinet-level environment entities 
had undertaken in several years.  On May 16, Johnson also made a 
presentation - attended by Ambassador Stapleton -- at France's 
prestigious Sustainable Development Institute ('Institut du 
developpement durable et des relations internationales' or 'IDDRI'); 
met with the press; discussed approaches to environmental outreach 
in France with the Ambassador; and was the guest of honor at a 
reception hosted by DCM. 
 
¶3.  In the Johnson-Olin meeting, both principals noted they face 
similar realities, not only the nature of environmental challenges, 
but also budget constraints.  By way of example, Olin mentioned a 
legislative priority for the French government, a new water bill and 
the need to update hydrological systems in France.  The two 
officials agreed to the need for innovative solutions to problems 
and to the sharing of information and best practices in the 
environmental domain.  The French side spoke highly of the existing 
relationship with EPA, especially visits to and the sharing of 
information about clean-up of contaminated ('superfund') sites.  The 
French side re-raised - as Olin had in an earlier discussion with 
the Ambassador - the idea of an exchange of civil service 
environmental personnel.  In that regard, Olin said an exchange with 
the UK had been especially successful.  Administrator Johnson 
responded that the U.S. would be pleased to consider this further, 
particularly if what was contemplated was short-term exchanges. 
The Administrator also invited the Minister to Washington for 
discussions on environmental topics and environmental site visits. 
In that regard, the Administrator briefed Olin on EPA's 
'brownfields' program.  Schedule permitting, Olin replied that she 
would be delighted to accept the EPA offer. 
 
¶4.  Johnson highlighted several areas of EPA work.  These included 
"very aggressive" efforts to implement the President's initiative on 
clean, renewable fuels and the EPA's 'Climate Leaders' and 'Energy 
Star' programs, as well as a number of U.S.- led international 
partnerships including 'Methane to Markets' and the 'Asia Pacific 
Partnership on Clean Energy and Development.'    Emphasizing the 
importance of technology, the Administrator spoke of the 'FutureGen' 
goal of a zero-emission, coal-fired power plant.   Olin shared the 
French government's goal to drive down greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions by a factor of four, well below the 1990 level of such 
emissions.  To do this, she said, will require much effort.  Urban 
renewal presented an area for intensive work.  Accordingly, the 
French government plans to seek additional fiscal incentives to 
promote energy efficiency in buildings and dwellings.  Similarly, 
Olin said that developing energy-efficient, clean cars was also a 
priority and she noted that as of May 10 new cars sold in France by 
law displayed not only average mileage information, but also annual 
average emissions of GHGs.  The Administrator noted that the U.S. 
leads the world in hybrid vehicles on the road and the U.S. was 
developing hydrogen as an energy source for cars of the future. 
Olin said that France could do more to promote cleaner cars, but was 
"catching up."  Peugeot-Citroen, she mentioned, were partnering to 
develop a hybrid car and the government was considering the 
imposition of higher taxes on larger cylinder capacity vehicles, 
such as 4X4's. 
 
 
PARIS 00003555  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶5. Following a discussion by both senior environmental officials 
about the increasing importance of water and regulation of mercury 
pollution, domestically and internationally, Olin expressed her 
concern that the U.S.'s proposed contribution to the Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) was substantially less than in previous 
replenishments and that unless remedied, this could prove to be "a 
disaster" for developing countries implementing environmental 
projects.  While recognizing the important work of GEF, ESTH 
Counselor responded that one of the U.S. concerns - and something 
the U.S. Treasury has underscored in the replenishment negotiations 
- is that GEF needs to meet standards of accountability and 
transparency expected of an international financial institution. 
Olin continued that the international environmental framework needs 
to be strengthened, particularly the United Nations Environment 
Program.  That said, and despite support by a number of European 
countries, France has decided no longer to push for the creation of 
a new world environmental body.  Olin thought perhaps a working 
group might be able to develop ideas to address common concerns. 
Such a group might also determine ways in which to assure 
environmental concerns are taken up by higher levels in the United 
Nations.  She asked whether the U.S. might be interested in 
exploring ideas on how to accomplish this. 
 
¶6.  Comment: In recent years, many in France have criticized the 
U.S. for not acceding to the Kyoto Protocol.  This criticism has 
occasionally degenerated into a negative stereotype of the United 
States.  For instance, we've seen references to the U.S. as "the 
Great Polluter" or "SUV Heaven."   At each of his events in Paris, 
the Administrator not only vigorously presented the 
results-oriented, technology-driven U.S. climate change policy, but 
also the range of work underway at EPA.  The Administrator's visit 
fit squarely with our public outreach goals to reverse the U.S. 
stereotype.  We very much appreciate the Administrator's willingness 
to engage the French and look forward to EPA's assistance in 
continuing the dialogue with France on environmental stewardship. 
End Comment. 
 
STAPLETON