06PRETORIA4993
MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY INTERESTED IN MORE
Mon Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO1505
RR RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHSA #4993/01 3451037
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111037Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7258
INFO RUEHOR/AMEMBASSY GABORONE 4826
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 3698
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 8393
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 5872UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 004993 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
SIPDIS 
 
GABORONE FOR ILEA 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/AAE:ERICHARDS; FKENNEDY 
DS/IP/AF:KBARRY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID KJUS PHUM PREL ASEC SF
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY INTERESTED IN MORE 
U.S. TRAINING FOR POLICE 
 
REF: PRETORIA 4817 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Minister of Safety and Security Charles 
Nqakula was interested in more U.S. training opportunities 
for the South African Police Service (SAPS) and was surprised 
to hear that SAPS had refused previous offers for training by 
the U.S.  Nqakula, who commented that U.S. assistance had 
been vital in providing much-needed training of law 
enforcement officials, promised Ambassador Bost that he would 
look into this issue. The Ambassador, during his initial 
welcome call with Nqakula on November 27, expressed the 
importance of continued efforts by all parties to address the 
high crime rate in South Africa, the negative impact the 
perception of crime has on foreign investors and potential 
investment, as well as the diplomatic community, and urged 
South Africa to take advantage of U.S. training programs on 
security related matters.  Whether Nqakula, who showed 
interest in improving the number of trained officers, 
especially at the management level, can convince SAPS of the 
potential benefits of this training remains to be seen.  End 
Summary. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
TRAINING NEEDED TO REDUCE HIGH CRIME RATE 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The Ambassador paid a courtesy call on Minister of 
Safety and Security Charles Nqakula on November 27.  The 
Ambassador was accompanied by RSO and econoff (notetaker) and 
Nqakula was accompanied by his Chief of Staff and Special 
Advisor. 
 
¶3. (U) The Ambassador initiated the meeting by explaining the 
U.S.' interest in continuing its efforts to assist South 
Africa to address its crime problems.  He noted that, while 
South Africa is a wonderful country, its incredible potential 
is slipping away because the high crime rate eventually will 
compromise foreign investment, as well as 2010 World Cup 
tourism.  The Ambassador stated that U.S. companies play a 
large part in the business community with over 600 U.S. 
companies in South Africa that have provided seven to eight 
billion USD in economic activity over the last few years. 
These investors are worried about their safety and well 
being.  The Ambassador pointed out that potential foreign 
investors are hesitant to invest due to the perception of 
high crime in the country.  The Ambassador cited the benefits 
investors provide including hiring of local staff, providing 
salaries that allow employees to send children to school, and 
preventing potential crime through employment. 
 
¶4. (U) The Ambassador also stated that one of his primary 
concerns and responsibilities is for individual safety, for 
both Americans and South Africans.  He cited the recent 
robberies at the Bangladesh Chancery and Ambassador's 
residence to highlight the crime rate.  In discussing the 
2010 World Cup, the Ambassador stated that this was a perfect 
opportunity to showcase the beauty and potential of South 
Africa, but asked what tourists would be willing to vacation 
in a country where the threat of injury or theft was so high? 
 The Ambassador stressed that these issues needed to be 
resolved, and reiterated that the U.S. was willing to be a 
partner. 
 
¶5. (U) Minister Nqakula acknowledged prior U.S. assistance 
and stated that he was now looking to a better horizon given 
assistance from other countries, including the U.S., and the 
better trained personnel now playing a role in law 
enforcement.  Nqakula stated that the Ambassador's comments 
reflected the consistency of the U.S. government's eagerness 
to resolve problems and assist young democracies.  He 
commented that the U.S. was one of the first countries to 
open itself to the post-apartheid government and he was 
appreciative of the U.S.' attempt to share the idea of 
freedom with the leadership of new democracies. 
 
¶6. (U) Nqakula confirmed that the biggest problems facing the 
South African democracy were the elements of safety and 
security.  He further stated that there were "tremendous 
difficulties and challenges" with lack of resources, 
especially a scarcity of trained officials, who could act as 
managers.  Nqakula explained that the main weakness was a 
lack of training to ensure a change in the mindset from the 
old force to a new one.  Nqakula explained that the police 
force is not able to just rely on an abundance of people or 
 
PRETORIA 00004993  002 OF 002 
 
 
"warm bodies", but it also needs skilled managers as station 
commanders, who can control their people and supplies. 
According to Nqakula, the key is training.  He commented that 
U.S. assistance had been vital in providing much-needed 
training of law enforcement officials. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
IS SOUTH AFRICA INTERESTED IN TRAINING? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) In response to Nqakula's statements, the Ambassador 
and RSO inquired as to the reasons the South African Police 
Service (SAPS) had repeatedly failed to accept invitations to 
the U.S.' fully-funded International Law Enforcement Academy 
held in Botswana.  The Ambassador highlighted that this 
training would be ideal for addressing Nqakula's need for 
managers.  Specifically, it would provide officers with 
management skills before a large inflow of "rookies" joined 
the police force in preparation for the 2010 World Cup. 
Nqakula stated that he had been unaware of this program, as 
well as SAPS' failure to attend, but promised that he would 
look into this issue. 
 
¶8. (U) The Ambassador also emphasized that the U.S.' 
experience with large stadium events could be beneficial for 
assisting with the 2010 World Cup.  He stated that the U.S. 
was already coordinating a trip for South African law 
enforcement personnel to receive hands-on training in the 
U.S. on event planning and security.  The Ambassador stressed 
that as many law enforcement personnel as possible should 
take advantage of this training offer.  Nqakula agreed, 
thanked the Ambassador for the U.S.' assistance and expressed 
hope that both he and the Ambassador could pursue continued 
relations through future meetings. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) That the Minister was unaware of the training 
possibilities for SAPS at ILEA Gaborone is not surprising. 
Indications are that the decision not to participate in ILEA 
training was taken within the higher echelons of SAPS, not 
the Ministry.  It remains to be seen whether Minister Nqakula 
will be able to convince these SAPS officials of the 
potential benefits to SAPS of such training at ILEA Gaborone. 
 Although the U.S. has provided special assistance to SAPS, 
like the recent ATA training, the Minister is correct that 
U.S. police mid-management training assistance would be 
helpful, as can be seen from the training now being provided 
to the Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department (reftel). 
BOST