06RABAT505
STAFFDEL PHELAN AT MOROCCAN MFA
Tue Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO6883
RR RUEHTRO
DE RUEHRB #0505/01 0801721
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211721Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3140
INFO RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 1416
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 3824
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 8706
RUEHTRO/USLO TRIPOLI 0068
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0481
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RABAT 000505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG AND H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OREP MO
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL PHELAN AT MOROCCAN MFA 
 
 
(U)  This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Staffdel Phelan met senior Moroccan MFA 
officials, including Bilateral Affairs Director Amrani, to 
discuss Western Sahara, reform, FTA, MCA and other issues of 
mutual interest.  Phelan emphasized the need for a concrete, 
practical Western Sahara autonomy proposal that could serve 
as the basis for negotiation.  Amrani agreed that a solution 
is needed to clear the way for regional cooperation and 
integration.  Amrani highlighted areas of cooperation and 
convergence, especially the NATO Med Dialogue and the BMENA 
Forum for the Future process.  Tazi noted decreasing levels 
of MEPI and ESF funds despite past assurances.  Ambassador 
briefed MFA officials on Prime Minister Jettou's Washington 
visit and MCA Compact negotiations.  He also presented A 
Congressional Resolution thanking Morocco for its Katrina- 
related contributions. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  On March 17, Ambassador and Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee Staffer Michael Phelan met with Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Director for Bilateral Affairs 
Youssef Amrani.  Amrani was joined by MFA Americas Director 
Abdellah Salaheddine Tazi.  EconCouns also attended. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Noting that the U.S. Senate remains engaged and 
interested in Maghreb regional issues and wants to promote 
regional cooperation and prosperity as well as cooperation 
on issues of mutual interest like counter-terrorism, 
economic development, democracy, and reform, Phelan 
explained that his visit was intended to maintain momentum 
on the main obstacle to progress, the unresolved Western 
Sahara issue.  Following the August 2005 POW release that 
Senator Richard Lugar helped facilitate, there was hope that 
additional rapprochement between Morocco and Algeria would 
be forthcoming.  He was encouraged by the news that the GOM 
was developing an autonomy plan for the southern provinces, 
but he cautioned that Morocco's plan must be clear, 
concrete, tangible and practical so it can serve as a basis 
for further negotiation.  Phelan also expressed Senator 
Lugar's appreciation of Moroccan efforts in cooperation on 
counter-terrorism as well as reform efforts in the political 
and economic realm as evidenced by the signing of an FTA and 
continued preparation for MCA. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Amrani thanked Phelan for Senator Lugar's role in 
the release of the POWs in August 2005.  Amrani agreed that 
a solution must be found to the Western Sahara question, but 
that Morocco still worries about "our good neighbors, the 
Algerians."  Any solution must result in a democratic and 
stable Western Sahara, he warned.  Groups operating out of 
Chad, Mali, and Algeria, some with Al Quaeda ties, would 
make use of instability in the region.  He dismissed the 
Baker plan as "behind us," and noted that King Mohammed VI 
is consulting with political parties and stakeholders on a 
solution based on "real autonomy" in which the local 
population will manage itself. Morocco realizes that it 
needs open borders and regional integration to survive and 
thrive, he said.  The Arab Maghreb Union is a "viable 
project" that builds on our common history, culture, and 
language, he said.  "We are serious," Amrani insisted. 
Morocco is preparing to put forward a concrete proposal on 
autonomy for the Western Sahara as a basis for negotiation. 
He asked Phelan to carry that message when he traveled to 
Algiers. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Amrani said the GOM appreciated the deep 
consultations over the last years with its "strategic ally 
and important partner" the United States.  Whether in 
counter-terrorism, democratization and reform, or the G-8 
BMENA initiatives, Morocco has shared President Bush's 
vision for the region, even to the extent of hosting the 
inaugural Forum for the Future in 2004.  Morocco remains 
engaged in the Forum and BMENA process, whether helping to 
organize the Bahrain and Jordan meetings or supporting the 
individual BMENA initiatives.  Morocco has taken difficult 
steps on human rights, press freedom, and even negotiating 
the FTA.  On counter-terrorism Morocco is above reproach. 
King Mohammed VI's Human Development Initiative is 
completely consistent with the vision of the Millennium 
Challenge Account.  He emphasized Morocco's participation in 
the NATO Med Dialogue and its pride at hosting the North 
Atlantic Council in Rabat April 6 and 7.  Some countries say 
Morocco is moving too fast, he said, but more and more we 
 
RABAT 00000505  002 OF 002 
 
 
are discussing activities and engagements from the same 
point of view.  Finally, Amrani called on the United States 
to work with Morocco on UN Security Council reforms. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Americas Director Tazi welcomed Phelan, noting that 
over the last year the GOM had received more than 25 
congressmen, 10 staffdels, and a number of VIP visits.  He 
said it was a signal of the importance of the relationship. 
He expressed surprise and disappointment over the 
diminishing levels of development assistance Morocco 
received from the United States, especially in light of 
announcements in 2003 and 2004 that the United States would 
quadruple development aid and military related assistance. 
Now we see a dramatic reduction in MEPI funding, bilateral 
ESF, and other support, he noted.  Tazi reminded Phelan that 
former USAID Administrator Natsios had signed a bilateral 
agreement for a five year $100 million program addressing 
Morocco's needs that was now, with a $20 million ESF 
reduction in FY 06 alone, in danger of folding. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Ambassador Riley briefed Amrani and Tazi on Prime 
Minister Jettou's recent visit to Washington and on the 
status and progress of Morocco Millennium Challenge Account 
(MCA) Compact negotiations, including discussions of 
fisheries, agriculture and artisanal crafts.  Ambassador 
Riley also noted Senator Lugar's participation in a dinner 
with the PM and MCC CEO Danilovich.  He described the MCA as 
an excellent vehicle for U.S. participation in the Human 
Development Initiative and a powerful signal of our 
bilateral friendship and alliance.  Ambassador noted the 
February 25 consultative program for MCA in Ouarzazate, a 
key prerequisite for moving the process forward.  He also 
presented a framed copy of the Congressional Resolution 
thanking countries that contributed to the hurricane Katrina 
response. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Staffdel Phelan has cleared this message. 
 
¶9.  (U)  Tripoli minimize considered. 
 
RILEY