06ROME27
GOI: BUDGET CUTS WILL NOT REDUCE AFGHANISTAN
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rome
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ROME 000027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL PGOV AF IT AFGHANISTAN
SUBJECT: GOI: BUDGET CUTS WILL NOT REDUCE AFGHANISTAN 
ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: 05 STATE 226670 
 
 ¶1.  (U)  Summary.  MFA Special Envoy to Afghanistan, 
Ambassador Anna della Croce told Charge January 3 that Italy 
will not allow budget cuts to affect its Berlin pledge of 145 
million euros through end-2006.  Della Croce expects a 
decision on GOI participation in the Afghanistan Compact next 
week.  End summary. 
 
Holding the Line on Pledging 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Charge contacted della Croce January 3 to make 
reftel demarche.  Della Croce told Charge that, despite 
dramatic cuts to its economic assistance budget, the GOI will 
fulfill commitments made in Berlin for 145 million euros over 
three years.  However, the GOI cannot make financial 
commitments beyond those made at Berlin because of a 28 
percent cut in its economic assistance budget.  (A cable on 
the budget, passed December 22, will follow septel.)  She was 
interested to hear our views of Afghan budgetary requirements 
for Afghan Fiscal Year 1385 (March 2006 - March 2007) and 
asked for details on what commitments the USG will make. 
 
GOI Participation at Compact 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  Della Croce was hopeful that FM Fini will lead the 
GOI delegation to the Afghanistan Compact and expects a 
decision by next week.  She pressed the Charge for details on 
USG participation at the Compact and expressed disappointment 
that delegations are limited to three delegates.  The GOI 
found that larger delegations at the Berlin and Tokyo 
meetings facilitated lower-level coordination at, and after, 
the conferences.  If Fini is unable to attend, the delegation 
will likely be led by MFA Undersecretary of State for Asia 
and Human Rights Margherita Boniver. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Comment.  It is significant that, in the face of 
dramatic budget cuts, the GOI remains committed to fulfilling 
its Berlin pledge.  With the new budget just passed on 
December 22, the MFA is grappling with the implications of a 
28 percent cut in economic assistance.  We expect the GOI 
will be better positioned to evaluate the feasibility of new 
commitments to Afghanistan after cuts to other foreign aid 
programs are finalized.  Embassy will follow-up with 
Ambassador della Croce later this week, and will provide 
updates on Italian delegation, etc.  End Comment. 
BORG