06TELAVIV558
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEL AVIV 000558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran: Nuclear Program 
 
¶3.  Israel-India Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Citing recent comments by President Bush and Acting PM 
Ehud Olmert, Ha'aretz wrote that it has been mutually 
agreed that the U.S. will provide a defense umbrella to 
shield Israel from any Iranian attack.  The newspaper 
noted that the President has raised the U.S. commitment 
to Israel a notch closer to the defense level it 
provides for NATO.  Ha'aretz quoted Olmert as saying at 
Sunday's cabinet meeting: "The American President's 
statement held a very important development -- he said 
the U.S. would stand by its ally, also militarily, if 
need be, in view if the Iranian threat." 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice phoned Acting PM Ehud Olmert to 
reassure him that the U.S. would stand firm regarding 
Hamas, a gesture that the newspaper says is seen as a 
sign of political support for his decision to transfer 
250 million shekels (around USD 53 million) to the PA. 
The Jerusalem Post cited a statement issued by the 
Prime Minister's Office, according to which Rice called 
to "reiterate the U.S. position on Hamas."  The 
statement said she emphasized the U.S. was in close 
contact with the international community to ensure 
"there was no erosion in the international position in 
Hamas." 
 
Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz was quoted as saying in an 
interview with Maariv that Israel will determine its 
permanent borders within two years, and the Jordan 
Valley and the settlement blocs would remain in 
Israel's hands. 
 
Israel Radio reported that during her visit to New 
York, FM Tzipi Livni will discuss Iran's nuclear 
program and developments in the PA with the 
representatives to the UN from the five permanent UN 
Security Council member countries.  The station quoted 
Israel's Ambassador to the U.S. Danny Ayalon as saying 
that the Iranian issue is the gravest problem posed to 
the free world since World War II. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Quartet envoy James 
Wolfensohn is scheduled to go to the Persian Gulf later 
this week to raise funds for the financially strapped 
PA, amid some concerns in Western capitals that if the 
money is not raised, Iran may step in and fund the PA 
to get a strong foothold in the Gaza Strip. 
 
Major media reported that two high-ranking Al Aqsa 
Martyrs Brigades operatives were killed Monday night 
after missiles fired from IAF fighter jets in Gaza City 
struck their car.  It was the third targeted killing in 
Gaza in three days.  The Brigades vowed to avenge its 
activists' deaths.  Israel Radio reported that the IAF 
struck a bridge and access roads in the northern Gaza 
Strip.  This morning, Israel Radio reported that two 
IDF soldiers were wounded in Nablus.  The station 
reported that Ahmed Radad, the commander of Islamic 
Jihad in the city, was killed in the clash.  The 
Jerusalem Post reported that, assuming that violence 
will prevail after the new Palestinian government is 
formed, the Israeli defense establishment is examining 
options for the day after.  All media reported that 
members of a Hebron Hamas cell responsible for the 
murders of six Israelis in shooting attacks in 2005 
were arrested last month by security forces. 
 
All media echoed a revelation made public by Channel 10- 
TV last night: the station played back remarks made by 
Shin Bet head Yuval Diskin more than a month ago. 
Diskin said: "The political echelon can do whatever it 
wants, but from a security standpoint I am opposed to 
transferring additional land to the Palestinians."  His 
comments sparked controversy.   Diskin was also quoted 
as saying that Jewish terrorists are a cancer in 
Israel's body. 
 
Ha'aretz, Maariv, and The Jerusalem Post reported that 
in the report Peace Now made public on Monday -- a 
summary of settlements and settler outposts for 2005 -- 
Peace Now announced on Monday that 12,000 people 
(according to The Jerusalem Post's report, at least 
7,000) joined the existing settlers during 2005, even 
as 9,000 settlers were removed from the Gaza Strip and 
the northern West Bank.  The report says that permanent 
construction is being carried out in 33 of the 103 
outposts in the West Bank. 
 
Col. (res.) Danny Tirza and Defense Ministry 
spokeswoman Rachel Naidek Ashkenazi were quoted as 
saying in interviews with The Jerusalem Post that by 
the end of March, the security fence will represent a 
"continuous obstacle" to terrorists as the segments 
that roughly follow the Green Line will be nearly 
finished, even as the total barrier remains about half 
completed.  Israel Radio quoted GOI sources in 
Jerusalem as warning that the legal problems regarding 
the completion of the fence in many spots, especially 
surrounding Jerusalem, must be solved as soon as 
possible.  The sources were quoted as saying that in 
some areas, notably in the southern West Bank 
settlements of Tekoa and Nokdim, Jews object to the 
construction of the fence, saying that they prefer to 
wait until Israel's official borders are finalized. 
 
Yediot reported that the Defense Ministry has granted 
two Palestinians who were killed by members of the "New 
Jewish Underground" the status of "victims of hostile 
action."  Their families will receive hundreds of 
thousands of shekels in compensation. 
 
The media (Hatzofe's banner) reported that on Monday, 
Bentzi Lieberman, chair of the Yesha Council of Jewish 
Settlements in the Territories, complained to Internal 
Security Minister Gideon Ezra that policemen sexually 
harassed female protesters during the evacuation of the 
Amona outpost.  The media reported on the ongoing 
request by right-wing circles for an official 
investigative commission into police behavior at Amona. 
 
Maariv and Israel Radio reported that on Monday, Iran's 
biggest newspaper, Hamshahri, announced a cartoon 
contest on the Holocaust, apparently in retaliation to 
the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten's Muhammad cartoon 
controversy.  Major media reported that the interfaith 
group Kedem condemned the Israeli media's reprinting of 
caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad. 
 
Leading media reported that the Labor Party is now 
focusing its election campaign on Olmert's alleged 
corruption and that Kadima started a campaign against 
Likud Chairman Binyamin Netanyahu on Monday.  Maariv 
quoted Meretz-Yahad party chairman Yossi Beilin as 
saying that Meretz would join Kadima in a government 
coalition even without the Labor Party.  Israel Radio 
quoted outgoing Shinui party leader Yosef (Tommy) Lapid 
as saying during a news conference this morning that he 
would not run for a seat in the next Knesset and that 
he would support Shinui's splinter party, MK Avraham 
Poraz's new Secular Zionist Party.  Yediot reported 
that on Monday, former Israeli Consul-General in New 
York Alon Pinkas joined former national security 
advisor Uzi Dayan's party Tafnit.  Pinkas had won a low 
spot on the Labor Party's Knesset list. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Monday, construction was 
suspended on the Simon Wiesenthal Center-affiliated 
Museum of Tolerance being built over a Muslim cemetery 
in Jerusalem, while the authorities ascertain whether a 
ruling Sunday by the court of Islamic law banning 
construction near the graves is legally binding. 
 
Ha'aretz published the results of Tel Aviv University's 
Peace Index, conducted January 30-February 1. 
-"Is Hamas's victory an existential threat for Israel?" 
Among Jewish public - Yes: 55 percent; no: 38 percent; 
7 percent were undecided. 
-"Do you support the creation of a Palestinian state?" 
Among Jewish public, after Hamas's election victory: 
Support: 55 percent; object: 40 percent; 5 percent were 
undecided.  Among Jewish public, before Hamas's 
election victory: Support: 67 percent; object: 27 
percent; 6 percent were undecided. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Ever since Hamas 
snatched away from him the title of champion of no 
partners, the Chairman of the Palestinian Authority has 
turned into a distinguished citizen of Jerusalem." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "Declarations aside, Israel is acting as 
if it wishes to save the PA from collapse even if Hamas 
is the force behind it." 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit addressed the 
disengagement opponents in popular, pluralist Maariv: 
"What is the difference between the Roadmap ... and 
Netanyahu's 'iron wall'?  The only difference is over 
quantity.... Don't miss this opportunity." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Presenting the New Darling -- Abu Mazen" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (February 7): "Ever 
since Hamas snatched away from him the title of 
champion of no partners, the Chairman of the 
Palestinian Authority has turned into a distinguished 
citizen of Jerusalem.... Up until a week ago, Israel 
only had a stick for its neighbors.  They, in turn, 
hung a Hamas flag on it.  Now, it suddenly turns that 
Israel also knows how to hold out the carrot.  If you 
want Abu Mazen -- you'll eat.  If you want Hamas -- you 
won't eat.  Democracy is one thing and cooperation is 
something else.... 'Democracy on the defensive,' key 
words in the joint Egyptian-Israeli policy, is very 
familiar to America ever since September 2001.  The 
defensive posture will be maintained primarily by going 
on the offensive.... Israel, in coordination with Egypt 
and the United States, will assault Hamas with a slew 
of conditions: recognition of the state of Israel's 
right to exist, of UN Resolution 242, of the Oslo 
Accords and of course, immediately dropping the armed 
Intifada.  If Hamas accepts even one of these 
conditions, it will have to change its name to Salaam 
Now.  In the worst case scenario, the debate over these 
conditions will increase the tension between the 
extremist circles and the moderates even more and 
perhaps even lead to a big bang: unification of the 
Fatah hawks and Hamas doves." 
 
II.  "Hamas's Problem" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
editorialized (February 7): "[Acting Prime Minister 
Ehud] Olmert's declared policy of refusing to engage 
with or support a PA dominated by an unreconstructed 
Hamas, and urging the world to do the same, is exactly 
correct.  This policy does hold the hope of finally 
ending international support for an international 
regime that is deeply implicated in and responsible for 
terrorism against Israel.  It even holds the much 
slimmer hope of forcing Hamas to renounce its own 
ideology.  But now Olmert is undermining his own 
declared policy of isolation with his also declared 
policy of preemptive engagement with and funding of the 
coming Hamas-dominated regime.  How can we expect the 
international community not to fall for a PA with Abbas 
kept on as a figurehead if Israel is already justifying 
and exemplifying such a policy?  Declarations aside, 
Israel is acting as if it wishes to save the PA from 
collapse even if Hamas is the force behind it.  The 
specter, if it is one, of the PA's collapse should be 
Hamas's problem, not ours.  It is Hamas, and not 
Israel, that should have to grapple with the changes 
necessary to avert such a crisis." 
 
 
III.  "Shalom, Orange Brothers" 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit addressed the 
disengagement opponents in popular, pluralist Maariv 
(February 7): "You know that an overwhelming majority, 
among yourselves as well, will vote for parties that 
express some sort of willingness to withdraw in Judea 
and Samaria [i.e. the West Bank].  There is no 
essential-qualitative difference in the plans spanning 
from Binyamin Netanyahu to Dr. Yossi Beilin, and this 
includes, from the Right and Left, Avigdor Lieberman, 
Ehud Olmert, and Amir Peretz.  Lieberman's land and 
population swap can even be supported by the 
signatories of the Geneva agreement.  What is the 
difference between the Roadmap, with its hint of 
another unilateral withdrawal, as implied by Ehud 
Olmert at the Herzliya Conference, and Netanyahu's 
'iron wall'?  The only difference is over quantity. 
Over how much land and sand to concede....  What has 
changed?  Why will you be able to support what you 
rejected until now?  Because Hamas's rise to power 
provides Israel with a chance of obtaining American and 
European consent for Israel to determine a border line 
on a route that expands the separation fence without 
any foreseeable time limit....  What will you receive 
in exchange?  A great deal.  The bulk of the nation 
will be behind you; perhaps you will even have the left 
wing's support; some expansion of the settlement blocs; 
and yes, and this is the heart of the matter, the 
debate on dividing Jerusalem will become redundant.... 
Put aside your anger.  It is a bad adviser.  This is 
the propitious moment.  It is liable to pass.  Don't 
miss this opportunity.  Let us restore the glory of the 
past.  The parties from the Right and Left will 
follow." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  Iran: Nuclear Program: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Avner Cohen, author of "Israel and the Bomb" and "The 
Last Taboo," a senior researcher at the University of 
Maryland, wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: 
"The need to deal with the Iranian nuclear capability 
strengthens the notion that the time has come for the 
state of Israel to find intelligent ways to clean up 
its nuclear status." 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Time to Come Clean on the Bomb" 
 
Avner Cohen, author of "Israel and the Bomb" and "The 
Last Taboo," a senior researcher at the University of 
Maryland, wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(February 7): "Every time the subject of the Iranian 
nuclear issue comes up in international forums ... 
there is someone who raises the issue of the 
exceptional Israeli nuclear issue.... Even in the 
United States there are those who argue that only if 
Israel is brought into the Iranian equation in some way 
is there a chance of preventing Iran from developing 
nuclear weapons.  And indeed, the U.S. has made 
possible the introduction of a connection in this 
spirit, though softer and diluted, into the IAEA 
decision of this weekend, which also included a mention 
of the commitment to establish a zone free of weapons 
of mass destruction in the Middle East.  The attempt to 
put Israel and Iran on the same level, or even to 
create a concrete political connection between them, is 
ignorant, unfair and biased.... [In any case,] the need 
to deal with the Iranian nuclear capability strengthens 
the notion that the time has come for the state of 
Israel to find intelligent ways to clean up its nuclear 
status, at home and abroad.... Perhaps a fresh prime 
minister, who is open to innovative thinking, will be 
able to deal with the complex challenge of formulating 
a more transparent and democratic Israeli nuclear 
policy appropriate to the 21st century." 
 
--------------------------- 
¶3.  Israel-India Relations: 
--------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
¶P. R. Kumaraswamy, who teaches Israeli politics at 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "For 
political, economic and security reasons, India needs 
to maintain close ties with Iran, as well as with 
Israel and the U.S.  While the latter two are 
complementary, relations with Iran place India in a 
fix." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Squaring a Triangle?" 
 
¶P. R. Kumaraswamy, who teaches Israeli politics at 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (February 7): 
"By voting with the majority at the IAEA and endorsing 
the decision to refer the question of Iran's suspected 
nuclear program to the UN Security Council, India has 
opened a new chapter in its foreign policy.... 
[However,] for political, economic and religious as 
well as energy considerations, political parties in 
India have demanded and worked toward closer ties with 
Teheran.... The potential of Iran emerging as the 
principal source of India's energy demands and a long- 
term supplier of gas added a true strategic 
dimension.... Despite the vote, India is unlikely to 
abandon Iran.  It has strong interest in maintaining 
and strengthening its ties with Teheran.  Unlike China 
and Russia, its leverage vis-a-vis Tehran is relatively 
limited.  For instance, there are indications that Iran 
is demanding a higher price for an already concluded 
gas deal.  In short, for political, economic and 
security reasons, India needs to maintain close ties 
with Iran, as well as with Israel and the U.S.  While 
the latter two are complementary, relations with Iran 
place India in a fix.  That is why India's Iran policy 
is one of the most serious challenges facing foreign 
policy decision makers in New Delhi." 
 
JONES