06TELAVIV2757
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jul 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEL AVIV 002757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Mideast 
 
¶2. Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All TV and radio stations broke out with the escalating 
situation on the Israeli northern border.  According to 
reports, Hizbullah has kidnapped two Israeli soldiers. 
The Hizbullah attack began with missile fired towards 
Israeli settlements, wounding four people. Later 
Hizbullah's TV station, Al Manar, reported that the 
organization has kidnapped two IDF soldiers. The TV 
station later reported that the two kidnapped soldiers 
are in a 'safe' location and that Hizbullah would be 
willing to exchange them. The IAF is reported to be 
intensely firing towards targets in southern Lebanon. 
Israeli TV 1 reports that there is also a ground 
operation.  All media noted that northern border 
residents have been asked to enter bomb shelters. TV 
Channel 1's military commentator and correspondent 
reports that, according to his sources, it sounds as if 
extreme actions (the word war is being used) are to be 
expected.  Prime Minister Ehud Olmert convened an 
urgent cabinet meeting this evening. 
 
Israel Radio reported this morning that in an IAF 
helicopter attack on a house in Gaza's densely- 
populated Sheikh Radwan neighborhood, where several 
Hamas leaders were believed to be gathering to plan 
terror attacks, senior wanted terrorist Mohamed Def was 
slightly injured. According to Palestinian sources the 
blast caused the three-story structure to collapse, 
burying people under the rubble. six people were 
killed, among them a mother and three children; 24 
people were wounded.  Hamas spokesmen say it will react 
in a sever manner to the IDF's attack. 
 
All media reported that the IDF has expanded its 
actions in the Gaza Strip shortly after midnight 
Tuesday, when infantry soldiers and tanks entered 
central Gaza for the first time since Operation Summer 
Rains began two weeks ago.  In this operation the IDF 
has the cut Strip in two. 
Israel Radio this morning reported that two Qassam 
rockets landed south of Ashkelon on Wednesday morning. 
There were no casualties. The radio also reported that 
IDF troops arrested 15 wanted Palestinians in the West 
Bank before dawn on Wednesday. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the U.S. rejected a revised 
draft of a UN resolution on the Israeli offensive.  The 
revised draft U.N. Security Council resolution was 
drafted by Qatar. 
 
Yediot reported that in a meeting between Israeli 
Foreign Ministry officials and international 
humanitarian organizations that operate in the 
territories, the latter said that medicines in Gaza 
will run out within two weeks. 
 
Maariv reported that the Israeli Navy wishes to 
purchase two advanced American war ships the Littoral 
Combat Ship-Israel. 
 
Yediot reported that the Israeli security establishment 
has requested from the U.S. Pentagon assistance in 
finding a solution to the Qassam rocket firings. The 
paper noted that it is possible that in the near future 
the "Phalanx" system will be brought to Israel for a 
trial period. The system usually serves as a defense 
system against mortar shell rockets. 
 
Yediot publishes a poll according to which 49 percent 
of the public is against the realignment plan.  Only 38 
percent support it. 
 
President Moshe Katzav affair: 
*Ha'aretz reported that at least five more women who 
worked with Katzav before he became president said he 
sexually harassed them. 
*All media reported that Attorney General Menachem 
Mazuz has instructed the police to open an 
investigation into the mater on Tuesday. 
*Maariv reported that even before the investigation 
began, Knesset feelers have already started checking 
into the possibility of impeaching the president. 
*Commentators opined that it seems it is the end of the 
road for President Katzav. 
 
----------- 
¶1. Mideast: 
----------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote on page one of independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (7/12):"The release of Shalit has become more 
complicated after both sides have turned the issue into 
one of principles and prestige.... A lot depends on the 
creativity of the mediators, and whether the deal will 
be broadened to include other matters." 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner opined in left- 
leaning, independent Ha'aretz (7/12): "The U.S. has a 
clear interest in blocking Hamas, which is disconnected 
from the Israeli interest.  If Hamas demonstrates that 
it is possible to hitch a ride on the back of the 
democratic process to implement a radical Islamic 
ideology, its accomplishment will undermine the United 
States' chances of succeeding in its moves to found 
democracy in the region." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I. "Limited Success" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote on page one of independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (7/12): "After two weeks of the Israel Defense 
Forces' Operation Summer Rains in the Gaza Strip, the 
General Staff cannot consider its main goals met. The 
necessary operational conditions that would enable the 
release of Corporal Gilad Shalit have not been 
achieved.  The second goal, minimizing the Qassam 
rocket attacks, has only been partially achieved. 
Rockets are still being launched from the northern Gaza 
Strip against the western Negev, but the incidence is 
lower.  Israel has also failed to pressure internal 
Palestinian groups so that they would force a change in 
the stance of Hamas, and Syria has also not been 
convinced to act against the group.... Israel's 
achievements in the operation are limited.  The 
government and the General Staff believe that they 
enjoy a certain degree of international and public 
legitimacy for a forceful operation against Hamas, 
considered to be a terrorist organization.  This 
support could easily evaporate in face of a major 
operational mistake.... At an early stage pressure on 
Syria was considered an option for convincing Meshal to 
end the military confrontation. However, Syria is also 
pressured by Iran to continue backing Hamas and 
encourage its demands for prisoner release in return 
for Shalit.  Tehran has broader strategic interests 
including undermining Egyptian and Jordanian influence 
in the region.... The release of Shalit has become more 
complicated after both sides have turned the issue into 
one of principles and prestige.... A lot depends on the 
creativity of the mediators, and whether the deal will 
be broadened to include other matters." 
 
 
II. "Protecting Abbas" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner opined in left- 
leaning, independent Ha'aretz (7/12): "How many times 
has Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) failed to meet American 
expectations, how many times have they looked around in 
search of the next leader, 'the real one' and 
nonetheless stuck with him.  They didn't do this out of 
love, nor out of hope, which had already faded.  Abu 
Mazen, the president of the Palestinian Authority, is 
the default option.  Without it there would remain only 
one of two options, chaos or Hamas, which are 
respectively American policy's two most bitter fears 
today.  Therefore the Americans will protect the leader 
everyone already agrees is incapable of providing any 
goods.... The U.S. has a clear interest in blocking 
Hamas, which is disconnected from the Israeli interest. 
If Hamas demonstrates that it is possible to hitch a 
ride on the back of the democratic process to implement 
a radical Islamic ideology, its accomplishment will 
undermine the United States' chances of succeeding in 
its moves to found democracy in the region." 
 
-------- 
¶2. Iran: 
-------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
Independent, conservative Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(7/12): "The 9/11 attacks and those that have followed 
demonstrate that the free world faces an Islamist jihad 
that recognizes no moral compunctions and seeks to 
dominate the world.  The free world must defend itself. 
The longer we wait, the higher the cost of this defense 
will be, and the more innocent lives will be 
unnecessarily lost.   The time to stop Iran is now." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
Independent, conservative Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(7/12): "Even if the Iranian regime changes tack again 
and, at the last minute, starts sounding more 
conciliatory, the situation is clear and has been for 
years, ever since the regime was caught cheating on 
pledges not to enrich uranium: The mullahs are 
determined to build a nuclear bomb, and are daring the 
world to try and stop them.... The 9/11 attacks and 
those that have followed demonstrate that the free 
world faces an Islamist jihad that recognizes no moral 
compunctions and seeks to dominate the world.  The free 
world must defend itself. The longer we wait, the 
higher the cost of this defense will be, and the more 
innocent lives will be unnecessarily lost.   The time 
to stop Iran is now." 
JONES