06TUNIS755
Embassy Tunis Opens First American Corner in
Thu Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0042
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0755/01 0891421
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301421Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0284UNCLAS TUNIS 000755 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/MAG (GERMAIN, LAWRENCE), NEA/PD (SMITH, AGNEW), 
IIP/G/IR (CBORYS) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OIIP OPRC SCUL SOCI OEXC TS
SUBJECT:  Embassy Tunis Opens First American Corner in 
Tunisia 
 
 
¶1. Summary. In January 2006, in the presence of close to 200 
Tunisians, the Ambassador inaugurated the first American 
Corner in the country at the Tunis AMIDEAST headquarters. 
In his speech to a wide range of government officials, 
journalists, students, academics, and civil society 
partners, the Ambassador cited the number of ongoing USG 
exchange programs in support of Tunisian students as well as 
the importance of sustained dialogue and mutual 
understanding.  The inauguration was covered in two Tunisian 
daily newspapers and one weekly newspaper, reaching close to 
110,000 readers.  Over the past two months, interest in the 
Corner has been growing as it has become the site of weekly 
film showings and Embassy programming.  End Summary. 
 
The Quest for the Perfect Partner 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  After close to two years of resistance on the part of 
the Tunisian government to hosting an American Corner at a 
Tunisian public library or university, Embassy Tunis began 
to consider another obvious partner, the American NGO 
AMIDEAST.  In addition to helping manage the Fulbright 
program and other USG student exchanges in Tunisia, AMIDEAST 
provides student advising on American universities.  More 
importantly to our purposes for the American Corner, 
AMIDEAST provides English classes for all ages and 
socioeconomic groups.  They currently teach English to over 
800 Tunisians each year.  Located close to downtown Tunis, 
AMIDEAST is open to the public and is already an attractive 
destination for those interested in studying English and 
learning more about America.  The director of AMIDEAST Tunis 
was pleased to host an American Corner, designating an open 
and sunny area, directly at the front of the AMIDEAST 
building, as the home to our collection.  He also appointed 
a young, eloquent, and active staff member as the American 
Corner director, while assigning two other AMIDEAST staff 
members to assist her. 
 
Opening Sets the Stage 
---------------------------- 
¶3. On January 25, 2006, the AMIDEAST director and the 
Ambassador together opened the first American Corner in 
Tunisia.  Over 200 Tunisians, including students, 
journalists, government officials, university faculty, and 
civil society representatives, were present at the event. 
In his remarks, the Ambassador recalled the long friendship 
between the Tunisian and American people, the number of 
student exchanges that existed between our two countries, 
and the importance of continuing dialogue and mutual 
understanding.  Both the speech and the initiative of the 
American Corner were well-received by the guests as many 
reminisced of the "good old days" when the American Cultural 
Center was located downtown and was a hub of student 
activity.  Entertainment at the event was provided by 
Embassy Poloff Brennan Gilmore, who sang a variety of 
American songs of all genres to the delight of the Tunisian 
audience gathered around him.  This event was announced by 
two daily newspapers and covered by a third weekly paper, 
reaching over 110,000 Tunisians. 
 
Good Start 
------------- 
¶4. Since its inauguration, the American Corner, which is 
open Monday through Friday from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., has seen 
a small but steady stream of daily visitors, many of whom 
are students at AMIDEAST but others who are simply 
interested passers-by.  The Director of the Corner 
instituted a biweekly American film showing which revives an 
old, and fondly remembered, tradition from the days when the 
American Center was located in downtown Tunis.  The 
Director, with the US Embassy, has programmed three programs 
over the past two months, to include a presentation on the 
Blues by the Embassy Medical Officer, a poetry reading by a 
Tunisian poet who writes in English, and a lecture by 
visiting NASA scientist Dr. Joe Davila (reftel).  The 
attendance varied widely, but reached 70 students for the 
program with the American scientist.  There are currently 
two American AISEC (an international exchange organization) 
interns helping to staff the American Corner and to assist 
with programming, which has also helped to bring extra 
insight into America to the visitors to the Corner. 
 
Looking Ahead 
------------------- 
¶5. The American Corner provides a new and exciting program 
platform for the Embassy, particularly given its location 
closer to the heart of Tunis.  In this regard, we are 
designing a series of programs in the month of April, to 
include an extensive American Studies series, aimed at 
advertising the American Corner and attracting a wide 
 
variety of audiences.  Thanks to an ongoing State 
Partnership between the state of Wyoming and Tunisia, we 
also recently made contact with the Wyoming State Library, 
who is interested in partnering with the American Corner in 
Tunis.  The PA section is currently collecting books from 
departing FSO's so that we can begin a lending library - 
this will serve both as a means of funding for the American 
Corner as well as an additional attraction to perspective 
clients. We will continue to develop this first project as 
we begin to search for partners for a second Corner in 
Tunisia. 
HUDSON