06USUNNEWYORK1597
UN PRESENTS SYG,S 1701 REPORT ON THE FIRST WEEK
Mon Aug 21 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO6738
OO RUEHAST
DE RUCNDT #1597/01 2332310
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 212310Z AUG 06
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9926
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J5/UNMA// IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 001597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER UNSC KPKO IS LE
SUBJECT: UN PRESENTS SYG,S 1701 REPORT ON THE FIRST WEEK 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001597  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  During closed UNSC consultations August 21 
on SYG Annan,s report on the first week of implementation of 
UNSCR 1701, UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) 
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi reported on the 
"encouraging" deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) 
to the south and the corresponding withdrawal of the Israeli 
Defense Forces (IDF), which had led to the immediate and 
massive return of some 400,000 displaced Lebanese persons. 
But Annabi cautioned that the situation remains fragile, and 
characterized Israel,s August 19 raid in the Bekaa Valley -- 
which occurred after the SYG's report was released ) as a 
"serious violation" of the cessation of hostilities.  He 
reported that the third tripartite meeting held between 
representatives of UNIFIL, the LAF, and the IDF on August 20 
had made clear that little progress could be made towards 
further IDF/LAF redeployments in southern Lebanon until the 
details of the expanded UNIFIL force become available. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary cont,d.  Annabi argued that the 
Secretariat's distribution August 18 of draft Rules of 
 
SIPDIS 
Engagement (ROE) and a Concept of Operations (CONOPS) for the 
expanded UNIFIL force -- plans that incorporate the input of 
prospective key contributors -- places the onus on member 
states to respond with firm commitments.  While acknowledging 
that all of the facts about the August 19 IDF raid have not 
yet become available, Ambassador Bolton noted that Israel had 
said the operation was meant to prevent re-supply of 
Hizballah across the Syrian-Lebanese border.  If that is the 
case, he observed that Israel was carrying out an essential 
part of UNSCR 1701 that establishes an embargo on all arms 
imported into Lebanon without the consent of the GOL, and 
argued that blocking re-supply of arms to Hizballah is 
essential to prevent a return to the status quo.  Several 
delegations, including France and the UK, called on Israel to 
lift the air/sea blockade of Lebanon.  Finally, Annabi 
reported that SYG Annan had asked DPKO to inform the Council 
on a daily basis on any future violations of the cessation of 
hostilities.  End Summary. 
 
Annabi Describes IDF Raid as &Serious Violation8 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Annabi told the Council that Israel's August 19 raid 
in the Bekaa Valley -- which occurred after the SYG's report 
on the implementation of UNSCR 1701 was released -- had 
constituted a "serious violation" of the cessation of 
hostilities, but that only minor violations had been 
committed beforehand.  Annabi recalled that SYG Annan had 
expressed deep concern that the August 19 raid had escalated 
tensions in the region, and that continuing Israeli 
overflights of Lebanese territory are also problematic.  He 
reported that LAF representatives, during a third tripartite 
UNIFIL-LAF-IDF meeting held on August 20, had argued that a 
coordination mechanism should be established to ensure Israel 
does not conduct similar raids in the future.  As a result, 
Annabi said that henceforth the IDF and LAF would use UNIFIL 
as an intermediary in order to pass information to the other 
side about possible breaches of UNSCR 1701; the objective of 
this new arrangement is to obviate the need for unilateral 
action.  He also mentioned that Annan had asked DPKO to 
inform the Council on a daily basis of any future violations 
of the cessation of hostilities -- in line with the daily 
briefings DPKO offered on violations of the Blue Line 
following Israel's withdrawal from south Lebanon in 2000. 
 
Tripartite Meetings Stall on UNIFIL Reinforcement 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Annabi described the progress achieved during the 
first week on LAF deployment and IDF withdrawal.  But he 
reported that during the tripartite meeting held August 20, 
IDF representatives had refused to continue the Israeli 
withdrawal from Lebanon until the details of the reinforced 
UNIFIL deployment to the south become clear.  Moreover, 
Annabi said the three sides had not set a date for another 
tripartite meeting.  Annabi did say, however, that the IDF 
agreed to open a corridor along the Lebanese coast to allow 
the LAF to reach the Blue Line.  The fact that little further 
progress can be made in terms of IDF/LAF redeployments until 
UNIFIL reinforcements arrive, Annabi argued, suggests that 
member state contributions to an expanded UNIFIL are needed 
urgently.  Although Annan has been on the phone "daily" with 
potential contributors, Annabi reported that few commitments 
to provide troops had been made so far.  Now that the 
Secretariat has circulated draft ROE and CONOPS for the 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001597  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
expanded UNIFIL force to potential contributors, he said it 
is up to member states to respond.  "We believe the 
Secretariat has done its work with regard to potential troop 
 
SIPDIS 
contributing countries (TCCs)," Annabi concluded, "and it is 
now for member states to urgently translate expressions of 
interest into firm commitments." 
 
¶5. (SBU) Briefing on progress on humanitarian relief 
operations in south Lebanon, Annabi welcomed the fact that 
more than 400,000 internally-displaced persons had already 
returned to south Lebanon.  But he argued that the "massive 
access problems" facing international relief workers required 
an immediate end to the sea and air blockade imposed on 
Lebanon by Israel.  The war had registered a traumatic impact 
on the civilian population, he argued, and the international 
community had to do its utmost to ensure the victims receive 
relief quickly. 
 
Muslim States in UNIFIL and Border Monitoring 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Responding to questions from delegations about 
Israel's announced refusal to support deployments to the 
enhanced UNIFIL force from countries with which it does not 
have diplomatic relations, Annabi shared the UN's 
understanding of the expectations of potential contributors: 
it is important to have a "coherent and balanced" force with 
participation from European and non-European countries, 
including Muslim nations.  He said the Secretariat had raised 
this issue with Israel and "expects some understanding on 
their part."  Addressing the issue of UNIFIL's role in 
helping to secure the Lebanese-Syrian border, Annabi said 
UNIFIL would be prepared to offer assistance subject to a 
request by the GOL and the provision of assets by member 
states.  Thus far, he noted, only one state had offered to 
make personnel available for border monitoring, but this 
offer was subject to parliamentary approval.  Turning to the 
need to reinforce the LAF, Annabi said UNIFIL would request a 
"generous budget" to help meet the LAF's training and 
equipping needs.  But he emphasized that member states would 
still need to supply the bulk of the LAF's needs through 
bilateral assistance. 
 
Several Delegates Call IDF Raid &Violation,8 
But Also Underscore Importance of Arms Embargo 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7. (SBU) Most delegations welcomed the report and the 
cessation of major hostilities.  Several delegations, 
however, including Qatar and Argentina, shared the SYG,s 
assessment that the August 19 IDF raid in the Bekaa Valley 
had constituted a &violation8 of the cessation of 
hostilities.  Others, like France, China, Japan, the UK, and 
Russia, called on the parties to exercise maximum restraint 
to ensure that no violations of the cessation of hostilities 
occur.  The UK, Argentina, and Ghana also underscored the 
importance of ensuring respect for the arms embargo. 
Argentina specifically called on all states, especially 
Lebanon,s neighbors, to comply with OP14 and OP15 of UNSCR 
1701 (which establish the arms embargo).  A number of 
delegations, including France, the UK, Argentina, and Ghana, 
called on Israel to lift its sea and air blockade on Lebanon. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Observing that we should not yet draw conclusions 
because we do not yet have all the facts, Ambassador Bolton 
noted that Israel had said its August 19 raid was meant to 
prevent re-supply of Hizballah across the Syrian-Lebanese 
border.  If that is the case, he reasoned, Israel was 
carrying out an essential part of UNSCR 1701 that establishes 
an embargo on all arms imported into Lebanon without the 
consent of the GOL.  Arguing that preventing Hizballah 
re-supply must be a high priority for the UNSC, Ambassador 
Bolton asked all delegations to consider whether it was more 
important to avoid using force at all costs or to ensure 
compliance with the arms embargo.  Asserting that the Israeli 
raid likely concerned Hizballah re-supply rather than any 
conflict between Israel and Lebanon, he argued that the event 
underscores the importance of implementing UNSCR 1559. 
Welcoming LAF redeployment to the south, the Ambassador also 
called on the GOL to deploy its forces to the Syrian border. 
He concluded by underscoring the need for the immediate 
release of the two abducted Israeli soldiers. 
 
France Defends Its Contribution to UNIFIL 
----------------------------------------- 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001597  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Noting that media reports had suggested that the 
delay in reinforcing UNIFIL was due to &slowness8 on the 
part of some member states in taking decisions, French DPR 
Duclos argued that the international community should 
maintain &perspective8 on the issue.  Member states, he 
said, had worked very hard with the Secretariat to define ROE 
and CONOPS for the mission, which he said &go far to meet 
the concerns of TCCs.8  As far as France,s individual 
contribution, Duclos said that the vanguard force of 50 
French engineers already deployed to Lebanon would soon be 
joined by 200 additional engineers who would focus on 
rebuilding Lebanon,s infrastructure.  He expressed hope that 
work on securing reinforcements for UNIFIL could be completed 
by the end of this week in order to begin actual deployments 
by the early part of next week. 
BOLTON