06WARSAW231
POLISH FOREIGN MINISTER MELLER TO RESIGN
Tue Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 000231 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PL
SUBJECT: POLISH FOREIGN MINISTER MELLER TO RESIGN 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Polish Foreign Minister Stefan Meller all but 
confirmed during a February 13 press conference that he 
intends to resign his post, citing frustration over his 
diminishing authority over Polish foreign policy. Meller 
denied press speculation that he might step down for health 
or family reasons, but allowed that he was weighing 
resignation because of ongoing problems in coordinating 
policy with the president's and prime minister's 
chancelleries. The foreign minister indicated that he was 
reluctant to say more until after his foreign policy report 
to parliament February 15. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Meller, a career diplomat with no party affiliation, 
was appointed foreign minister after the governing Law and 
Justice (PiS) party failed to form a coalition with Civic 
Platform (PO) -- which had been widely expected to take the 
MFA portfolio.  From the outset, it was evident that Meller 
is viewed as an outsider by PiS officials (Meller was 
excluded from the National Security Council, for example) and 
MFA officials often complain about their ministry being 
circumvented or cut out entirely by the premier's and 
president's staffs. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Perhaps reflecting PiS's scattershot approach to 
such decisions, speculation about Meller's successors 
includes a wide field of possible candidates.  Among these 
are PO foreign policy specialist and MEP Jacek Saryusz-Wolski 
(who has denied these rumors), current Defense Minister Radek 
Sikorski, Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee Chair Pawel 
Zalewski, and PiS MEP Wojciech Roszkowski. There have also 
been suggestions that one of Meller's deputies might be 
elevated to replace him. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment: One wonders who would be interested in the 
MFA post, given Meller's difficulties in asserting his 
authority before strong and activist rivals.  Indeed, the 
timing of Meller's departure -- or whether PM Marcinkiewicz 
and President Kaczynski will eventually be moved to offer 
Meller new assurances -- may be determined by the 
government's success in finding someone both qualified and 
willing to take the job. 
ASHE