06WARSAW944
POLISH STATEMENT IN SUPPORT OF IRAQI GOVERNMENT
Mon May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 000944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM IZ PL
SUBJECT: POLISH STATEMENT IN SUPPORT OF IRAQI GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: STATE 81632 
 
The Polish Foreign Ministry issued the following statement 
May 22 marking the completion of the formation of the new 
Iraqi government.  Begin unofficial translation of the Polish 
MFA statement. 
 
"Poland welcomes with great satisfaction the approval by the 
Iraqi parliament of the government headed by Prime Minister 
Nuri Al-Maliki.  This will be the first constitutional 
government of the Republic of Iraq appointed by the 
parliament elected in general democratic elections. 
 
"With the beginning of the term of this new government the 
period of the transitional political process has ended in 
post-war Iraq and a decisive stage has begun in the 
consolidation of the state and people concerning the 
resolution of burning everyday problems and the strategy of 
building a stabile, secure and democratic state.  The 
national unity government of Al-Maliki has a great task ahead 
of it and will need the support not only of the broad range 
of Iraqis but also of friends of Iraq worldwide.  Poland for 
its part intends to continue to support through its actions 
the stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq.  This will be 
one of our foreign policy priorities in the Middle East.  We 
believe that the new government in Iraq will contribute to 
the intensification of traditionally friendly Polish-Iraqi 
relations and to the strengthening of mutually beneficial 
economic cooperation.  This conviction has been expressed by 
Prime Minister Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz and Foreign Minister 
Anna Fotyga in congratulatory cables to their Iraqi 
counterparts. 
 
"We wish the new government of the Republic of Iraq the 
greatest success in the realization of its historic task to 
introduce lasting peace, security and welfare on the Iraqi 
soil that has experienced much hardship, in the framework of 
a unified state, taking into account the rights and 
aspirations of all its citizens." 
 
End unofficial translation. 
ASHE