07ABIDJAN1180
COTE D'IVOIRE ADOPTS PLAN AGAINST CHILD
Tue Nov 27 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #1180 3311622
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271622Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3773
INFO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDCUNCLAS ABIDJAN 001180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/W-EPLUMB, G/TIP, PRM/PIM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV SMIG SOCI IV
SUBJECT: COTE D'IVOIRE ADOPTS PLAN AGAINST CHILD 
TRAFFICKING AND LABOR 
 
REF: ABIDJAN 1084 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. The Government of Cote d'Ivoire has adopted 
a National Plan of Action Against Child Trafficking and Labor 
that will run from September 2007 through December 2009.  The 
plan's overall objectives are: to adopt laws specifically 
prohibiting these practices, to determine the scope of the 
problem, and to take measures to prevent these practices and 
to reintegrate victims into society.  Adoption of this plan 
demonstrates a strong commitment by the Government of Cote 
d'Ivoire to address and eradicate child trafficking and labor 
but will not in and of itself satisfy the Harkin-Engel 
Protocol. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) The Government of Cote d'Ivoire adopted a National 
Plan of Action Against Child Trafficking and Labor in late 
September.  The plan will run through December 2009. It 
states that child labor in Cote d'Ivoire occurs primarily in 
the agricultural and domestic labor sectors as well as in the 
informal urban economy.  The plan notes that there has been 
no national study on trafficking and child labor except for a 
study of the cocoa industry conducted in 2002.  Its 
objectives are: to strengthen the legal framework governing 
child trafficking and labor, to determine the extent of the 
problem, to establish measures to prevent such practices, to 
assist the educational system, to adopt a strategy to 
reintegrate victims in their families and society, and to 
create a mechanism to monitor the situation as well as the 
impact of actions taken to combat the problem.  The 
government will partner with NGOs, civil society, and UNICEF 
to carry out the plan, which will cost USD 7.2 million. 
 
¶3. (U) In order to strengthen the judicial framework, the 
plan provides for drafting, adoption, and dissemination of a 
law prohibiting trafficking of and dangerous work by children 
as well as adoption of the Rights of the Child and Palermo 
Conventions.  To ascertain the scope of the problem, the 
National Institute of Statistics will conduct separate 
studies on trafficking of children and child labor. These 
will be followed by additional studies of both trafficking 
and child labor in the following specific fields: mining, 
industry, agriculture, commerce, transport, domestic work, 
and the urban economy. 
 
¶4. (U) The plan provides that a manual will be drafted and 
disseminated providing procedures for removing victims from 
abusive environments. The scheme also includes rehabilitation 
of ten existing shelters and the construction of five new 
ones to provide refuge for victims.  The victims will receive 
professional training and assistance for reinsertion into 
society.  In locations where the problem of child trafficking 
is particularly acute, the government will provide new 
schools to help deter trafficking.  The last phase of the 
program will consist of 4 workshops to evaluate the impact of 
the plan's activities. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: Adoption of the plan indicates the 
commitment by the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to address and 
eradicate child trafficking and labor.  The plan is detailed 
and government and civil society actors identified for each 
step.  The weakest parts of the plan regard victims' 
professional training and reinsertion into society.  The plan 
fails to provide details of how this will be carried out and 
its success is uncertain in a country where youth 
unemployment is high and the economy sluggish due to the 
political crisis.  The plan will not in and of itself satisfy 
the Harkin-Engel Protocol.  However, as the protocol deadline 
looms, the effectiveness of efforts such as this one will 
come under greater scrutiny. 
NESBITT