07ABIDJAN465
COTE D'IVOIRE: FY-2007 TIP PROJECT PROPOSALS
Fri May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO6079
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #0465 1241754
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041754Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2906
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000465 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
G/TIP PASS TO AMY LEMAR-MEREDITH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC ELAB KCRM PHUM PREL SMIG IV
SUBJECT: COTE D'IVOIRE: FY-2007 TIP PROJECT PROPOSALS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 28157 
 
¶1. Embassy Abidjan is pleased to submit two proposals to 
strengthen and expand Cote d'Ivoire's efforts to combat 
trafficking in persons (TIP) in response to reftel.  The 
proposed projects, listed in order of funding priority, will 
address key areas of concern in the fight to end trafficking 
in Cote d'Ivoire, namely training to combat trafficking for 
local government and law enforcement officials, reintegration 
of child trafficking victims, and shelter for women sex 
trafficking victims.  Post appreciates the Department's 
consideration of these proposals. 
 
¶2. Proposal One 
Name of Applicant: Afrique Secours et Assistance (ASA) 
Requested Funding Amount: 86,100 USD 
Project Title: Educating Law Enforcement and Providing 
Shelter for Female Victims of Trafficking in Abidjan 
Project Duration: 12 months 
 
Proposal Abstract: 
The project will use ESF funding to implement a two-part 
project. The first part of the project will consist of 
sensitization of local government and law enforcement 
authorities about human rights and trafficking issues and the 
various conventions that protect women such as the African 
Charter on Human and People's Rights. ASA will work with 25 
journalists to create special programs on human rights and 
trafficking to be broadcast in local languages on radios and 
TV.  These programs will include interviews, games and 
documentaries (films on trafficking in women).  The potential 
audience of these programs is five million people. 
 
Second, ASA will open a women's shelter in Abidjan that will 
be used to provide food, lodging, psychological care and 
repatriation assistance to sex trafficking victims. The 
shelter will also work with local health centers to provide 
medical care.   The shelter will be able to host 50 women at 
a time. 
 
¶3. Proposal Two 
Name of Applicant: UNICEF Cote d'Ivoire 
Requested Funding Amount: 296,604 USD 
Project Title: Fight Against Child Trafficking in Cote 
d'Ivoire 
Project Duration: 12 months 
 
Proposal Abstract: 
The project will use INCLE funding to train 150 law 
enforcement and local government officials (including 
prefects, judges, and security and defense forces) on child 
trafficking and identifying victims in some of the most 
vulnerable regions of the country (Abidjan, Soubre, San 
Pedro, Aboisso, Bondoukou, Bouna, Korhogo and Bouake). 
UNICEF will conduct two training sessions for the local 
government officials and six sessions for judges, police 
officers, and gendarmes. 
 
UNICEF will also reinforce the capacity of the community and 
professional networks in charge of trafficking prevention and 
child protection in the cocoa/coffee sector as well as in the 
urban informal sector by setting up 25 local committees for 
trafficking prevention and child protection; supporting the 
operational cost of these committees; and sensitizing the 
communities (100 community chiefs, leaders of producers' 
organizations and organization leaders in the urban informal 
sector) about the main legal instruments and international 
treaties concerning child protection and the convention 
relating to children's rights. Those people will be provided 
with training in order to sit on the prevention and 
protection committees.  The training of 50 cocoa producers 
and 25 actors in the informal sector will be reinforced so 
that they can become peer educators capable of training the 
people around them. Using these peer educators, UNICEF aims 
to sensitize 4,000 producers and 2,000 employers in the 
informal sector. 
Valle