07ABIDJAN402
COTE D'IVOIRE: REPORT CARD FOR WEEK 2 OF
Fri Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #0402 1101726
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201726Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2846
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000402 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL UN IV
SUBJECT: COTE D'IVOIRE: REPORT CARD FOR WEEK 2 OF 
SORO GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: ABIDJAN 374 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY  After using week one to get his cabinet 
installed, the respectful and friendly ceremony marking the 
beginning of the dissolution of the Zone of Confidence (ZOC) 
and the opening of the Joint Integrated Command Center (ICC) 
has been the highlight of week two of the Soro government. 
There has been little movement on other fronts and the agenda 
is chock-full.  Soro has not announced appointments to the 
key directorships (i.e., customs, ports, and the state-owned 
media) or his own group of advisors.  The decree announcing 
Soro's powers as Prime Minister is still pending at the 
Presidency, despite the announcement of cabinet positions the 
week of April 9.  The appointment of the audience foraines 
(public identification hearings) judges is still in the 
President's hands.  Relaunch of this process depends on the 
successful redeployment of public administrators (prefects) 
in the north.  Overall mood is one of hopefulness that this 
new government will move the country forward and get down to 
the business of governance.   END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (SBU) At the April 16 ceremonies marking the dissolution 
of the ZOC and the opening of the ICC, the mood of 
participants was respectful toward Gbagbo and Soro with 
congenial banter between the President and the new Prime 
Minister.  President Gbagbo reiterated that the war is over. 
At one point, the master of ceremonies called on President 
Gbagbo to speak to the crowd of diplomats and high-level 
government officials, and the President deferred to Soro, 
joking that Premiers always precede their Presidents.  Soro 
in brief comments said that his government will get down to 
the business of governance immediately. 
 
¶3. (SBU) However, by the end of the week, the agenda for 
Soro's new government remains chock-full.  The decree 
announcing Soro's powers as Prime Minister is still pending 
at the Presidency (Note:  There are some indications that 
Soro will not be invested with any special powers, as was 
widely speculated, and Soro himself wanted, during the Ouaga 
negotiations.  End Note).  Soro has not put in place his 
inner circle of advisors in the Prime Minister's Office, nor 
made key appointments to the directorships of the ports, 
customs, the refining company, post or state-owned newspaper 
Fraternite Matin and state-owned television and radio RTI, 
all important indicators of the extent of Soro's authority 
over the government.  This week the controversial FPI 
directors of customs, the ports and oil refining company 
remain in place and have welcomed Mrs. Gbagbo, who is 
promoting her new book on the war and the future of Cote 
d'Ivoire, in grand public receptions at their offices.  The 
refinery director announced 15 million FCFA purchase of the 
books, but the source of this funding remains obscure.  Soro 
has asked all of Banny's advisors to remain in their 
positions until he decides the makeup of his office.  Most of 
these advisors are scrambling to try to keep their jobs. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Soro has indicated that his priority is to implement 
the identification process of undocumented Ivorians according 
to the agreement outlined in the Ouagadougou Political Accord 
(OPA).  To date the audiences foraines remain suspended as 
the Ministry of Justice awaits further instruction from the 
Soro government.  New judges have not yet been appointed as 
the Ministry of Justice's list of 208 judges for deployment 
throughout the country has been sitting on the President's 
desk since December.  Last week President Gbagbo announced 
tha the audience foraines will resume only after publc 
administrators (the prefects and subprefects) have been 
redeployed in the north.  The first group is expected to be 
redeployed the week of April 23. 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT: The overall mood is hopeful that the 
Gbagbo-Soro alliance will get down to the serious business of 
governance.  In short, the new Soro government is up and 
running and gets passing (but not outstanding) marks for its 
first two weeks.  The overall mood in Cote d'Ivoire is 
optimism that the Soro government will now get down to the 
serious business of governing, something this troubled 
country has not seen for at least six months.   END COMMENT 
Hooks