07ANKARA2334
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Sep 13 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8063
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2334/01 2561237
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131237Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3732
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8360
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3297
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2297
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6135
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5940
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2534
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 13, 2007 
 
 
ANKARA 00002334  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Investigation into Ankara Car Bomb Plot Continues 
All papers report a 23-24-year-old suspect with curly hair and an 
Arabic accent is being sought in the investigation into the car bomb 
plot on Tuesday, averted when police defused hundreds of kilograms 
of explosives placed in a mini-van in a parking lot in downtown 
Ankara.  Three cell phones were found inside the van, suggesting the 
plotters aimed to stage attacks at three different locations. 
Several papers claim the PKK was behind the attempt, with Cumhuriyet 
saying the terrorist organization wanted to retaliate against the 
killing of 11 of its members in Sirnak last month when the 
organization charged Turkish troops used chemical weapons in the 
operation.  Police went on alert in Ankara, increasing security 
measures in the parking lots of public buildings, shopping malls and 
state agencies. 
 
Turkish Paper Interviews Talabani, Barzani in Northern Iraq 
Tabloid Aksam's Syrian columnist Husnu Mahalli interviews the Iraqi 
Kurdish leaders Jalal Talabani and Massoud Barzani in northern Iraq. 
 President Talabani said with regard to the missing US-origin 
weapons in Iraq that the agency in charge of distribution of weapons 
in Iraq was managed by Americans, and that there were always 
irregularities.  "Some 160,000 are said to be employed in this 
agency whereas the actual number of employees are recorded as 90,000 
according to Iraqi Interior Ministry data.  It means that an extra 
70,000 are paid by the agency while they also sell guns elsewhere. 
The Americans know this," says Talabani.  On Kirkuk, Talabani said 
the claim that about 500,000 Kurds had been settled in the oil-rich 
town was "exaggerated," but noted the Arabs settled by Saddam 
Hussein should return to their homes.  The Iraqi President said the 
democracy in Turkey offers significant opportunities to Kurds who 
have their own parties and media outlets.  "The new Turkish 
constitution will give broader rights to the Kurds.  Waging war 
against the AKP government and Turkish state means fighting against 
democracy and the rights of the Kurdish people in Turkey," he 
emphasized. 
 
Talabani added he has told PM Erdogan that according to the 
requirements of the Iraqi Constitution, Iraq, once security is 
settled across the country, would see that foreign terror 
organizations are not allowed in Iraqi territories.  "Unfortunately, 
we can't fight against the PKK and PJAK at this point," he said. 
Talabani noted that Kurdish leaders should understand that Kurds 
should contribute to the democratic process in Turkey.  "I think 
Kurdish political leaders such as DTP leader Ahmet Turk have 
understood this fact.  But maybe they don't have freedom of 
movement," Talabani said, stressing that the AKP's policies have 
given the Kurds in Turkey hope.  Talabani also said after he became 
the President of Iraq, he paid visits to Syria and Iran, but was not 
invited by Turkey.  "I'd be honored to comply with an invitation to 
visit Turkey if I receive one," Talabani said. 
 
Massoud Barzani, the head of the regional Kurdish administration, 
said despite all the problems with Turkey, investment by Turkish 
companies in the region increased.  Barzani said strains would 
benefit no side, and called for improvement of friendly ties with 
Turkey.  On the PKK question, Barzani said the organization's 
members were settled in Mount Kandil and other mountainous areas 
along the border with Turkey whereas Kurdish soldiers were fighting 
for security in Baghdad.  "We have told the PKK that we won't allow 
attacks on our neighbors.  The PKK is a source of distress for us as 
well," he stressed.  Barzani also noted he has received an 
invitation from Iran as the president of the Kurdish federal region, 
but not from Turkey and Syria.  "I'm not planning to visit any 
country where I'm not invited as the president of the Kurdish 
federal region," he concluded. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq 
Kubilay Celik writes in the nationalist Tercuman: "It seems, given 
 
ANKARA 00002334  002 OF 003 
 
 
the report by General Petraeus, US withdrawal from Iraq is not an 
imminent issue any longer.  The General believes that things are 
working well in Iraq and an immediate pull out will have a negative 
impact on the achievements.  On the other hand, Democrats are 
strongly pushing the administration for an immediate pull out. Even 
though the majority in the Washington administration is well aware 
of the impasse in Iraq, they are unable to say it publicly.  In 
fact, the US is facing an enormous challenge in Iraq regardless of 
its decision on withdrawal.  Things are going to be very difficult 
for the next president of the US.  The new president will have to 
exert enormous efforts to correct the American image internationally 
and also should find a way to settle the Iraq issue -- both of which 
are extremely difficult." 
 
Zafer Atay writes in the business-political daily Dunya: "General 
Petraeus claimed that all is well in Iraq and called for a gradual 
pull out.  It can only be called a big lie to say that things are 
going well in Iraq when 600,000 - mostly civilians -- died during 
the last four years.  While the General was giving his Congressional 
testimony, eight American soldiers were killed in Iraq, and there 
were numerous car bomb attacks.  Ambassador Crocker's presentation 
was better and more realistic than that of General Petraeus.  The 
experienced diplomat warned that a triumph in Iraq cannot be 
guaranteed.  However he joined the General by expressing that things 
are going well in Iraq.  In any case, there is a talk of pulling out 
30,000 soldiers from Iraq.  And this is another distortion. 
President Bush sent 30,000 additional troops to Iraq despite 
Congressional opposition.  If and when they are pulled out, the 
essential core of US forces, which is more than 100,000 will still 
be in Iraq." 
 
Turkish Anti-Terror Board Discusses Measures against Terrorism 
All papers report Turkish High Council on Counter Terrorism, 
convening Wednesday under the chairmanship of Deputy Prime Minister 
Cemil Cicek, discussed the activities with regard to the fight 
against terrorism in light of information presented by security and 
intelligence units.  A statement released at the end of the meeting 
says "Terrorist activities carried out against our country by the 
terrorist organization sheltered in a neighboring country were 
discussed."  The meeting also discussed the bomb-laden vehicle that 
police discovered in a crowded neighborhood in Ankara on September 
11, say papers. 
 
Draft Constitution 
All papers:  Mainstream Milliyet reports that 11 AKP deputies and 6 
academicians will meet for three days, starting today, to go over 
the text of the constitution draft and finalize it.  CNN Turk's 
website publicized the full content of the draft constitution that 
was prepared by the academicians led by Prof. Ergun Ozbudun. 
Answering questions of CNN Turk, Prof. Ozbudun said that after AKP's 
review, the draft will be publicized. 
 
Papers also report that alternative draft constitutions are being 
prepared by the NGOs, vocational organizations and jurists under the 
leadership of Prof. Ibrahim Kaboglu.  In a press conference to 
introduce their initiative, Prof. Kaboglu said that their work is 
open to contributions of democratic civic organizations and experts 
and that they named their group's effort the "Democratic Initiative 
for a Social, Cultural and Egalitarian and Contemporary 
Constitution."  Mainstream Sabah says Ataturk's revolutions and the 
principles were taken out of the AKP's draft constitution and that 
clauses related to freedom of faith and religion will open the door 
to the re-establishment of different religious sects. 
 
Northern Cyprus Site of President Gul's First Overseas Visit 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak and Zaman reported that President Gul 
will pay his first foreign visit to northern Cyprus on September 
18-19, and then he will go to Strasbourg to address the Council of 
Europe on October 2-3. 
 
 
ANKARA 00002334  003 OF 003 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish Foreign Ministry Spokesman Levent Bilman slammed Greek 
Cypriot leader Papadopoulos for calling the Turkish armed forces as 
"the only enemy of the Greek Cypriots." 
 
- EU Commission official Jean-Christophe Filori warned that changes 
in Turkish Penal Code Article 301 should not be handled within the 
frame of constitutional reforms. 
 
- Turkish security forces killed four PKK terrorists in fighting 
near Kelekci village in the southeastern province of Siirt, 
Governor's Office said on Wednesday. 
 
- Turkey's budget deficit for the first eight months of the year is 
reported as 8.4 billion Turkish Lira. 
 
International News 
 
- A powerful earthquake of 7.8 magnitude centered near the 
Indonesian island of Sumatra toppled buildings on Wednesday and set 
off a tsunami alert for the Indian Ocean. 
 
- Turkish Cypriot presidential secretary Rasit Pertev met Wednesday 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn in Brussels, and asked the EU 
to press the Greek Cypriots to come to the negotiating table. 
 
- Belgium is reportedly preparing to renew the trial of ten suspects 
from the Turkish extreme left terrorist organization DHKP-C. 
 
- Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has stepped down after just one 
year in office. 
 
WILSON