07ANKARA2110
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1074
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2110/01 2271446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151446Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3417
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8297
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3176
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2229
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6068
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5888
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2480
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002110 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 15, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Candidate Gul Seeks Support for Presidency 
All papers report Abdullah Gul in a press conference Tuesday pledged 
to uphold Turkey's secularist principles and work for democracy if 
elected president.  Gul said he will quit the ruling AKP the day he 
becomes president and act as an impartial head of state for all 
Turks.  Mainstream papers stress that Gul's first message was to the 
military, when he said that "the constitution is binding for all 
institutions." 
 
Mainstream Milliyet reports Gul is seeking broad support for his 
presidency and plans meetings with NGOs Wednesday. Leading 
opposition CHP said in a statement that Gul's Islamic roots and some 
past statements raise concerns with regard to his sincere commitment 
to democracy and the secular republic.  CHP stressed Gul's 
presidency would speed up transforming Turkey into an Islamic state. 
 "Tension in the Capital," reads a banner headline in the 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet, reporting the main opposition CHP's 
warning that it will boycott receptions and other state events if 
Gul becomes president.  The Kurdish DTP is expected to support Gul 
with its 20 seats in the parliament.  The extreme nationalist MHP 
earlier stated it will participate in the presidential election; 
however, papers don't expect the MHP to vote for Gul.  Liberal 
Radikal says Turkey is back to square one, 3.5 months after Gul 
first entered the race to become president, triggering a political 
crisis and early parliamentary elections.  The paper says the basic 
problem remains the same - Gul's wife's headscarf. 
 
The participation of 367 lawmakers is required in the first two 
rounds of parliamentary voting -- August 20 and 24.  Gul is expected 
to be elected in the third round of voting on August 28, when only a 
simple majority is required. 
 
Turkish Markets React Calmly to Gul's Presidential Candidacy 
All papers report Turkish financial markets weakened on Wednesday 
due to global factors as well as uncertainty over reaction from the 
secular elite and military.  The Turkish Lira fell to its weakest 
level in two months against the dollar and stocks also declined. 
Business analysts, however, do not expect a strong negative 
reaction.  Business daily Referans reports that an Istanbul 
investment expert said Gul's presidency would bring economic 
stability.  Gul is a well-respected, moderate and liberal politician 
in international circles, the expert said, expressing belief that 
international investment inflow will continue.  The 
Islamist-oriented papers Zaman and Yeni Safak report that several 
business leaders welcomed the idea of Gul as president. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Gul's Presidential Nomination 
Oktay Eksi writes in the mainstream daily Hurriyet: "As the 
opposition party [CHP] indicated, Gul comes from a strong religious 
sectarian background with constant vindictive feelings against the 
fundamental values of the Turkish republic.  We can track down many 
statements he made in parliament about commitment to democracy, yet 
it is not possible to find statements of commitment to the 
Republican values and spirit, except for rhetoric necessary for 
protocol.  After he is elected, all eyes will be on Gul watching for 
whether he really has committed himself to the fundamental 
philosophy of the Turkish Republic.  One cannot afford to be 
'neutral' to those values.  Whoever occupies the position of 
president should either commit to these values or leave." 
 
Gungor Mengi writes in the mainstream daily Vatan: "Believing in 
democracy requires respect for the majority's will whether we like 
it or not.  Gul acknowledged the skepticism over his intentions by 
making a strong statement of commitment to Republican values with an 
emphasis on secularism.  We have to give him some credit in a 
democratic fashion so that he can, with his deeds, win the hearts of 
those with skeptical minds.  What's done is done, now it's the time 
to be patient.  The presidency is the highest rank and it tolerates 
 
ANKARA 00002110  002 OF 003 
 
 
zero mistakes, unlike in the case of politicians.  Let's hope that 
Gul proves that he has statesmanship qualities to match this highest 
rank." 
 
Tamer Korkmaz writes in the Islamist-oriented daily Zaman: "Gul's 
candidacy is the most important step toward the new age.  Gul will 
be a president embracing all sectors of the society.  He will create 
harmony among the state institutions.  It is no secret that there 
are some in Turkey who look for and work toward a regime crisis. 
They are doomed to lose.  Turkey is moving ahead and there is no way 
to divert its course on the road to democracy." 
 
Changes Expected in Erdogan's New Cabinet 
All papers speculate with regard to the shape of the new cabinet 
list to be submitted to outgoing President Sezer by Prime Minister 
Erdogan on Tursday.  Mainstream Hurriyet believes up to 16 ministers 
could change in Prime Minister Erdogan's new cabinet.  The paper 
expects the number of ministers with an Islamic background to be 
reduced. 
Hurriyet predicts former Finance Minister Kemal Unakitan will be 
named deputy PM responsible for coordinating the economy.  Former 
Ankara Chamber of Industry chairman Zafer Caglayan will likely 
become Industry Minister, and veteran politician Mehmet Saglam will 
be Education Minister.  The paper expects changes in the ministries 
of culture, farming, and interior as well.  Papers say Ali Babacan 
is likely to become foreign minister if Abdullah Gul is elected 
president.  Saban Disli is another candidate Erdogan has in mind for 
the post.  Vatan claims Erdogan will withdraw his list if Sezer 
vetoes even a single name, and will resubmit it to the new president 
on August 29. 
 
Turkey-US-Israel to Hold 'Reliant Mermaid 8' Exercise 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Turkey, the US and Israel are 
to hold joint search and rescue exercises, "Reliant Mermaid 8," off 
Turkey's southern coast in the in international waters in the 
Mediterranean in late August.  The exercises will be staged with ten 
military vessels, four helicopters and four search and rescue 
airplanes from the three countries. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV (7 A.M.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Two people were killed and 32 others injured when a truck carrying 
illegal immigrants crashed in the southeastern province of Van. 
 
- Two PKK terrorists were captured in the northwestern city of Duzce 
and the southeastern city of Mardin.  One PKK terrorist died in 
clashes with the security forces in the southeastern city of Sirnak. 
 
 
- Collective bargaining negotiations between public servants' labor 
union KESK and the government kicks off Wednesday. 
 
- Turkey signed a 1.2 billion Euro loan with Swiss, German, French, 
Austrian, and Turkish financiers Tuesday for the controversial Ilisu 
dam project which will produce an annual 3.8 billion kilowatt hours 
of electricity.  The Ilisu dam to be completed in 2014 will put 
approximately 80 villages under water as well as submerge the 
remains of an ancient city, provoking strong criticism of the 
project from environmentalists. 
 
International News 
 
- Controversial statements by Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister 
Markoulli have narrowed chances for arranging a meeting of Turkish 
and Greek Cypriot leaders Talat and Papadopoulos. 
 
- Four Palestinians have been killed and 12 others wounded in 
 
ANKARA 00002110  003 OF 003 
 
 
clashes with Israeli forces in Gaza Strip. 
 
- Russian prosecutors are investigating a video posted on several 
ultranationalist websites which shows the brutal execution of two 
men from Central Asia and the Caucasus, and the beheading of one of 
them. 
 
- US Comptroller General David Walker said America is pursuing 
unsustainable public and foreign policies and compared modern 
America to the decline of ancient Rome. 
 
MCELDOWNEY