07ANKARA2719
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8133
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2719/01 3091455
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051455Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4278
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8482
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3508
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2444
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6247
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6053
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2645
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2007 
 
SPECIAL EDITION ON IRAQ'S NEIGHBORS MINISTERIAL MEETING IN ISTANBUL 
 
Media Coverage: November 4, 2007 
 
 
All Sunday papers report that Saturday's Iraqi Neighbors Ministerial 
Meeting, including foreign ministers of Iraq's neighbors, permanent 
members of the UN Security Council, and the G-8 countries, ended 
with a strong condemnation of "all kinds of terrorist activities." 
In addition, the participants urged for more efforts from the Iraqi 
government to fight against terrorism and prevent the Iraqi 
territory from being used as a base for terror attacks against 
neighboring countries.  Attendees included representatives from 
Turkey, Iraq, the United States, Britain, Germany, France, Bahrain, 
Iran, Italy, Japan, Canada, Kuwait, Egypt, Russia, Saudi Arabia, the 
European Commission, the Arab League, the United Nations and the 
OIC.  UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri 
al-Maliki, US Secretary of State Rice and the Foreign Ministers of 
France, Germany, Iraq, and Iran were among the key guests of the 
conference.  A final statement released at the end of the meetings 
endorsed the establishment of a "support mechanism" in Baghdad to 
help continuation of the talks.  It highlighted "the richness of the 
multi-cultural, multi-sectarian, and multiethnic structure of Iraq 
and the importance of securing a peaceful coexistence of all 
communities."  It also noted the next meeting would be held in 
Kuwait. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan said the final communiqu incorporated 
practical elements pertaining to the implementation of the 
principles.  "The fact that the final communiqu includes strong 
chapters on counterterrorism, over which we should all cooperate, 
has pleased us.  We find it useful and beneficial to continue the 
Iraq neighboring countries process at the expanded level," Erdogan 
said.  Papers report Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki pledged in 
the talks that all PKK offices would be shut down in Iraq, 
logistical support going to the PKK would be cut, and that Iraq 
would not allow its territory be used for attacks against its 
neighbors. 
 
Foreign Minister Ali Babacan reportedly explained to his 
counterparts in Istanbul that Turkey keeps all options on the table, 
and that a possible Turkish military operation into north of Iraq 
would not be an "invasion" but rather an "incursion" designed to 
target the terrorist camps.  Mainstream Milliyet says in bilateral 
talks with Babacan at the Istanbul meetings, the Foreign Ministers 
of France and Germany warned Turkey against cross-border operations 
into northern Iraq.     Sunday papers also reported Foreign Minister 
Ali Babacan, Secretary Rice and Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar 
Zebari had a trilateral meeting during the summit talks.  In a joint 
press conference with Babacan after the trilateral, Zebari said they 
took several tangible measures to neutralize the PKK, and stressed 
that all countries should respect Iraq's sovereignty and territorial 
integrity.  Zebari said that prior to the Istanbul conference, three 
working groups were established in the areas of security, energy, 
and displaced people, adding that a center would be established in 
Baghdad to continue the activities of these working groups.  Zebari 
also voiced pleasure with the results of the Istanbul conference. 
Iraqi government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh pledged in Istanbul to 
increase the number of checkpoints along the border between Iraq and 
Turkey.  Following these pledges, three offices of the 
PKK-affiliated Kurdistan Democratic Solution Party were closed in 
Erbil and Suleymaniye, papers report, however columnists claim the 
closures were merely a cosmetic measure.  Nechirvan Barzani, the 
Prime Minister of the regional Kurdish government in Iraq, told an 
exclusive interview with the private NTV news channel that they are 
unhappy with the PKK's using the Iraqi territory to attack Turkey, 
stressing that, for a solution, the Kurdish government has to be at 
the negotiating table as well. 
 
Papers report that Turkey was "relatively satisfied" with the 
 
ANKARA 00002719  002 OF 003 
 
 
measures the Iraqis have promised to take against the PKK, but that 
these measures are still "insufficient," and all possibilities 
remain open.  Mainstream Hurriyet says many pledges were made at the 
summit talks without any commitment for capturing the PKK 
terrorists.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet claims Turkey could not 
get what it wanted from the Iraq summit and that the final 
declaration stressed non-intervention in Iraq's internal affairs. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and Zaman believe that Turkey, 
displaying a stern attitude, got what it wanted from the talks in 
Istanbul.  Zaman says the Istanbul talks stressed Iraq's territorial 
integrity and that it called on the UN to play an active role in 
Iraq. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Iraqi Neighbors Conference: 
 
In the mainstream daily Milliyet, columnist Taha Akyol says PM 
Erdogan is on the way to Washington with Iraqi summit backing: "The 
United States felt uneasy when Turkey organized the Iraqi 
Neighboring Countries Conference prior to the war in Iraq.  It 
believed that it was able to deal with all the problems and did not 
want anyone to interfere.  Although the United States is a 
superpower, the tragic situation in Iraq has made it realize that 
its might is limited!  It is looking for allies and friends in the 
area.  Of course, countries like Turkey, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and 
Saudi Arabia have friendly relations with the United States.  In 
fact, they are its allies.  However, all the allies of that country 
in the area, except Israel, are opposed to its policy on Iraq -- 
particularly to the support it gives to KDP leader Barzani, which 
increases the danger of division in that country.  That is what has 
caused problems in Turkey's relations the United States. The 
neighboring countries have become more important because of the 
deadlock the United States is confronted with in Iraq.  The regional 
countries being more involved in matters related to Iraq will 
strengthen Iraq's integrity.  The statement the Arab League issued 
two days ago to the effect that the 'PKK must move out of Iraq' is a 
typical example.  The draft final communiqu of the Second Expanded 
Meeting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Iraqi Neighboring 
Countries contains many important points on that subject.  Article 9 
calls for the disbanding of all the militia (peshmerge) forces and 
armed groups without exception.  Article 10 says that multicultural 
cities should not be placed under the control of only one group and 
that the Iraqi government should be advised to agree to a committee 
that will be established with the participation of UNESCO and the 
neighboring countries for that purpose.  Article 17 criticizes all 
terrorist activities and calls for the establishment of a mechanism 
for the obstruction of terrorist activities that are carried out 
from outside the borders of a target country.  Article 18 recalls 
that in accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 1546, no 
country should allow terrorist activities in its territory.  Article 
19 stresses the importance of the effective control of borders. 
Prime Minister Erdogan will visit the United States after he secures 
an important regional diplomatic support from the neighboring 
countries.  The 'Iraqi neighboring countries' are now waiting to see 
what the United States will do.  They want to establish whether or 
not it will support separatism and whether or not Northern Iraq will 
become a place which does not shelter the PKK." 
 
In the mainstream daily Hurriyet, Oktay Eksi stresses the unkept 
promises of Iraqi Kurdish leaders: "Iraqi PM Maliki made some 
remarks at the Istanbul summit, asking Turkey not to allow the PKK 
issue to harm the ties between Turkey and Iraq.  We've had enough of 
good will statements, and we have heard too many promises to fight 
against PKK in Iraq.  It is certain that the Iraqi administration is 
not capable of doing anything against the PKK, nor does it have any 
intention to take action.  Therefore Maliki's statement 'we will not 
allow anybody to use our soil for attacking other neighbors' is 
nothing but nice words." 
 
In the liberal daily Radikal, Murat Yetkin writes: "Because of 
Turkey's initiative, the Iraqi Neighbors Conference put terrorism, 
 
ANKARA 00002719  003 OF 003 
 
 
particularly the fight against terrorism stemming from Iraqi soil, 
on the agenda, which is a major accomplishment for Ankara.  The 
recent terrorist attacks put Turkey in the spotlight and helped 
secure high level participation to the conference.  It was a very 
good move to persuade the UN Secretary General to attend the Iraqi 
Neighbors Conference, which in turn paved the way for emphasis on 
the UN's role to the Iraq process.  Turkey could not get any 
concrete step against the PKK out of the Istanbul meetings, however 
Turkey achieved a great deal in diplomacy.  The PKK attacks are on 
international agenda. On the international level, Turkey has gained 
significant international sympathy and support for its struggle 
against PKK terror." 
 
WILSON