07ANKARA1536
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6584
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1536/01 1661312
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151312Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2615
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8150
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2885
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2047
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5968
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5758
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2367
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JUNE 15, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Gul Criticizes Iraqi Reluctance to Act against the PKK 
All papers report the second international "Democracy and Global 
Security Conference" kicked off in Istanbul Thursday with the 
participation of interior ministers, police chiefs and academics 
from 80 countries.  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul addressed the 
conference and said that Turkey tries everything it can to 
contribute to the security and stability of Iraq, but Iraqi 
authorities "do nothing to prevent PKK activities within their 
borders.  The PKK's terrorist actions have sped up again, because 
this organization finds shelter in the north of Iraq.  Turkish 
security forces seized two tons of plastic explosives brought in 
from Iraq over the past year," Gul emphasized, voicing expectation 
that the Iraqi government will control its borders.  Gul stated the 
coalition forces in Iraq should handle border security in case the 
Iraqi government cannot, and if neither side can do it, they should 
cooperate with "the countries which can do the job." 
 
Meanwhile, mainstream Hurriyet reports William James (Billy) Hayes, 
whose time in a Turkish jail inspired Alan Parker's 1978 movie 
"Midnight Express," came to Istanbul.  The Turkish Security 
Directorate said Hayes, 60, came with a special permission to attend 
the security conference and would leave the country June 18. 
 
In addition, Hurriyet reports Lee Baca, the Los Angeles County 
Sheriff who released Paris Hilton from prison early, also came to 
Istanbul for the conference.  Baca told Hurriyet the release of 
Hilton was legal, adding that the Daily Mail newspaper which accused 
him of having acted inappropriately was "not a real newspaper but 
entertainment in print."  Baca also rejected charges that he 
received financial support for his election campaign from Hilton's 
grandfather William Barron Hilton.  That's hot. 
 
Erdogan Invites Maliki to Turkey 
Mainstream Milliyet reports Prime Minister Erdogan said Thursday he 
invited the Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki to visit Ankara, 
adding that he was waiting for a response from Baghdad.  Erdogan has 
met with Iraq's President Talabani, and said recently he will not 
meet Barzani.  Erdogan said he had no information regarding 
President Bush phoning Barzani on Wednesday, during which, according 
to the Turkish press, the President expressed Washington's support 
for the democratic process in Iraq.  With an invitation extended to 
al-Maliki, Turkey's Iraq policy is seen to be "moving from the 
border toward Ankara," says Milliyet. 
 
US Helicopters Watch Turkish Moves on Iraq Border 
Milliyet, Sabah, Aksam and Zaman report American helicopters watched 
Turkish military tank movements on the border with Iraq near the 
Habur crossing Thursday, flying low along the border, but without 
crossing into the Turkish side. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report the Turkish military has shelled the 
southern part of the Cudi Mountain in the Sirnak province, and in 
operations backed by helicopters troops were hunting PKK militants 
on the Gabar Mountain, the northern part of the Cudi Mountain. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Northern Iraq 
Hakan Aygun wrote in the conservative daily Bugun (6/15):  "Even 
though there is, in fact, a need for a cross border operation in 
northern Iraq to eliminate the PKK terrorists, there is the other 
side of the coin: terrorists inside Turkey.  By pointing out that 
Turkey must cope with terrorists inside first, PM Erdogan has become 
the most courageous political figure who could break the taboo on 
this issue.  Whenever we fail to handle an issue, to prevent 
rational discussion it has always been the case.  Someone says, 'The 
problem stems from outside' as the primary tactic for turning a 
problem into a taboo. For the Kurdish issue, the same tactical lie 
was implemented.  'This is a problem provoked by the US and EU. 
Otherwise, we would have no problem with our Kurds' has become a 
 
ANKARA 00001536  002 OF 003 
 
 
prevailing rhetoric.  Some wanted the people of Turkey to pretend as 
if terrorists are living in the US or in EU countries.  The bare 
truth is that we cannot gain full control of our borders.  Finally 
PM Erdogan acted with leadership and expressed the fact that we must 
solve the problem inside first." 
 
Ruhat Mengi wrote in the mainstream daily Vatan (6/15):  "It was 
reported that the US has taken action [regarding the PKK] and 
President Bush called Massoud Barzani in that regard.  President 
Bush in their conversation reportedly talked about bilateral 
cooperation against terrorism with Barzani.   Barzani in return 
expressed his thanks, and he should be very thankful indeed. 
Because there seems to be something wrong.  If Bush was acting 
genuinely, with sincere intentions, he should have called Turkey 
instead and express his commitment to fight against terrorism 
together.  And he should have called Barzani only to say 'stop 
sending our weapons to Turkey through terrorists, otherwise, we 
can't even save you.'   Given the fact that the US provides by air 
food supplies to the terrorist organization, it would be very 
difficult for President Bush to say that [to Barzani.]" 
 
Zebari Calls for Turkey-Iraq-US Dialogue on the PKK 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshiyar Zebari urged Ankara on Thursday for 
dialogue to deal with the PKK militants inside Iraq.  "This dialogue 
should involve the Turkish and Iraqi governments, the US and the 
regional Kurdish government in northern Iraq," Zebari told a meeting 
of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) in New York.  He said 
Turkey was reluctant to do that, pushing instead for bilateral talks 
with the US on the issue.  The Iraqi FM also said he was "really 
encouraged" by Prime Minister Erdogan signaling Tuesday that Turkey 
should focus on fighting the PKK at home rather than in northern 
Iraq. 
 
DTP Concerned of Terrorist Killings, Elections 
Radikal, Cumhuriyet and Yeni Safak report a statement released 
yesterday by Turkey's main Kurdish party, DTP, claimed that the 
recent increase in the funerals of "martyred security forces" 
occurred because of non-compliance to the "unilaterally declared 
ceasefire."  "Operations continue at full speed, bringing the deaths 
of young people every day.  It is extremely saddening that peace 
efforts that had been ongoing for seven years came to this point," 
according to the statement.  It also criticized a recent Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) statement that invited the nation to display a 
united reaction against terror, saying the call will legitimize 
lynching attempts against Kurds.  The DTP also said the door of 
parliament was closed to "left, labor, and the Kurds," voicing 
concern that the upcoming general elections will not be held on 
"democratic and sound" grounds. 
 
Putin Will Join BSEC Summit in Istanbul 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Russian President Vladimir 
Putin will participate in the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) 
meeting to be held in Istanbul June 25.  Armenian Foreign Minister 
Vartan Oskanian will also join the meeting.  The conference will 
debate security, illegal migration and smuggling in the region, and 
will deprive the US of its justifications for intervening in the 
Black Sea region, according to the paper.  President Sezer will host 
the summit and the heads of state of Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, 
Azerbaijan and Georgia will also participate. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 7.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A bomb exploded at a bus station used by military and civilian 
buses in the mainly Kurdish southeastern city of Diyarbakir on 
Friday, injuring four civilians and a soldier. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001536  003 OF 003 
 
 
- Council of State (Danistay) ruled to remove from office Abdullah 
Demirbas, the mayor of Sur municipality in Diyarbakir, for using 
languages other than Turkish in municipal transactions.  The 
municipality has been providing services in Turkish, Kurdish, 
English and Syriac. 
 
- Turkish Land Forces will buy 336 landmine sensitive NATO-standard 
armored vehicles which also have high sensors and radars. 
 
- Selahattin Ozel, the head of Alevi federations in Turkey, says 
Alevis will not vote for the AKP because it is working towards the 
establishment of an Islamic state. 
 
International News 
 
- In Iraq, 10 Sunni mosques were attacked on Thursday following the 
Wednesday bombing of Al-Askariya Mosque, a major Shiite Muslim 
shrine in Samarra. 
 
- Nicosia has lodged a complaint against Turkey at the EU, saying 
Turkey blocks Greek Cypriot membership in international 
organizations. 
 
- According to newly adopted legislation, travelers entering or 
leaving the EU with 10,000 Euro or more in cash will be forced to 
declare it at customs. 
 
- The Vatican suspended all financial aid to Amnesty International 
for backing abortion, calling on all Catholics to stop donations to 
the organization. 
 
WILSON