07ANKARA2386
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8335
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2386/01 2631452
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201452Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3803
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8376
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3323
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2313
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6150
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5955
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2551
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Controversy over the Draft Constitution 
All papers: The University Rectors committee convened yesterday to 
evaluate the new constitution draft.  At the end of the one-hour 
meeting, the Chairman of The Board of Higher Education (YOK) Prof. 
Erdogan Tezic made a strong statement saying that "a clause that 
would lead use of headscarf in universities is not legally possible. 
 The ban on the headscarf is a legal situation created by decisions 
of the Supreme Court and European Court of Human Rights, and that it 
cannot be regulated in by the constitution."  Tezic also urged the 
government to suspend work on the new draft until after the October 
21 referendum so that the unclear situation regarding the election 
of the President would be resolved.  Meanwhile, Court of Appeals 
Chief Prosecutor Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya released an unexpected 
written statement saying that the lifting of the headscarf ban would 
trigger hatred, will damage trust in law, and would lead to turmoil 
and polarization in the Turkish public.  Moreover, it would create 
the impression that the government has a tendency toward oligarchy. 
Following the warnings of the university rectors and of the Chief 
Prosecutor, PM Erdogan, during the press conference to brief the 
public on the draft constitution, urged the rectors to "mind their 
own business" and said that "the job of legislation belongs to the 
parliament. The committee of rectors is not authorized to make a 
decision about the constitutional reforms planned by the 
government." 
 
Papers also report that while PM Erdogan expressing his 
disappointment that the Turkish press has reduced the debate over 
the draft to the headscarf issue, he told the Financial Times that 
the main goal of his government is to lift the headscarf ban from 
the universities. 
 
Under Secretary Nicholas Burns Visits Turkey 
All papers report visiting Under Secretary of State for Political 
Affairs Nicholas Burns met Wednesday with Prime Minister Erdogan. 
Burns told the press after the meeting that he explained to the 
prime minister that the US is pursuing a "diplomatic and peaceful 
strategy regarding Iran."  "The best thing for us to do is work with 
Turkey and other countries like Russia and China to convince Iran 
through diplomatic means.  In that regard, we will need support from 
Asia, the Middle East and European countries to contribute to the 
sanctions on Iran," Burns stressed.  When reminded of Turkey's 
complaints with regard to US weapons ending up in the hands of the 
outlawed PKK in northern Iraq, Burns assured that the US was 
"solidly with Turkey," denying extension of arms or backing to the 
PKK.  "The US would like to continue working with the Iraqi and 
Turkish governments in order to give an end to the horrible actions 
of the PKK.  The PKK deserves universal condemnation," Burns said. 
Burns also noted Secretary Rice was expected to come to Istanbul for 
a meeting of Iraq's neighbors at the end of October. 
Following talks with Erdogan, Burns was received by President 
Abdullah Gul and held talks with Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) 
officials later in the day. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Nicholas Burns' Turkey Visit 
Semih Idiz commented in the mainstream daily Milliyet: 
"International relations function on eternal benefits, not based on 
eternal hostility or eternal friendship.  In this context, the US 
seems determined to restore ties with Turkey and move toward a 
constructive and solid ground.  The visit of U/S Burns to Turkey is 
part of this effort.  His remarks at the Atlantic Council prior to 
his visit indicated that Washington has left behind its pre-Iraqi 
occupation proud and overly-confident attitude, and is now ready to 
pursue a rather realistic and modest attitude.  Regarding the future 
of Iraq, Washington is now relying more on its bilateral relations 
with Turkey.  Deterioration of bilateral ties with Washington does 
not bring any benefit to Ankara either.  Official circles, the 
Foreign Ministry included, are emphasizing that Turkey should be in 
a close working relationship with Washington to solve serious 
 
ANKARA 00002386  002 OF 003 
 
 
problems, such as the PKK.  PM Erdogan hopes that his upcoming trip 
to Washington will contribute to these efforts as Burns leaves 
Turkey with an understanding of the importance of the PKK issue. 
Bilateral ties are moving in this direction unless poisoned suddenly 
by an Armenian resolution in the US Congress." 
 
Soli Ozel wrote in the mainstream daily Sabah: "The speech by U/S 
Burns set the tone for his trip which demonstrated that Washington 
wants to see Turkey on its side as part of a long term strategy. 
Burns' speech at the Atlantic Council gave enough clues regarding 
the policy.  Moreover Burns has three concrete demands from Turkey: 
the US wants Turkey not to pursue the energy deal with Iran and move 
closer to the US policy instead; the US wants Turkey to open border 
with Armenia; and the US wants Turkey to lift its veto against Greek 
Cypriots on NATO-EU security cooperation.  The problem is that Burns 
does not offer anything for Turkey while he makes very clear 
demands.  His words on the fight against the PKK and its presence in 
Northern Iraq are insufficient." 
 
Asli Aydintasbas writes in Sabah: "With this visit, U/S Burns gave 
Washington's message to the ruling AKP: 'let's start all over.' 
Following his visit there will be a continuation of high level 
contacts both in Ankara and in Washington, which clearly indicates 
that both sides are very enthusiastic about strong Turkish-American 
ties.  However, there are some minuses in the bilateral relations 
along with the pluses.  The most notable minus is the lack of 
prevention of PKK attacks.  There is no concrete action regarding 
the PKK so far.  There is no way for the US to restore its 
unfavorable image in Turkey as long as the current situation on the 
PKK continues as is.  Along with other potential problems, such as 
an Armenian Genocide Resolution in the Congress, Iraq seems to be 
the most critical issue between the two countries.  The US will 
start a reduction of troops as of 2008 and move its presence to 
Northern Iraq.  Ankara does not want a US military force there.  The 
question is how Ankara and Washington will sort this out.  It seems 
the year 2008 will be a giant period for bargaining between the two 
countries." 
 
Hayrettin Karaman argued in the Islamist-leaning daily Yeni Safak: 
"According to press reports, U/S Burns has something concrete in his 
hands: He is here to ask for support for US policies on Iran and the 
Middle East while he will, in exchange for Turkey's support, offer 
America's help in eliminating the PKK in Northern Iraq.  This is 
nothing but an indecent proposal.  Does a friend call the PKK a 
terrorist organization and impose some demands before eliminating 
that terrorist threat?   This clearly says 'we are going to strike 
Iran and establish a new order in the Middle East to better serve 
Israeli interests.  We will continue to support the PKK indirectly 
unless Turkey supports and contributes to our plan.'  All of this is 
anything but friendship." 
 
Ankara Garrison Commandant Protests the First Lady 
Vatan, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Radikal and others:  At a ceremony held 
yesterday at Ankara's Esenboga airport to welcome President Gul on 
his return from Northern Cyprus, Ankara Garrison Commander General 
Aslan Guner, to avoid shaking hand with Mrs. Gul, left his place in 
the welcoming line. 
 
Diaspora Obstacle to Armenian Patriarch Mutafyan in US 
Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Vatan and others: Washington's Georgetown- 
University canceled a scheduled speech by the Patriarch of Turkish 
Armenians, Mesrob II Mutafyan, after pressure from the Armenian 
lobby. 
 
Turks Injured by Americans in Iraq Sue US Ankara Embassy 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Hamit Ozkaya and Mehmet Nezir Ekdi, two 
Turkish truck drivers carrying construction equipment to the airport 
built by Americans in Tikrit, were heavily injured by friendly fire 
from an approaching US convoy near Beji on December 11, 2006.  The 
Turks were airlifted to a military hospital by Americans, and one of 
 
ANKARA 00002386  003 OF 003 
 
 
the injured, Hamit Ozkaya, the father of 10 children, had to have 
his leg amputated.  The two Turks later filed a court case against 
the American soldiers in Silopi in Urfa province, but the court 
rejected the application saying only a UN court can investigate 
crimes against civilians in war zones.  Ozkaya and Ekdi now have 
applied to a court in Ankara, this time suing the US Embassy and 
asking for 700,000 Turkish Lira in compensation. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- President Gul and of the Turkish General Staff Chief General Yasar 
Buyukanit yesterday attended the funeral of the cousin of Foreign 
Minister Ali Babacan, a soldier killed in fighting with PKK 
terrorists in the southeastern province of Bitlis. 
 
- Five PKK militants and one Turkish security official were killed 
in clashes with a group of around 30 terrorists in Sirnak province 
on the Iraqi border. 
 
- President Gul said political equality was a main parameter for a 
settlement in Cyprus. 
 
- A high-speed 3G mobile phone license awarded to Turkish operator 
Turkcell last week has been cancelled due to a lack of competition. 
Last Friday, Turkcell, the sole bidder for third-generation 
licenses, won one license for 321 million Euro.  Three other tenders 
were cancelled.  Preparations are under way for a new tender. 
 
International News 
 
- On Wednesday, a car bomb killed anti-Syrian Lebanese lawmaker 
Antoine Ghanem and at least six other people in Beirut, less than a 
week before parliament's election of a new president.  Syria's 
opponents believe Damascus is behind the killing. 
 
- The US Embassy in Baghdad has barred its officials from traveling 
by land outside the Green Zone as Iraqi Prime Minister al-Maliki 
suggested the US Embassy stop using American security firm 
Blackwater. 
 
- The European Union confirmed Belgian EU official Gilles de 
Kerchove as the bloc's new anti-terror coordinator on Wednesday, six 
months after the post became vacant. 
 
- A court in Moscow has banned the Russian translations of 14 books 
by Said-i Nursi, an Islamic thinker of Kurdish origin from Turkey. 
The court ruling said the books fuelled religious tensions and had 
signs of extremism. 
 
WILSON