07ANKARA513
A/S HARTY'S MEETINGS WITH TURKISH OFFICIALS STRIKE
Wed Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8165
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0513/01 0661033
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071033Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1235
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2269
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1717UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000513 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT CVIS TU
SUBJECT: A/S HARTY'S MEETINGS WITH TURKISH OFFICIALS STRIKE 
OPTIMISTIC TONE ON US-TURKISH PARTNERSHIP 
 
REF: ANKARA 157 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  A/S Harty met with senior Turkish officials from 
the Ministries of Justice, Interior, and Foreign Affairs during a 
visit to Ankara on March 6.  Expressing gratitude for Turkey's 
recent efforts to resolve a number of high profile child abduction 
cases, A/S Harty also conveyed the urgent need for the Turkish 
parliament to pass implementing legislation for The Hague Convention 
on Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.  A/S Harty 
thanked Turkish officials for their assistance to American citizens 
in Turkey, underscoring the GOT's extraordinary efforts in 
processing almost two thousand American citizen evacuees from 
Lebanon through the port of Mersin last July.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
'WHEN' NOT 'IF' IMPLEMENTING LEGISLATION PASSES 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Acknowledging Turkey's steady progress towards full 
compliance with The Hague Convention on Civil Aspects of 
International Child Abduction, A/S Harty emphasized to Ministry of 
Justice (MOJ) Deputy Undersecretary Sadi Guven the need for the 
Turkish parliament to pass implementing legislation sooner rather 
than later.  Citing upcoming elections and a shortened parliamentary 
session as likely impediments to the legislation's passage this 
term, Guven assured A/S Harty that The Hague Convention has the full 
force of law in Turkey, despite the absence of implementing 
legislation, and expressed confidence in the legislation's passage, 
if not this term, certainly in the near future. 
 
¶3. (U) Reflecting on the positive working relationship between the 
MOJ and the US Mission in handling child abduction cases, A/S Harty 
praised Judge Aykut Kilic for his tireless efforts in helping to 
resolve a number of difficult cases this past year, in particular 
his crucial role in achieving a successful resolution to the high 
profile and contentious Ciloglu case this past December (see 
reftel). 
 
¶4. (U) A/S Harty detailed the proactive role Consular Affairs 
undertakes to educate US judges and their law clerks on Hague 
Convention obligations to ensure efficient and informed processing 
of Hague cases in the United States.  Noting most judges' preference 
to learn about legal issues from their peers, A/S Harty described 
the Hague Permanent Bureau-sponsored (HPB) training sessions that 
take place in the United States and internationally.  Guven was 
receptive to A/S Harty's offer to work with the HPB to arrange for 
judges versed in The Hague Convention to travel to Turkey to train 
their Turkish counterparts.  Referring to the Embassy's current 
sponsorship of a 15-week English language training course in Turkey 
for eight local judges, Guven expressed appreciation for the US 
commitment to fostering improved communication on Hague cases. 
 
------------------------------------- 
PRAISE FOR GOT'S ASSISTANCE TO AMCITS 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) A/S Harty informed Ministry of Interior Undersecretary 
Sahabettin Harput that the United States expects approximately a 
half million American citizens to travel to Turkey in 2007, nearly 
double the number who visited in 2005.  Welcoming this news, Harput 
remarked that many Americans, after spending time in Turkey, 
frequently commented on their changed perceptions of the country 
after visiting and getting to know Turkish people.  A/S Harty shared 
with Harput the belief that the best commercial for America is 
America, and that the same clearly holds true for Turkey.  With 
twelve thousand Turkish students currently studying in the United 
States, A/S Harty enthusiastically noted that more university 
students come to America from Turkey than any other country in 
Europe and she hoped that number would continue to rise. 
 
¶6. (U) A/S Harty warmly thanked Harput for the professionalism, 
efficiency, and courtesy Turkish officials display in providing 
assistance to Americans when they are injured or become crime 
victims.  In particular, she praised the high standard of service 
shown to the almost two thousand Americans who evacuated through the 
port of Mersin from Lebanon last July, despite the overwhelming 
workload and unexpected circumstances Turkish officials' faced. 
Describing CA's oral history project of the evacuation effort that 
is currently underway, A/S Harty explained CA's intention to not 
only document the extraordinary contributions of those who 
participated in the evacuation, but to use it also as a training 
tool for handling crises of that magnitude in the future.  Quoting 
Ataturk ("Liberty and freedom are two aspects of my character"), 
Harput insisted it only natural for Turkey to assist Americans given 
Turkey's embrace of all individuals regardless of race, religion, or 
ethnicity. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
US-Turkish Relationship Valued in Turkey 
 
ANKARA 00000513  002 OF 002 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Deputy Undersecretary for Consular Affairs Ambassador Ugur 
Dogan assured A/S Harty that whatever happens in Turkey, Turks' 
favorable attitude towards Americans would not change given the 
value and importance Turks place on the US-Turkish relationship.  On 
a personal note, he shared the reservations he had about sending his 
three children to study at universities in the United States after 
9/11, fearing their possible mistreatment or discrimination for 
being foreigners from a Muslim country.  He noted such fears were 
unwarranted, and that on a person-to-person basis Turks' attitude 
toward Americans would remain positive because "deep down Turks are 
very fond of Americans."  Just as thousands of Turkish students 
study in the United States each year, Dogan hoped that more American 
students would consider attending university in Turkey. 
 
WILSON#