07ANKARA1136
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2611
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1136/01 1311446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111446Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2081
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8055
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2673
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1936
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5906
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5675
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2290
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001136 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, MAY 11, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Parliament Approves Constitutional Reforms 
All papers report that on Thursday, the Turkish Parliament approved 
a package of constitutional reforms, which includes the direct 
election of the president for a five-year term, renewable for 
another five years, and general elections to be held in every four 
years.  The changes, backed by 376 MPs, more than the two-thirds of 
the lawmakers in the 550-seat assembly, have to be approved by 
President Sezer.  Sezer will either approve the reforms within 15 
days or send them back to the parliament for review.  Prime Minister 
Erdogan said the package would be sent back to the presidency 
unchanged in case of a veto by Sezer.  The main opposition CHP did 
not attend the vote while all 19 lawmakers from opposition Anavatan 
Party supported the reforms. 
 
Another provision in the package requires that names of independent 
candidates appear on the combined ballot lists rather than on 
separate papers in general elections.  Columnists criticize the 
change as it would make it extremely difficult for illiterate voters 
to pinpoint the independent candidates on combined lists, especially 
in the Kurdish-majority east and southeast parts of the country. 
Several columnists argue the law was designed to block the election 
of Kurdish independent candidates.  They also expect that as a 
deception tactic, many people, who stand no chance of getting 
elected, will add their names as independent candidates in order to 
make the ballot list look crowded and confusing, making it hard for 
voters to identify their candidates. 
 
High Court Chairwoman Warns against Fundamentalism 
All papers report that, delivering a speech at a ceremony held 
Thursday to mark the anniversary of the founding of the Council of 
State (Danistay), the high court's chairwoman Sumru Cortoglu accused 
government officials of "encouraging fundamentalist elements." 
Cortoglu recalled that the attack staged against the Danistay 
members in May last year would be remembered as "a dark stain," 
stressing this attack was actually aimed at the secular state order, 
the Republic, democracy and the supremacy of law.  "Unfortunately, 
the presence of such a danger was ignored by the state authorities," 
Cortoglu emphasized. 
 
Political Parties Campaign Seek Candidates 
Mainstream Milliyet and Vatan report that the majority of 
bureaucrats who had resigned to run in July 22 general elections 
plan to run as AKP candidates. MHP is the next most preferred party. 
 Former Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz was willing to run under the 
Democrat Party, which was formed by ANAP and DYP.  However, ANAP 
leader Erkan Mumcu objected to this idea and Yilmaz decided to run 
in the elections as independent candidate from Rize. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports that the 9th President Suleyman 
Demirel, who is regarded as the architect of DYP-ANAP merger, is 
trying to convince Agar to accept the inclusion of Genc Party in the 
merger. 
 
Land Forces Commander General Basbug at Iraq Border 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet and others:  Land Forces 
Commander General Basbug said during his visit to the southeastern 
city of Sirnak near the border with Iraq that the Turkish Security 
Forces "mission to render terrorists ineffective will continue and 
with an increasing determination in the coming period. We will 
pursue military operations till the separatist terrorist 
organization is totally obliterated." 
 
Legal Problems for DTP Mayors 
Mainstream Sabah reports that the Diyarbakir prosecutor demanded up 
to 10 year prison sentence for Batman mayor Huseyin Kalkan for 
referring to jailed PKK Leader Abdullah Ocalan as a "leader of 
Kurds" in an interview with the Los Angeles Times in May 2006. 
Sabah reports that Cizre mayor Aydin Budak has been removed from his 
post by the Interior Ministry because of a speech he made during 
 
ANKARA 00001136  002 OF 003 
 
 
Nevruz celebrations. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Tony Blair Stepping Down 
Zafer Arapkirli writes in the business and political daily Dunya: 
"When Blair started his first election campaign, he presented a very 
promising image with his vision and political courage. However given 
his performance during the last 10 years, unfortunately he will be 
remembered as a war monger and occupier.  From the British domestic 
political angle, he will be remembered as a leader of capitalism 
because he turned his back on the labor unions -- groups which 
brought him his election victory in the first place. Sorry to say 
but with his departure we can remember and repeat his campaign motto 
in 1997 -- things can only get better." 
 
Kubilay Celik writes in the nationalist daily Tercuman: "When he 
became the Labor Party leader, Blair promised that British youth 
would not be engaging in war any more.  In reality, Britain engaged 
in all kinds of war during his rule, from Kosovo to Sierra Leone, 
and certainly the Iraq war.  The terrorist attack in London was a 
result of his policies.  British people have never forgiven him for 
following Bush unconditionally on the Iraq issue.  He was facing 
growing pressure for resignation, and now he has made it official." 
 
 
Sami Kohen writes in the mainstream daily Milliyet: "Blair's 
departure is a serious loss for Turkey.  He demonstrated an active 
support for Turkey on every occasion, including the EU process, as 
he strongly believed in Turkey's geo-strategic importance.  On the 
other hand, his departure holds a lesson for politicians because he 
made the decision to withdraw from leadership by himself.  He could 
have waited another year until the next elections but he preferred 
not to weaken himself politically.  The fact of the matter is that 
the decrease in popular support for Blair stems from the Iraq war. 
Had Britain not been in the Iraq war, Blair would not have faced 
negative pressure from the public.  Yet he had some significant 
successes, especially on two issues.  Under Blair's leadership the 
British economy has grown faster than that of many European 
countries.  And he resolved the Northern Ireland problem which is a 
very important success.   History will certainly find positive 
things to say about Tony Blair with the exception of the Iraq war." 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 7.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Lawyers say the existing laws allow the nomination of candidates 
at age 25 in the general elections and that there is no need to wait 
for constitutional reforms. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan, accompanied by Foreign Minister Abdullah 
Gul, will travel to Erzurum over the weekend to address supporters. 
 
 
- On May 13, a mass rally in support of the secular republic will be 
held in the Aegean port city of Izmir. 
 
- The two-day "Forum Istanbul" meetings kicked off yesterday with a 
focus on the future of Turkey in light of international 
developments. 
 
International News 
 
- Secretary Rice praised the Islamist-inspired AKP and noted 
whatever the governing party's religious complexion, the Turkish 
government has instigated accession talks with the EU and passed a 
number of EU-inspired laws on religious and individual freedoms. 
 
- Richard Holbrooke, former assistant US secretary of state, has 
 
ANKARA 00001136  003 OF 003 
 
 
warned Turkey against cooperation with Iran in the fight against the 
PKK, stressing this might lead to problems with NATO. 
 
- The Council of Europe has called on PKK supporters outside the EU 
offices in Strasbourg to give up a hunger strike, protesting against 
the solitary confinement of PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
WILSON