07ANKARA2846
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Nov 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7999
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2846/01 3321506
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281506Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4460
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8517
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3570
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2482
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6281
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6092
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2681
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002846 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2007 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Congressman Shays Meets Kurdish Politicians in Ankara 
All papers report that Tuesday, US Ambassador Ross Wilson met 
Kurdish lawmakers at a working breakfast for Congressman Shays to 
discuss ways to improve Kurdish democratic participation and to 
eliminate the PKK.  According to reports from mainstream Hurriyet 
and Islamist oriented Zaman, parliamentarians from the Kurdish DTP 
and far right MHP were not invited.  AKP parliamentarians Ihsan 
Arslan, Abdurrahman Kurt and Afif Demirkiran participated in the 
meeting.  In addition, Sertac Bucak, leader of the pro-Kurdish party 
Hak-Par and Serafettin Elici, leader of pro-Kurdish KADEP, and 
former parliamentarians Hasim Hasimi and Mesut Deger participated. 
Liberal Radikal, leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet and 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak report the meeting sought to "take the 
pulse" of the Kurds in Turkey. 
 
According to Islamist-oriented Zaman and mainstream Hurriyet, the 
meeting addressed increasing democratic rights and freedoms for the 
Kurds and eliminating the PKK in the region.  The ruling AKP 
lawmakers said they were working to add provisions to the new 
constitution in order to protect the rights and freedoms of the 
Kurds.  Hurriyet reports that Ambassador Wilson said the Kurdish 
issue could be resolved through democratic and peaceful means, but 
that the PKK is the obstacle blocking efforts for normalization in 
the region.  He stressed that a democratic structure had to be 
introduced in the region, and there would be no place for the PKK in 
this structure.  "The PKK is our common enemy and must be 
eliminated," Wilson said.  Hurriyet, Vatan, and Zaman report 
Congressman Shays' comments that the DTP's presence in the 
parliament is a major opportunity for Turkey.  Also, Shays 
continued, the DTP should be given a chance to launch initiatives 
for solving the Kurdish issue, even though the party has failed to 
play a positive role in efforts so far.  Mainstream Cumhuriyet says 
that, when Shays expressed his desire to visit the family of a PKK 
terrorist, the participants asked him to visit the family of a PKK 
victim as well.  All papers report that Kurdish parliamentarians 
also said a Turkish cross-border operation into northern Iraq "would 
not help" solve the problems.  They opposed the efforts for the 
closure of DTP, noting that it would only benefit the PKK. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the PKK/Counterterrorism 
Sami Kohen commented in the mainstream Milliyet (11/28):  "About two 
weeks ago, it was not possible to see pictures of US troops and 
Peshmerge working together in northern Iraq to secure the border 
region.  The US and the Kurdish Administrations used to ignore 
Turkey's calls on the PKK issue.  Turkey's parliamentary resolution 
on a cross-border operation, the military's intense activities and 
the long awaited Erdogan-Bush meeting changed the opinions of the 
US, Iraq, and the Kurdish Regional Administration.  Ankara is 
pleased with these positive developments, but awaits concrete 
developments in order to meet Turkey's expectations.  Turkey gained 
international support for a possible cross-border operation through 
diplomatic measures.  However, the most important development in 
this issue is the change in Washington's strategy that transpired 
following the Bush-Erdogan meeting.  The US did not only reactivate 
its cooperation with Turkey against the PKK, but pressured the 
Barzani administration to act in conjunction with Turkey and the US. 
 This opens up a new perspective.  After showing its determination 
with its intense military activities, Turkey was able to launch 
pick-point operations across the border.  Also, a more comprehensive 
military operation remains on the agenda.  According to some 
observers, everyone is aware that Turkey will launch a military 
operation if PKK attacks continue and if Turkey's expectations are 
not fulfilled.  Perhaps this will act as a deterrent and allow 
Ankara to benefit from more concrete steps." 
 
Abdulhamit Bilici wrote in the Islamist oriented Zaman (11/28): 
"People are wondering why the world is so understanding regarding a 
possible cross-border operation against the PKK.  How, and why, is 
 
ANKARA 00002846  002 OF 003 
 
 
the elimination of the PKK discussed so openly in the international 
arena, even by some countries that supported the PKK in the past? 
My opinion is that the recently implemented democratic reforms play 
a great role in this change of opinion.  Turkey's efforts toward 
democracy during the last five years are being noticed by the 
international public.  The sincere democratic efforts of the 
government are protecting Turkey against terrorism.  The same 
countries that used to dismiss Turkey, on the basis of its prior 
poor human rights records, are now criticizing the PKK.  Don't 
listen to allegations that democracy will increase security risks in 
Turkey.  Democracy is the only way to economic prosperity and 
political stability." 
 
The Annapolis Summit for Middle East Peace 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others cover the Annapolis summit talks for the Middle East 
peace process.  Papers see the conference as one more attempt at 
peace, and note that expectations were not high about the outcome of 
the meeting. Papers report Foreign Minister Ali Babacan stated a 
"cautious optimism" over the summit.  Nationalist Cumhuriyet, 
liberal Radikal , mainstream Milliyet and others say even though the 
talks announced a "peace partnership," the critical problems such as 
the return of Palestinians from exile and the status of Jerusalem 
were not addressed.  Reports note that Israel and Palestine have 
agreed to begin work in an effort towards peace before the end of 
2008, and a "steering committee" would gather December 12 to that 
end.  Several papers point to the Hamas-al-Fatah division and the 
"weak" position of Prime Minister Olmert in Israel, adding that it 
won't be easy for Washington to push Israel far enough for a 
settlement in an election year. 
 
Papers report that addressing the summit, Foreign Minister Babacan 
said "two democratic states" should live side by side "within 
recognized and secure borders."  He told Turkish reporters that 
Turkey had four main principles which are "political dialogue in 
resolution of problems, security for all, economic relations, and 
the preservation of the multi-cultural structure of the region."  On 
the attitude of Iran and Hamas toward the process, Babacan said, "It 
is not possible to obtain a result through violence and extremism. 
Many countries and international organizations attended this 
conference, which proves that the international community supports 
this process."  Pointing to Ankara's efforts on building an industry 
zone in Palestinian land for the use of Israel and Palestine, 
Babacan said he proposed the establishment of a medical university 
and a hospital for both Israelis and Palestinians. 
 
Guler on Shah Sea Natural Gas to Europe 
Liberal Radikal, Islamist-oriented Zaman and others report that 
Energy Minister Hilmi Guler told the press Tuesday that if EU 
countries do not want Russian or Iranian natural gas, Shah Sea 
natural gas could be transported to Europe.  Guler said that Shah 
Sea natural gas was an alternative to Turkey-Bulgaria- 
Romania-Hungary-Austria gas pipeline project and pointed out that 
gas coming from Shah Sea started flowing to Europe through the 
Turkey-Greece pipeline inaugurated on November 18. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The ruling AKP presented a new proposal to parliament debating, 
without delay, requests for lifting the immunities of lawmakers 
charged with crimes against the unity of the state. 
 
- Huseyin Kalkan, the Kurdish mayor of Batman, said the closure of 
the pro-Kurdish DTP would force people to go to the mountains. 
 
- The Turkish military is to buy 468 armored MRAP (Mine Resistant 
Ambush Protected) vehicles against the PKK landmines. 
 
ANKARA 00002846  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
- The 2007 UN Human Development Index shows Iceland has overtaken 
Norway as the world's most desirable country to live in.  Of the 177 
countries on the list, Turkey is number 84. 
 
International News 
 
- With less than a week before legislative elections, a Russian 
court has rejected an appeal to the five-day jailing of Russian 
opposition head and former chess champion Garry Kasparov. 
 
- The EU has warned Turkish Cyprus against adopting the Euro as 
official currency without receiving the approval of Brussels. 
 
- On Tuesday, Greek journalists joined thousands who were marching 
through central Athens protesting country's pension system. 
 
- Stockholm International Peace Research Institute says embargoes 
imposed by the UN Security Council after the end of the Cold War had 
been "ineffective." 
 
WILSON