07ANKARA112
TURKEY: ACROSS THE BOARD, OFFICIALS CHARACTERIZE
Fri Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3170
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHAK #0112/01 0191656
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191656Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0636
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHYE/AMEMBASSY YEREVAN PRIORITY 1260UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: ACROSS THE BOARD, OFFICIALS CHARACTERIZE 
HRANT DINK ASSASSINATION AS ATTACK AGAINST THE NATION 
 
REF: ISTANBUL 000038 
 
¶1. (SBU) GOT officials and Turkish politicians across the 
political spectrum moved quickly to condemn the assassination 
of Turkish-Armenian journalist and human rights activist 
Hrant Dink (reftel).  PM Erdogan conducted a live press 
conference within 90 minutes of the attack, while President 
Sezer, Speaker of Parliament Arinc, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and all major political party leaders rushed to 
release statements.  Turkish political leaders, visibly 
shocked, stressed unanimously that this was not just an 
attack against one individual, but against the Turkish nation 
as a whole.  Synopses of statements follow. 
 
¶2. (U) PM Erdogan stated, "We are in deep sorrow. ...I say 
openly that this attack, while on the person of Dink, was 
aimed at all of us...our integrity and unity as a nation and 
our country's comfort and stability.  The bullet was fired at 
free thought and at democratic life.  I condemn the bloody 
hands behind this murder on my government's and nation's 
behalf. I have assigned our Interior and Justice Ministers to 
head the effort to apprehend the perpetrator 
or perpetrators and planners as soon as possible and be 
brought before justice.  The moment I heard about the 
incident, I gave instructions to all relevant government 
agencies, primarily intelligence organizations.  We are 
investigating the murder in all its dimensions and we will do 
whatever is necessary to get to the bottom of it. ...Everyone 
should know that neither this bloody provocation, nor dark 
sources, nor such a heinous plan can disturb our unity and 
togetherness.  Our citizens, primarily our Armenian origin 
citizens, have the common sense and prudence to withstand 
this test.  I extend my condolences to my nation and urge 
especially administrators of our newspapers and televisions 
to give prominence to common sense."  He also noted, "We find 
it very meaningful that this murder was committed in these 
days during which so-called Armenian genocide allegations are 
on the agenda in some countries."  After his statement, PM 
Erdogan answered questions of journalists.  He said the 
Ministers of Interior and Justice will attend the funeral 
ceremony of Dink; he may as well if his schedule permits. 
 
¶3. (U) President Sezer strongly denounced the armed attack 
against Dink, saying: 
 
"I am deeply saddened that Hrant Dink lost his life in an 
attack ... I condemn this ugly and shameful attack. 
Such inhuman acts can never reach their goals.  Our 
expectation is that the perpetrators of this attack - who have 
deeply wounded our nation -- will be apprehended as soon as 
possible.  ... I extend my condolences to the family 
of Hrant Dink, to our press and to our nation." 
 
¶4. (U) TGNA Speaker Arinc stated that the insidious and 
treacherous attack was aiming directly at the future and 
happiness of Turkey.  Arinc expressed sorrow over the 
assassination and noted, "No matter who carried out this 
attack and for whatever reason, it is an attack on the peace 
and unity of the country and the peace within 
our nation." 
 
¶5. (U) Interior Minister Aksu strongly deplored the attack on 
an esteemed journalist and stated that this was an attack on 
the peace, confidence and stability of the country.  He 
stressed that nothing would be attained through such 
attacks and appealed to everyone to remain calm and to act 
with common sense.  Aksu noted that law enforcement 
authorities have already started to work in order to bring 
perpetrators to justice. 
 
¶6. (U) Opposition CHP leader Baykal termed the attack 
"shameful" and claimed that whoever carried it out or 
contracted it has harmed Turkey.  Baykal noted that no 
belief, idea, patriotism or nationalism could be related to 
such a murder. 
He expressed hope that light would be shed on the attack 
soon, adding, "Such initiatives won't be able to shake the 
environment of tolerance and peace in Turkey."  Anavatan 
leader Erkan Mumcu stated, "It is not Dink who was shot, it 
is Turkey's credibility."  DYP leader Agar issued a statement 
strongly denouncing the attack.  He expressed his 
sorrow and added that in a critical period in which Turkey 
faces very important external problems, this attack would 
level a serious blow to Turkey's national interests.  He 
termed the assassination an attack "casting a shadow on 
freedom of thought and expression" and extended his 
condolences. 
 
¶7. (U) Embassy Ankara released the following statement: 
 
"We were shocked and deeply troubled to hear that Hrant Dink 
 
ANKARA 00000112  002 OF 002 
 
 
was killed in an armed attack today in Istanbul.  We send 
heartfelt condolences to his family and loved ones and 
express our hope that the perpetrator of this heinous crime 
will quickly be brought to justice." 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON