07ATHENS2313
TGI GAS PIPELINE INAUGURATION: GREEK EDITORIALISTS WORRY
Wed Dec 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Athens
VZCZCXRO4274
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHTH #2313/01 3391439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051439Z DEC 07 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ATHENS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0858
INFO RUEHIK/AMCONSUL THESSALONIKI 1730
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1983
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5005
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4288
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1366
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ATHENS 002313 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG KPAO GR TU IT
SUBJECT:  TGI GAS PIPELINE INAUGURATION: GREEK EDITORIALISTS WORRY 
ABOUT US-RUSSIA RIVALRY 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary and Comment:  The US presence at the November 18 
inauguration ceremony of the Turkey-Greece-Italy natural gas 
inter-connector and Energy Secretary Bodman's meetings in Athens the 
next day were very visible in the Greek media.  International press 
coverage from the Athens-based wire services was largely positive, 
emphasizing the cooperative nature of the initiative, and Greek 
broadcast media covered the event fairly.  In print, several Greek 
newspapers reprinted the Secretary's speech and used quotes from his 
Alexandroupolis airport press availability on the day of the 
ceremony to explain the economic benefits of the venture, notably in 
the financial press. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Virtually all local newspaper analysis and editorial 
comment, however, cast the visit as U.S. pressure on Greece to 
distance itself from Russia, reflecting deep-seated worries that 
this small country may find itself caught up in a new "Cold War" 
over at a time when it is being called upon to make politically 
difficult choices in the Balkans.  Several outlets cited perceived 
US or Greek protocolary lapses to support this thesis.  High-level 
Greek officials from Development Minister Folias to President of 
Parliament Sioufas to chief Spokesman Roussopoulos made a number of 
public statements aimed at neutralizing such anxiety on November 19, 
but in subsequent days, at least some official sources seem to have 
privately expressed the same kind of discomfort to journalists on 
background.  Representative excerpts follow.  Post will send a 
complete set of newspaper clippings via pouch.  End Summary and 
Comment. 
 
Initial Coverage: Mostly Factual, but Fearful 
 
¶3.  (U)  Broadcast media coverage of the ceremony was handled by 
state-owned ERT, and was straightword.  In print, among general 
interest dailies, pro-government, mid-market Apogevmatini carried an 
inside 11/21 story headlined:  "Positive Reaction by Americans to 
Greek Turkish Pipeline."  In contrast, top-circulation center-left 
Ta Nea wrote that Greece is "Caught in the Energy War between 
Washington and Moscow."  Accrding to "sources," the paper added, 
"the presnce of Americans" at the inauguration of the TGI was "the 
U.S. retaliation for the Greek-Russian agreement on the 
Bourgas-Alexandroupolis project."  Left-of-center Eleftherotypia 
assessed that the Greek government was  trying to tell the public 
that it had an independent energy policy to lessen the negative 
impressions from America trying to steal the show at 
Alexandroupolis.  This paper added that in his remarks to ALPHA 
radio on 11/19, Folias "discreetly" relayed the Greek government's 
dissatisfaction with Bodman by saying: "I don't know what diplomatic 
protocol provides for, but we should remember he himself asked to 
make an address and so his presence was not a key presence." 
 
¶4.  (U)  In the Greek financial press, coverage was more factual. 
Leading economic daily Express, which had a reporter at Secretary 
Bodman's availability, headlined on 11/20: "U.S., Russia Fight on 
Greek Soil over Natural Gas Networks at [TGI] Pipeline Inauguration 
Sunday."  The paper wrote that: "The strict recommendation of the 
U.S. to fill the pipeline with gas from Caspian countries and not 
Russia was made both during the ceremony where Mr. Bodman stated 
that the gas must come from Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, or Kazakhstan 
in order to prevent the EU's dependence on Russia, as well as during 
his meetings with Development and Economy Ministers Folias and 
Alogoskoufis ... "  Finally, on 11/19 financial daily Naftemboriki, 
which appears with excerpts fromrotocolary Lapses 
 
¶5.  (U)  Among the later commentaries, on 11/26 influential 
independent Kathimerini said in a prominent piece by senior analyst 
Tom Ellis, available in English at www.ekathimerini.com:  "Greece is 
trying to reconcile its political and defense commitments to the USA 
with the cooperation it is pursuing with Russia in the energy sector 
... Athens is trying to make use of its gradual entry into Eurasia's 
energy sector for the obvious economic and geopolitical benefits, 
but while doing so must create an equilibrium between the 
superpower's priorities and demands on the one hand and pressure 
from the emerging Russian energy giant on the other.  An initial 
reading of the factors at play would put Greece, a member of the 
European Union and NATO, in the Western camp.  From many aspects, 
that is where it belongs.  However, the reality in the energy sector 
complicates the situation. 
 
 
ATHENS 00002313  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6.  (U)  The commntary continues:  "Meanwhile, the USA's often 
clumsy interventions, even when they are supporting proposals that 
are clearly both of economic and political benefit, such as the need 
to diversify energy sources, are a source of aggravation and 
sometimes result in opposition ... With its sights trained on 
deepening cooperation with Moscow and perhaps in a display of 
bitterness of over the USA's failure to support Athens in its 
dispute with Skopje, the prime minister's office made an effort to 
downplay the presence at the ceremony of US Energy Secretary Samuel 
Bodman, who had worked with the Foreign Ministry's bureau regarding 
the visit.  The Americans, with Ankara's keen backing, presented 
themselves at the ceremony for the purpose of emphasizing - chiefly 
for Russia's benefit - their supremacy in the region stretching from 
Azerbaijan, across Georgia to Turkey and Greece. Bodman, who had 
visited Ankara, wanted to meet with Karamanlis but had not scheduled 
a meeting ahead of time.  It was no coincidence that the Greek prime 
minister chose not to introduce Bodman (Development Minister 
Christos Folias was forced to avoid mentioning names, welcoming only 
"all the distinguished energy ministers").  The government made a 
concerted effort not to include the U.S. official in the official 
photograph, as the leaders of Greece, Turkey and Azerbaijan pushed 
the button that activated the gas flow to Greece. 
 
¶7.  (U)  It concludes:  "Greece was annoyed that there had been no 
prior arrangements; this resulted in absurd situations, such as 
disagreements over where Bodman was to sit.  Similarly, a 
distinguished Greek diplomat called discreet attention to the haste 
shown by new US Ambassador in Athens Daniel Speckhard to be present 
at the ceremony before he had even presented his credentials to the 
Greek president.  A source involved in organizing the ceremony 
blamed the prime minister's office, explaining that if they had not 
wanted to draw attention to the US minister, instead of trying to 
sideline him, they could have invited Russian and European officials 
as well ... " 
 
¶8.  (U)  Among other papers, on 11/25, elite pro-opposition To Vima 
said in an article by editor-in-chief Yiannis Kartalis headlined 
"Pipelines:"  "It is self evident that Athens' game between 
Washington and Moscow can only have one objective: to best serve 
Greek interests on the political level, and the country's energy 
needs on the economic level.  Beyond the economic importance of the 
Bourgas-Alexandroupolis [oil] pipeline, it cannot be underestimated 
that [it] will contribute to the sought after stability and peace in 
the Aegean ... But Greece also has every reason to contribute to the 
lifting of Russia's alienation, thus contributing to the balancing 
of U.S. influence in the region." 
 
¶9.  (U)  Also on 11/25, centrist Eleftheros Typos wondered in an 
article by commentator George Malouhos headlined "Russian Pipelines 
under NATO Umbrella" whether it might be a good idea for Greece to 
seek a Western/NATO security web to protect the pipeline carrying 
Russian energy and at the same time the status quo of the region. 
More negative takes appeared in center-left Ethnos inside headlines: 
 "The Cold War with Natural Gas Pipelines; Political Game between 
Washington, Moscow, Athens and Ankara Risks Making Greece an Energy 
Hostage to Turkey; U.S. Nightmares and White House Recommendations; 
The Empty U.S. Pipeline."  Among other things, the paper criticized 
Secretary Bodman for coming to Greece "uninvited" to attend the TGI 
 
SIPDIS 
inauguration and asking to speak in order to "dictate" Europe's 
energy policy.  And on 11/24, opposition Ependytis used this inside 
headline:  "American 'Cap' on Evros! PM Karamanlis Enraged with 
Diplomatic Inappropriateness of U.S. Energy Secretary Against 
Greek-Russian Energy Cooperation."  The article said that: 
"Washington does not seem to be able to handle the fact that Greece 
is not absolutely obedient to its recommendation 'not to do 
business' with the bad Russians on energy."  SPECKHARD