07BEIJING2712
CHINA'S SPECIAL ENVOY DISCUSSES MIDDLE EAST TRIP
Mon Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4316
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2712/01 1132326
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 232326Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7161
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 0578
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 2038
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0671UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002712 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS CH XF
SUBJECT: CHINA'S SPECIAL ENVOY DISCUSSES MIDDLE EAST TRIP 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) China sees its role in the Middle East as one of trying to 
persuade all parties to continue looking for a way toward peace, 
China's Special Envoy on the Middle East Sun Bigan told Poloffs 
during a briefing on his April 9-20 visit to Saudi Arabia, Israel, 
the Palestinian Territories and Brussels.  Sun discussed the recent 
Arab Summit and concluded that Arab nations were committed to 
restarting the Arab Peace Initiative.  In meetings with Palestinian 
President Abbas, Israeli Foreign Minister Livni and other leaders, 
Sun said he learned more about their differences, especially about 
Israel's three preconditions to further negotiations.  Sun also met 
with the families of three captured Israeli soldiers.  He concluded 
the briefing by answering questions on China's role in the Middle 
East, thanking Saudi Arabia for its role in the peace process and 
encouraging the international community to deal fairly with 
Palestinians and Israelis.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In order to gauge the current situation in the Middle East 
and to encourage peace talks, Chinese Special Envoy Sun traveled to 
the region from April 9-18 and attended meetings with Saudi Arabian, 
Palestinian and Israeli leaders, Sun said in an April 20 briefing. 
Sun appealed to all parties involved to use the positive momentum 
generated by the Mecca Accord and the recent Arab summit to increase 
mutual trust and resume the peace process.  China welcomes the 
establishment of a new Palestinian government and hopes the 
international community will support Palestinians and Israelis in 
resolving their conflicts, Sun said. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Sun reiterated that China consistently advocates a peaceful 
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that leads to 
the harmonious coexistence of two nations based on UN resolutions 
and the theory of land-for-peace.  China encourages the efforts of 
Saudi Arabia and the Palestinian Authority, urges commitment to the 
newly formed unity government and hopes Palestinian authorities will 
make greater efforts, specifically to release the three captured 
Israeli solders whose family members Sun met.  China also calls on 
Israel to make further steps to ease the humanitarian crisis in the 
West Bank and Gaza and to have greater compromise.  As a permanent 
UNSC member, China will work with all parties to increase contact 
and cooperation and support all efforts to further the peace process 
and realize peace in the Middle East, Sun said. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Sun made four general observations:  First, he noted Arab 
nations are dedicated to restarting the Arab Peace Initiative and 
hoped that Arab nations could make progress towards normalizing 
relations with Israel.  Second, he noted that while the 
international community helped resolve some intra-Palestinian 
conflict with the Mecca Accord, it should be doing more to help 
resolve conflicts between the Palestinian government and Israel 
regarding the three preconditions. Third, he emphasized the 
importance Israel attaches to the issue of the three captured 
soldiers, expressed sympathy for the soldiers' families and 
encouraged a prisoner exchange as soon as possible.  Finally, he 
mentioned that Olmert and Abbas began holding regular bi-weekly 
meetings while he was in the region.  Sun felt these meetings would 
be important opportunities to discuss key topics, including 
security, arms smuggling and easing the closure of borders and 
crossings into Palestinian areas. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Responding to questions, Sun said that China plays a 
positive role as an advocate for peace, working to persuade all 
parties to continue looking for a path to peace.  China is far away 
and has no private interest in the Middle East, but nonetheless pays 
close attention to the situation, especially between Israel and the 
Arab Nations.  Sun emphasized that if the Middle East finds peace, 
the political trust and economic and trade cooperation that will 
result will be favorable to all countries, including China. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Sun was challenged on the issue whether China's Mideast 
role is truly disinterested, given its desire for oil and other 
natural resources in the region.  He dismissed such charges as 
groundless, pointing out that China has had relations with some 
Middle East countries for decades, but only became an oil importer 
after 1993.  China believes it has a positive and fair role in the 
region, with friendly exchanges with Arab countries and with 
Israel. 
 
¶7. (SBU) In his meetings with Saudi Arabian King Abdullah and 
Foreign Minister Saud Al Faisal, Sun said they touched on bilateral 
relations between China and Saudi Arabia, observing that the 
relationship has grown quickly and smoothly since ties were 
established in 1990.  But the trip focused on convincing all parties 
to move toward peace talks.  Sun thanked Saudi Arabia for its work 
to promote Palestinian cohesiveness with the Mecca Accord and its 
efforts to improve relations between Israel and Arab Nations during 
the recent Arab Summit. 
 
 
BEIJING 00002712  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Sun called on the international community to treat Israelis 
and Palestinians fairly, saying that while Palestinians should make 
efforts toward peace, Israelis should also make appropriate 
compromises.