07BEIJING2096
MARCH 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING
Thu Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8695
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2096/01 0881049
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291049Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6287
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0828
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0065
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 0068
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0133
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 6323UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002096 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MNUC XV CH KN KS JA RS CE PP SU NUIN
PK, TW 
SUBJECT: MARCH 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING 
 
BEIJING 00002096  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Key points made at the March 29 MFA press conference were: 
 
-- China has always viewed the Six-Party Talks "rationally" 
with neither pessimism nor optimism. 
 
-- The "so-called" stealing of United States military secrets 
was groundless and had ulterior motives. 
 
-- It is unfair for the United States to blame its economic 
problems on China, said the MFA Spokesperson when asked for 
comment on Senators Schumer and Lindsay's call for China's 
currency re-evaluation. 
 
-- Presidents Hu and Putin signed 21 trade agreements worth 
over USD 2.3 billion and reached broad consensus on many 
issues during the President's visit to Russia. 
 
-- It is not appropriate to connect the Darfur issue with the 
2008 Olympics and people exploiting this juxtaposition to win 
favor are "totally wrong." 
 
China Views April 14 Deadline "Rationally" 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. MFA Spokesman Qin Gang clarified at the March 29 regular 
press briefing that China has always viewed the Six-Party 
Talks "rationally" with neither pessimism nor optimism, when 
asked if China felt the April 14 deadline for shutting down 
the Yongbyon reactor could be realized.  Asked for news on 
Treasury DAS Glaser's meetings this week in Beijing, Qin 
responded that the United States is in intensive 
consultations with the parties concerned.  He added that all 
six parties attach importance to the implementation of the 
"initial steps." 
 
Spy Charges Groundless with Ulterior Motives 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Qin reiteated that the "so-called" stealing of United 
States military secrets was groundless and had ulterior 
motives, when asked whether Mr. Mak, a Chinese-American on 
trial for passing information to China, was working for the 
Chinese government. 
 
Senators Schumer, Graham on Currency Issue 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. It is unfair for the United States to blame its economic 
problems on China, said Qin when asked for comment on 
Senators Schumer and Lindsay's call for China's currency 
re-evaluation.  Qin maintained that China's currency was 
floated in 2005 in line with a package of currencies and 
responds to market forces.  The responsible management of 
China's currency is good for the economies of China and the 
world as a whole, he said.  Qin recognized some parties have 
concerns, but expressed frustration with a nation with a 
market economy such as the United States trying to instruct 
the economy of China, which has transformed from a controlled 
economy to one of market socialism. 
 
Darfur and 08 Olympics, Exploiting "Totally Wrong" 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5. It is not appropriate to connect the Darfur issue with the 
2008 Olympics and people exploiting this juxtaposition to win 
favor are "totally wrong," said Qin, commenting on UNICEF 
Goodwill Ambassador Mia Farrow's recent Op-Ed in the Wall 
Street Journal.  He claimed he had never heard of the actress 
or the report and said such people must not be familiar with 
Chinese policy on Darfur and China's efforts with those of 
the international community to reach a peaceful solution and 
return stability to the region. 
 
Hu Visit to Russia a Success 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. President Hu met with President Putin and other leaders 
during his state visit to Russia, said Qin, calling the visit 
a success when prompted by Chinese media.  Both leaders 
attended the China Year in Russia opening ceremony and the 
China National Expo, signed 21 trade agreements worth over 
USD 2.3 billion and reached broad consensus on many issues. 
They pledged sincere, trusting political cooperation, win-win 
economic cooperation, common science and technology 
innovation, harmonious humanitarian friendship and security 
cooperation based on unity and mutual assistance.  The 
 
BEIJING 00002096  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
leaders agreed to follow the spirit of their Good-Neighborly 
Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation and continue efforts to 
implement the leaders' consensus. 
 
Pacific Island Cooperation Hits Snag 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. Qin welcomed a press corps group from the Pacific Island 
countries to the press conference and said China attaches 
importance to the region with the aim of improving relations 
to safeguard peace and stability and promoting development 
based on equality and mutual benefit.  He cited a speech by 
President Hu in Fiji last year during the China-Pacific 
Island Country Economic Development Forum, stating that China 
is prepared to increase cooperation with the region in all 
fields. 
 
¶8. Responding to a call for comment on Vice Premier Zeng 
Peiyan's visit to Papua New Guinea and accusations that a 
Chinese enterprise is operating a nickel mine in violation of 
local labor laws, Qin said the accusations were found to be 
groundless after investigation by local Chinese authorities 
and the Chinese enterprise.  The Chinese government attaches 
importance to such reports and always requests that Chinese 
companies follow local labor laws and safeguard workers' 
rights and interests.  China hopes Zeng's visit will deepen 
and expand both countries' friendly cooperation. 
 
Nicaragua Hopes Taiwan, Mainland Can Unite 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. Qin had not noticed Nicaragua President Ortega's voicing 
hope for the unification of Taiwan with the Mainland.  The 
Spokesman reiterated China's hope that all countries can 
abide by the "universally recognized one China" principle. 
China wishes to establish normal diplomatic relations at an 
early date with those nations who still recognize Taiwan. 
 
War Criminals at Yasukuni Shrine 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10. The Spokesman had not heard of the report released 
Wednesday that the Japanese government and Yasukuni Shrine 
officials approved the enshrining of war criminals in 1969, 
nine years before the names were actually added.  Qin 
confirmed that China's stance on the Yasukuni issue has not 
changed.  However, China and Japan have reached consensus on 
the goal of overcoming such obstacles and improving the 
bilateral relationship, said Qin. 
 
Opposition to Terrorism of all Forms 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶11. Asked for comment on Monday's Tamil Rebel air strike that 
killed three and wounded 16, Qin reiterated China's 
opposition to terrorism of all forms, adding that China hopes 
Sri Lanka can realize social stability at an early date. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶12. Special envoy of President Hu and Vice Chairman of the 
NPC Standing Committee Han Qide will attend the inauguration 
ceremony of Senegal President Wade and the 47th anniversary 
independence celebration April 3-4.  At the invitation of the 
Chinese Foreign Ministry, European Commission Vice President 
Verheugen will visit China April 1-4.  Princess Sirindhorn of 
Thailand will visit China April 2-13.  At the invitation of 
FM Li, Australian FM Downer will visit China April 2-5. 
RANDT