07BRUSSELS392
Ambassador's Comments on Belgium and
Mon Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brussels
VZCZCXYZ0038
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBS #0392 0361615
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051615Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4286
INFO RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7769UNCLAS BRUSSELS 000392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL BE AF
SUBJECT:  Ambassador's Comments on Belgium and 
Afghanistan Spark Parliamentary Exchange 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The Ambassador has used a series of 
end-of-tour interviews with Belgium's print and 
electronic media to highlight the need for Belgium to 
make a greater contribution to the NATO effort in 
Afghanistan.  His pointed comments have gained prominent 
attention, both as one of the lead items on national news 
broadcasts and an exchange in Parliament during which the 
Prime Minister declared publicly that Belgium would 
fulfill its obligations and that Belgium's Afghanistan 
policy had been developed after consultation with the 
former SHAPE commander, General Jones.  Coming in the 
middle of the Ambassador's farewells, we have been able 
to make clear to the Belgians that we have not given up 
our efforts to secure a greater commitment to 
Afghanistan.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Ambassador's planned departure from Belgium on 
February 6 has provided him with a platform for pressing 
a number of key USG concerns with the broader Belgian 
public.  He has spoken with major French and Flemish 
media outlets, and a session with a journalist who hosts 
a website aimed at a predominantly Muslim audience.  This 
outreach has sparked strongly positive coverage, 
including praise for the Ambassador's straightforward, 
open method of dealing with journalists.  In each of his 
interviews, the Ambassador accentuated the positives of 
the last two and a half years, including Belgium's 
amendment of its "universal competence" law, initiatives 
to revive the Trans-Atlantic relationship, and close 
cooperation with the U.S. on issues like Iran and 
counter-terrorism. 
 
¶3. (U) While highlighting the steady upturn in bilateral 
relations, the Ambassador noted our continuing effort to 
promote increased Belgian involvement in Afghanistan.  He 
specifically argued for Belgium (and other European 
states) to do more there.  In the case of Belgium, that 
would mean providing additional troops to augment the 
existing force of 300.  The Ambassador noted that the 
Verhofstadt government did intend to add about 40 
additional forces later this year, when Belgium expected 
to assume command over operations at Kabul airport. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Ambassador's remarks about Afghanistan had 
an immediate impact on Belgium's internal political 
debate.  During the Prime Minister's February 1 Question 
Time in Parliament, opposition floor leader De Crem 
heckled PM Verhofstadt for not living up to Belgium's 
obligations, even as he profligately pledged to provide 
troops to UNIFIL, and expend extra Euro 30 million in 
development aid for Afghanistan.  The Prime Minister's 
reply argued that Belgium had been present at the ground 
floor of all major operations, and that there now were 
1,200 troops serving overseas.  Verhofstadt confirmed 
plans to send a 40 person unit in October to oversee 
airport management, and emphasized that Belgian actions 
had followed a "long discussion" about Afghanistan's 
future with former SACEUR General Jones.  At a private 
farewell dinner, FM De Gucht said that the only person in 
the Cabinet who disagreed with Ambassador Korologos was 
Minister of Defense Flahaut. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Prime Minister reaffirmed his position 
during the Ambassador's farewell call on February 5. 
Making clear that the Ambassador's interviews had caused 
him no difficulties, the Prime Minister spoke acidly 
about his Flemish Socialist coalition partners, who were 
"against" everything.  Asked about an earlier idea of 
redeploying F-16's to Afghanistan, Verhofstadt said he 
understand SACEUR did not want them. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment:  The prominent play given the 
Ambassador's remarks about Afghanistan was a clear 
reminder to the Belgians that we would continue to press 
them about this issue.  Although the June 10 elections 
will undoubtedly limit interest in foreign affairs 
issues, we will continue to seek out opportunities to 
achieve this goal. 
KOROLOGOS