07CASABLANCA168
A JEWISH LEADER'S PERSPECTIVE IN AN ARAB CITY
Tue Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0168/01 2261706
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141706Z AUG 07
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7809
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 8057
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0576
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0293
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2917
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 2042
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 4691UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV MO
SUBJECT: A JEWISH LEADER'S PERSPECTIVE IN AN ARAB CITY 
 
REFS:  (A) Casablanca 0163 
   (B) Rabat 1265 
   (C) Rabat 1272 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: As President of the Moroccan Jewish community and 
Ambassador at Large for the GOM, Serge Berdugo has never been shy 
about expressing his opinions on the situation in the country. 
Berdugo, however, rarely strays from the official line due to his 
close official and personal ties to the palace.  During a recent 
meeting the first, and presumably most important, topic addressed by 
Berdugo was security and terrorism in Casablanca.  He was eager to 
share his insights on the April bombings at the consulate and to 
express his relative comfort with the overall situation in Morocco, 
despite some nagging concerns for his community.  Berdugo talked at 
length about the topic du jour, the recent seizure of two weekly 
news magazines and the charges brought against their editor for 
violating the law forbidding criticism of the King.(refs:A,B)  Other 
topics included the upcoming elections, the recent resignation of 
the Deputy Minister of the Interior (ref:C), and growing Islamist 
influence, as well as issues that reach beyond Morocco's borders to 
the Western Sahara and Moroccan-Israel relations.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Security - Always a Factor for the Jewish Community 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On August 8, CG and poloff visited the downtown 
headquarters of Morocco's Jewish community.  From the comfortable 
thirteenth floor office with one of the best views of the Hassan II 
Mosque in Casablanca, Serge Berdugo, President of the Community and 
King's Ambassador at Large, shared his views on recent and upcoming 
events.  Berdugo launched into an exposition on Morocco's security 
situation.  After expressing his concerns for the consulate and the 
April suicide bombings, Berdugo described the feelings of the Jewish 
community regarding security and terrorism.  He claimed that the 
community at large is not overly concerned.  Despite that, he said 
he personally feels pressures regarding the security situation but 
it stems from a fear of attacks against Morocco in general and not 
attacks on the Jewish community specifically. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) When discussing the Jewish community's presence in 
Morocco, Berdugo was confident that the Jewish population, no matter 
how small, will always be at home in the country.  Despite his 
statement however, we frequently observe, and Berdugo confirmed, 
that most Moroccans speak in terms of nationals being Moroccan or 
Jewish not both.  The "us and them" mentality goes both ways, 
Berdugo claimed, but it is without animosity or friction.  The 
practice dates back to the French, he said, when residents of the 
country were officially classified as French, Moroccan Arab or 
Israelites of Morocco.  While he did admit that there are perhaps 
ten or fifteen percent of the population who dislike Jews, there was 
a consensus that this statistic is not uncommon worldwide. 
 
----------------- 
Events of the Day 
----------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The conversation turned to one of the hottest topics of the 
day, the confiscation of two weekly news magazines and the GOM's 
charges against their editor, Ahmed Benchamsi, for criticizing the 
monarchy in his editorial.  Berdugo was fiercely critical of 
Benchamsi saying the act was stupid or crazy but mainly 
irresponsible.  At the same time, however, he made clear his support 
for free speech and freedom of the press, though tempered by 
responsibility and integrity.  "Morocco is not the U.S." said 
Berdugo.  "In the U.S. there are those in authority and those who 
challenge authority, there is a balance.  Here the situation is 
different." 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Berdugo spoke casually about another timely topic, the 
resignation of Deputy Minister of the Interior Fouad Ali Al Himma. 
Saying he had spoken to Al Himma just days before the announcement, 
Berdugo imagined that in all likelihood Al Himma was "just ready for 
a change."  When asked whether or not the closeness of Al Himma and 
the King should be a matter of concern if Al Himma wins a seat in 
parliament or more Berdugo replied, "many in the Parliament are 
close to the King" then added offhandedly "Parliament does not 
exist." Explaining this remark Berdugo said, "People don't 
understand that the King wants a real parliament, a real judiciary, 
but he just can't do it now. The country is not ready." 
 
------------------------------ 
Who's Afraid of the Islamists? 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) When asked about the upcoming elections and the 
possibility of an Islamist gains, Berdugo responded, "I am not 
afraid of the Islamist, but if they win and there are ministers from 
the PJD, what will change?"  Berdugo is optimistic that even if the 
Islamic Party of Justice and Development (PJD) make large gains, the 
current path toward reform will not deviate.  Morocco, he said, is 
the strongest democracy in the region and we will continue to move 
in the right direction.  He was certain that "Morocco is ripe for 
success and nobody wants to see that end." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
On the Western Sahara and Israeli-Moroccan Relations 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Berdugo seemed less optimistic when he spoke of the 
Western Sahara autonomy talks.  "If they arrive at a consensus it 
will be very dramatic."  Berdugo admitted that finding a solution 
will not be easy, everything depends on "the notion that the world 
will change" he said.  Berdugo views Morocco and Algeria as the 
leaders in Africa and as such they must work together for the region 
to prosper.   Berdugo explained that neither the U.S. nor the EU 
really understand the problem.  What must be overcome is not 
economic, political or even cultural problems, he claimed, but 
longstanding psychological issues.  "People have been living like 
this for so long that it is difficult for them to imagine anything 
different" Berdugo said, in addition, "there is a new generation who 
has lost all past references and whose vision for the country is not 
the same as it was years ago." 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Berdugo offered his impressions of Moroccan-Israeli 
relations and his expectations of them for the future.  He seemed 
hopeful that slowly Morocco and Israel can come together in the 
first step toward initiating a new relationship.  Having just 
returned from Israel, he said that the Israelis "really understood" 
that diplomatic relations are out of the question for now.  They 
understood that "Morocco is a good friend."  He stressed his belief 
that both countries must undertake "multiple acts" to strengthen the 
relationship.  He explained that no one, including Israel, wants to 
put the GOM in a difficult position and make it vulnerable to 
attack.  He said that small and discreet acts, now underway, are 
what it will take to change the situation.  Citing one example of 
just such an act, Berdugo spoke of a new Israeli postage stamp to be 
released on August 27, 2007 honoring the former Chief Rabbi of 
Morocco and Jerusalem.  The stamp, said Berdugo proudly, has a 
Moroccan flag running vertically along one side flanking a portrait 
of the Rabbi. 
 
----------------- 
A Unique Position 
----------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Comment: As a representative of the King and the leader 
of the Jewish community, Berdugo's attitudes about the current 
situation may not reflect the feelings of the general public in 
Casablanca but in all likelihood, echo the attitudes of his 
community.  The small Jewish Community in Casablanca lives in a 
different "Morocco" than that of the average Moroccan.  With limited 
opportunities, most of the youth from the community go abroad to 
study.  The majority find well paying jobs overseas when they 
conclude their education and rarely return to Morocco.  By 
comparison, recent Moroccan university graduates struggle to find 
jobs in a cohort with 40 percent unemployment. As if to emphasize 
this point, at the end of our meeting, Berdugo addressed a consular 
issue for someone in the community who had been refused a tourist 
visa.  He said not getting a U.S. visa is a problem because most in 
the community consider it "normal" to have a one.  They cannot 
understand when there is a problem.  While his community may face 
roadblocks from time to time, according to Berdugo the current 
atmosphere for his Morocco is definitely one of optimism.  End 
Comment. 
 
GREENE