07CASABLANCA196
UPPING THE ANTE ON MIGRATION IN MOROCCO: MOROCCAN MINORS
Fri Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0196/01 2781105
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051105Z OCT 07
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7851
INFO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 8100
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2936
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 2059
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0600
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0313
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3749
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 0295
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 0965
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2292
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0638
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 4696UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR G/TIP, DRL/IL, NEA/RA, PRM/AFR, AND NEA/MAG 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SMIG ELAB MO
SUBJECT: UPPING THE ANTE ON MIGRATION IN MOROCCO: MOROCCAN MINORS 
HEADING NORTH 
 
REF: A) CASABLANCA 0193 
 
¶1. (U)  This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  As the border between Morocco and the EU tightens and 
more adult Moroccan illegal migrants are apprehended and returned, 
families are opting to send minor children north in hopes that they 
will be allowed to stay and work in Europe.  Minors migrating to 
Europe is a trend that first appeared in force in the 1990s, 
however, in recent years the number making the journey has increased 
exponentially.  Now, Morocco and the EU are joining forces to combat 
the problem at the source.  In the past year numerous agreements 
have been signed to build education and training centers throughout 
the country, as well as reception centers to house returning 
Moroccan youth.  The controversy of how and when to return Moroccan 
minors, however, is still a matter for discussion. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Children Go Where Adults Fear to Tread 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Efforts to protect the Moroccan-Spanish border have become 
increasingly successful in recent years, resulting in a significant 
decrease in the number of clandestine immigrants successfully 
crossing into EU territory.  However, while the overall numbers are 
declining, the number of Moroccan youth attempting to enter Europe 
illegally is greater than ever.  In June, Nezha Chekrouni, Moroccan 
Minister Delegate in Charge of Moroccans Residing Abroad, said that 
over 4400 Moroccan minors were being hosted in Spanish welfare 
centers by the end of 2005 and the numbers, she said, continue to 
rise.  Italy is experiencing a similar problem.  According to 
Carmela Godeau, Director of International Organization for 
Migration's (IOM) Counter Trafficking Center in Rome, Moroccans make 
up 20 percent of Italy's clandestine unaccompanied minor population. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The reasons for the increase are simple: First, Morocco's 
struggling economy; and second, the growing awareness that minors 
are allowed to remain in many European countries under the 
protection of the state while their adult counterparts are 
immediately repatriated.  The draw of employment in Europe looms 
large in the minds of most Moroccan youth.  Morocco's official 
unemployment rate for urban males age 15-24 was 32 percent in 2006 
with unofficial estimates up to 60 percent in some areas.  According 
to the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) statistics, Morocco's 
GNI per capita in 2005 was only 1,730 USD in comparison to Spain's 
25,360 USD.  Moreover, the two countries social and healthcare 
opportunities mimic this economic divide.  Young Moroccans often see 
little or no future for themselves in their own country and turn 
towards Spain, Italy or other European countries for a chance at a 
brighter future. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Furthermore, many parents encourage their children to 
migrate with the hope of future remittances for the family remaining 
in Morocco. (Note: Morocco recently announced that remittances from 
Moroccans living abroad soared to USD 4.7 billion in the first eight 
months of 2007, a 15.5 percent increase over the same period last 
year.  End Note.) The average age of these lone child migrants is 
14-15 in Spain where the child is entitled to admittance into the 
education system until the age of 16.  In Italy however, the average 
age, once 14-15 as in Spain, is currently 12-13.  Moroccan minors 
often travel to Italy using first, overland routes or air travel, 
most often to Tunisia, and then onward by sea.  Italian policy 
states that if a child is registered in the Italian education system 
for three years he is entitled to official working papers when he 
turns 18.  The younger children may not immediately generate and 
income but Moroccans are willing to wait the few years until they 
the minor can be legally employed at age 16, a practice that has 
been in place until now. 
 
------------ 
The Way Home 
 
------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) While Morocco and Spain have a very clear accord on the 
return of adult illegal migrants within 24 hours of their 
apprehension; the situation for minors is very different.  According 
to Spanish law, minors can only be returned if the family is located 
and agrees to care for the child upon his return to Morocco or there 
is a safe place for the minor to reside.  However, if the minor is 
determined to be neglected, his stay in Spain may be indefinite. 
This determination is well known by most Moroccan families sending 
their minor children to Spain.  Families often offer evidence of 
neglect to the Spanish social services checking the situation, 
according to sources at the Spanish Embassy in Morocco, thus 
insuring the child's continued residence in Spain. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  This "designation of neglect" caveat has caused a myriad 
of problems for Spain and Italy as well.  According to Laure 
Lungarotti of the IOM's office in Rabat, repatriation of minors has 
become a sticky subject for many reasons.  She claims that some 
minors are returned from Europe in accordance with the law into safe 
situations.  Others, unfortunately, are simply shipped back with no 
family notification, no place to go, and no way to support 
themselves.  The majority of these young people, says Lungarotti, 
end up living on the streets of Tangier or making a second or third 
attempt at the dangerous crossing.  As yet, the number of minors 
being officially repatriated remains small.  However, with a new 
agreement between Morocco and Spain, and a recent accord signed with 
Italy regarding the facilitation of minor repatriation, the 
situation may soon be transformed leaving Morocco wondering what to 
do with all these unaccompanied minors. 
 
----------------------- 
Changes on the Horizon? 
----------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)   Morocco and the EU are now attempting to come to terms 
over the problem of what to do with unaccompanied minors seem to be 
coming to a resolution.  Working together, Morocco and Spain opened 
a "host center" in Tangier last year for youth being returned to 
Morocco with no clear family ties or with family who refused to 
accept their children's return.  A similar center in Marrakech is 
scheduled to open soon and there are discussions between the two 
governments for more centers around the country. According to 
Lungarotti, interestingly enough, the reaction to the centers has 
been mixed.  "Basically," she said, "Moroccans want the minors who 
are returned to have a safe place to go but they don't actually want 
them returned at all." 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
EU Strategy-Attack the Problem at the Source 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) In order to stem the flow of illegal migration into Europe 
from the south, the EU developed the EU Technical and Financial 
Program in Favor of Third World Countries in the Field of Migration 
and Asylum (AENEAS). As part of this program a number of agreements 
were announced between Morocco and EU member states.  One agreement 
with Spain will provide funding to create a "socio-cultural" space 
in Tangier.  The center will provide training and cultural programs 
geared towards keeping youth in the regions.  The goal of program is 
to help minors find employment through training.  In another similar 
agreement, the autonomous government of Catalonia signed a compact 
with Morocco for USD 1.3 million to "prevent illegal migration and 
promote social and professional integration."  Not to be left out, 
Italy is in the process of negotiating, through the IOM, a USD 5 
million deal to build a youth training and education center in Beni 
Milal, a source region for minors migrating to Italy.  In addition, 
they have several smaller projects aimed as keeping Moroccan minors 
at home already underway. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Lack of Opportunity Touches More than Just Minors 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
¶10.  (U) Comment: Dr. Mehdi Lahlou, professor of economics at 
Rabat's National Institute of Statistics and Economics, believes 
that as many as 3000-5000 professors, doctors and engineers migrate 
annually, causing significant brain drain for Morocco and potential 
long-term economic damage.  On the other hand, Minister Chekrouni 
has been quoted in the press as saying that "We don't have oil.  Our 
greatest resource, our most valuable export, is our human potential. 
 Europe needs our immigrants."  Morocco is in a dilemma.   The 
country struggles with professionals leaving for opportunities 
abroad, threatening economic growth and political stability. 
Simultaneously, the GOM is keenly aware that the country is reliant 
on the billions in remittances sent home each year from the more 
than three million Moroccans living abroad.  Morocco is walking a 
fine line. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  The question for the youth of Morocco is not nearly so 
complex.  The perceived lack of opportunity for the future is 
rampant.   We spoke to a young 17 year old man last year who had a 
brother in Italy and was extremely anxious to migrate himself. 
Implying there was no future here for him, he said that "if there 
was no border between Morocco and Spain, not even a dog would be 
left."   This sentiment is shared by many Moroccans.  In order to 
curb the ever growing phenomenon of minor migration the GOM needs to 
increase job creation programs, as well as education and job 
training for the young, giving them incentives to remain in Morocco 
and participate in the country's economic development from home. 
End Comment.