07DAMASCUS735
Syria/Iran, Syria/France, Syria/PLO, Lebanon, Asad's
Thu Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0735/01 2001051
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191051Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3892
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6968
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4659
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3312
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7792
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1887
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5212
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1423
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7532UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000735 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Iran, Syria/France, Syria/PLO, Lebanon, Asad's 
Speech, Bush/Mideast Peace, Iraq (7/19) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on July 19 reported that Iranian 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will pay a one-day visit to Syria 
today to meet with President Asad and other senior Syrian 
officials. 
 
Papers also reported VP Shar'a's meeting with Jean-Claude Cousseran, 
envoy of French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, on July 18. 
Talks focused on the results of the recent meeting of Lebanese 
parties in Saint Cloud in France.  In this respect, Al-Shar'a 
stressed Syria's support for every effort leading to an end to the 
tense situation in Lebanon through a formula acceptable to all 
Lebanese parties.  Shara and Cousseran reiterated the importance of 
developing and strengthening Syrian-French relations under the new 
administration of French President Nicholas Sarkozy.  Earlier, FM 
Mouallem met with Cousseran, who reviewed France's efforts to bring 
the Lebanese parties closer and the results of the conference in 
Saint Cloud.  FM Mouallem confirmed Syria's full support for 
whatever the Lebanese agree on and its readiness to make every 
possible effort to help reach agreement among the Lebanese parties 
to resolve their differences on the basis of respect for the 
Lebanese constitution and the coexistence formula and in a way that 
ensures security and stability in Lebanon. 
 
Papers also reported the visit to Damascus on July 18 of Farouk 
al-Qaddumi, Director of the Political Bureau at the Palestinian 
Liberation Organization, and his meetings with VP Shara and FM 
Mouallem, who expressed Syria's concern over recent events in 
Palestine and their repercussions on the future of the Palestinian 
cause, affirming that the current division only serves the enemies 
of the Palestinian people and calling on all Palestinian parties to 
resort to dialogue to end the current crisis.  Al-Qaddumi emphasized 
Syria's important role in attempting to resolve the differences 
between Palestinian parties and in encouraging them to use dialogue 
to overcome their differences. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran is to visit Damascus today" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/19) 
 
"VP Shara and FM Mouallem confer with Cousseran. Khouchner:  Syria 
contributed to the success of the Saint Cloud meeting" (Independent 
al-Watan, 8/19) 
 
"Syria to the French envoy:  We support every possible effort to end 
the Lebanese crisis.  Syria reiterates the importance of boosting 
Syrian-French relations  during the term of President Nicolas 
Sarkozy" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/19) 
 
"Vice-President Shara discusses developments in the Palestinian 
arena with al-Qaddoumi, head of the Political Department of the 
Palestinian Liberation Organization" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
7/19) 
 
"The Lebanese army isolates militiamen in Naher al-Bared.  Fateh 
Al-Islam fighters intensify missile firing against northern Lebanon. 
 Nationalist factions:  A national unity government is a prelude for 
resumption of national dialogue" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/19) 
 
"Lebanese opposition:  We will not allow the governing team to seize 
the presidency" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/19) 
 
"Abbas hints at early elections.  UNRWA:  The Quartet must exert 
pressure to open Gaza crossings" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/19) 
 
"News circulated of an Israeli intention to turn over authority in 
two cities in the West Bank to the Palestinian Authority.  Abbas 
prepared for early elections.  Hamas rejects" (Independent a-Watan, 
7/19) 
 
"Analysts:  Bush's call for an international conference on the 
Middle East is an attempt to flee his failure in Iraq" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/19) 
 
"The White House:  Bush has called for a meeting, not a conference, 
on the Middle East" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/19) 
 
"US occupation forces step up assault against Baquba. Killing and 
injury of seven US soldiers in Baghdad" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
7/19) 
 
"Muttaki:  Talks with Washington on Iraq will commence soon on 
ambassadorial level" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/19) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
"Culture of Optimism and Satisfaction" 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Abdul-Fattah Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/19):  "In his speech, President Asad offered us a new dose of 
optimism and satisfaction.... He promoted the culture of optimism as 
opposed to the culture of frustration that many are trying to 
promote.... 
 
"President Asad was realistic when he said that what was achieved in 
the past seven years was less than hoped for but more than 
expected.... The speech was characterized by transparency and 
frankness and showed that Asad is aware of everything happening in 
the country, including peoples' discussion of certain issues 
entailing objective criticism of some points.... 
 
"President Asad showed high confidence in the country, the people, 
and the future.... 
 
"Asad made no mention of Lebanon in his speech.... In foreign policy 
the non-mention of some issues is a message to more than one party." 
 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"'I Will Remain One of You'" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, said 
(7/19):  "Not only did President Asad accurately diagnose our 
situation with its elements and challenges, pains and joys, but he 
also sent a noble message on how to use responsibility and 
citizenship to serve the people and the general interest and to 
build and strengthen the State so that it will always be able to 
maintain its security and stability, and, more importantly, its 
sovereignty, at a time when the violation of sovereignty has become 
a trend in international relations and in some superpowers' 
behavior...." 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"Do Not Wager on Foolishness" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
Khalid al-Ashhab, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (7/19):  "In his latest press conference, President Bush 
repeated hackneyed expressions about the Palestinian state and the 
Arab peace initiative.  And because he is really not concerned with 
those attractive expressions, he showed huge contradiction when he 
talked, for example, about the need to build on the Arab initiative 
and then immediately attacked the proponents of the initiative.... 
 
"Whenever George Bush has talked about peace, there was a new war he 
waged or was preparing to wage.  And whenever he has talked about 
democracy, there was some mammoth chaos somewhere in the world. 
What he said the day before yesterday was not an exception.  Judging 
from our bitter experience in what he says and does, what he said 
the day before yesterday points to new, hidden bad intentions, the 
details of which we do not know, but we are used to them being 
 
bad.... 
 
"Do not wager on what Bush says... We must be alert to any US 
stupidity during the period that remains of Bush's term in 
office.... This period does not encourage optimism.... A US 
stupidity does not  require much time and effort by the Bush 
Administration, but needs much vigilance and effort to repulse and 
evade...." 
 
Corbin