07DAMASCUS847
Syria/Saudi Arabia, Syria/Iraq, Lebanon, Palestinian
Mon Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0847/01 2321025
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201025Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4062
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 7054
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4732
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3400
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7861
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1969
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5295
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1489
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7582UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Saudi Arabia, Syria/Iraq, Lebanon, Palestinian 
Territories, Cold War (8/17-19) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on August 19 featured a statement by an 
official source expressing regret over a Saudi official statement 
regarding statements attributed to VP Shara, which "were 
unrightfully changed," stressing at the same time Syria's insistence 
on not being dragged into disputes that do not serve anybody except 
enemies of the two countries and enemies of the Arab nation.  The 
source indicated that "allegations that the Vice President had used 
impolite words against the Saudi Kingdom, were groundless," 
reiterating that the Syrian leadership and Syrian people "are keen 
to maintain best relations with the leadership and brotherly people 
of the Saudi Kingdom, and to work together on mending the rift in 
inter Arab relations and to activate them to face the dangerous 
challenges targeting stability and security of the region."  The 
source added that "it was no secret in and outside the region, that 
Syria has always been working to achieve efficient Arab solidarity, 
and this is confirmed by the Arab League, and Syria's positions at 
the successive Arab summits, and commitment to the implementation of 
these summits' decisions, providing the conditions for their 
success."  The source went on to say that "it was also no secret 
that Syria has borne a heavy burden because of her Arab 
commitment,... articularly following  the occupation of Iraq, and 
its catastrophic repercussions on the unity and security of Iraq, 
and doubting its Arab identity, when Syria played a host to no less 
than 1.5 million displaced Iraqis without complaining, or receiving 
aid from anyone.  The statement added that "no one could ignore that 
Palestine is the central cause..." 
 
On Syrian-Iraqi relations, papers reported that Iraqi Prime Minister 
Nouri al-Maliki is scheduled to start an official three-day visit to 
Syria on Monday August 20 upon the invitation of PM Mohammad Naji 
Otri.  Al-Maliki, accompanied by an official and technical 
delegation, is due to hold talks with Syrian leaders, including 
President Asad, VP Shara and PM Otri, on means to develop bilateral 
cooperation in various fields.  Talks will also focus on the current 
security and political situation in Iraq, bilateral cooperation and 
the file of Iraqi refugees in Syria. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"An official Syrian source expresses regret over a statement by the 
Saudi Government:  No impolite words were uttered against the Saudi 
Kingdom... We are keen to maintain better relations with it... We 
work to achieve efficient Arab solidarity... Syria bears a heavy 
burden because of her pan-Arab commitment... The Palestinian cause 
is a central issue to Syria and to Arabs... Syrian efforts paved the 
way for the Mecca Accord" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
 
"Upon the invitation of Syrian Prime Minister Ottri, Iraqi Prime 
Minister al-Malki arrives in Damascus next Monday on an official 
visit" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
 
"A sit-in in front of the UN mission headquarters in Damascus in 
solidarity with prisoners of occupied Golan and Farhat and Shams" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
 
"A sit-in in Sidon holds the ruling team responsible for current 
crises in Lebanon.  Lebanese Nationalist factions:  US Ambassador 
Feltman and US Secretary of State Rice are blocking any efforts on 
Lebanese reconciliation.  Speaker of Lebanese Parliament Berri:  A 
national unity Government paves the way for presidential elections" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
 
"Violent clashes in Nahr al-Bared.  Nationalist factions:  We will 
not allow the governing team to lead Lebanon towards the unknown" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/19) 
 
"Amid Lebanese political conflict, the opposition adheres to 
reconciliation.  Lebanese Parliament Speaker Berri:  Election of a 
President without a two-thirds quorum is a piracy" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/18) 
 
 
 
"President Bush acknowledges his failure in Iraq.  New York Times: 
 
The White House is working to reschedule withdrawal of US troops 
from Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
 
"Iraqi political leaders meet to discus their political crisis. 
Occupation forces close 18 Iraqi publications 'to promote 
democracy'" (Independent al-Watan, 8/19) 
 
"The occupation forces wage retaliatory raids against Iraqis ... The 
killing of three US soldiers raises the death toll to 3705" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 8/18) 
 
"Israeli forces attack two refugee camps in Nablus.  Israel resumes 
assassination of Palestinian activists in the West Bank" 
(Independent al-Watan, 8/19) 
 
" Strategic Russian warplanes conduct sorties over the Atlantic and 
Pacific ocean.  NATO warplanes keep surveillance" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 8/19) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"The Secret World Government" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, wrote (8/18): 
"A dangerous book by Cherep Spiridovich, an officer in the Russian 
army, entitled "The Secret World Government," was published in the 
1920's about the tactics of world Zionism to control the world.... 
 
"Eight decades after the publication of the book, developments have 
proven that the author was right, with the only difference that the 
government controlling the world is no longer secret. 
 
"The US Administration, which is the official front for the 
neoconservative network, interferes in the affairs of other 
countries in a direct and exposed way, while the 'secret world 
government' is doing this secretly.... 
 
"It is no secret to anyone these days that neoconservatives are the 
new preachers for Zionism, as they believe in Biblical and Talmudic 
myths that have nothing to do with the essence of the Jewish faith." 
 
 
"Neoconservatives, who cannot be separated from the administration 
of President George Bush, are the ones who are drawing up policies, 
preparing plans, and making decisions 'secretly' before they turn 
into declared official policies implemented by their executive 
tools, such as President Bush and Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice, and even Vice President Dick Cheney, who is a member of the 
neoconservative network.... 
 
"With the collapse of the Soviet Union and the withdrawing European 
role, the secret world government no longer needed secrecy.  It 
found that the circumstances were in its favor so it publicly 
announced its hostility toward humanity and began to interfere 
openly in the big and small affairs of sovereign states, not 
hesitating to use the strike military force to demolish the existing 
structures here and there and redraw maps in line with the ideas in 
which this team believes. 
 
"The Bush administration launches wars and encourages terrorism 
while claiming to fight it.... This administration also takes the 
side of killers and terrorists and turns a blind eye to their 
military nuclear programs while it wants to deprive other countries 
of their right to possess nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.... 
 
"This administration is not ashamed to hint that the Pakistani 
president must give up his post, for example, or to reject the 
election of this person or that as president of Lebanon, or to adopt 
hostile positions toward international liberation movements and 
describe them as terrorists, or to torpedo the will of the 
Palestinian people, who elected their government through the ballot 
box.  This administration does not feel ashamed when it considers a 
 
government change by free and democratic means to be an encroachment 
upon the American national security, or when it calls big and 
influential countries to account if any of their officials meets 
with an official from a country that this administration antagonizes 
and works to isolate...." 
 
--------------------------------- 
"Who Is Instructed by the Other?" 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(8/17):  "Lebanese Army Commander General Michel Sulayman stated 
recently that Fatah-al-Islam is affiliated with Al-Qaeda, not with 
the Syrian intelligence, and that what Americans offered to the 
Lebanese Army were words and promises and little ammunition. 
 
"Sulayman's remarks about Fatah al-Islam refute the accusations that 
both Americans and the March 14 group in Lebanon leveled against 
Syria.... Where will the weapons that the American planes shipped to 
Lebanon go...? 
 
"Was the alleged support for the Lebanese Army a cover to transfer 
the weapons to other parties...? 
 
"Shipping weapons to Lebanon under the cover of supporting the 
Lebanese Army was a fact, and it was publicly announced by the Bush 
administration through Secretary of State Rice, who loves to combine 
diplomacy and saber-rattling.  If those weapons were not delivered 
to the party that was theoretically meant to receive them, were they 
shipped to be in the service of American creative chaos in Lebanon 
and the region...? 
 
"We wonder if General Sulayman will be spared the attacks and 
accusations of the March 14 team after speaking the truth about 
Fatah al-Islam and the American aid to the Lebanese Army." 
 
------------------------- 
 
"The Lying Cord Is Short" 
 
------------------------- 
 
Mundhir Khalil Id, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (8/17):  "Recent bombings in Mosul and other areas in Iraq, in 
which hundreds of Iraqis were killed, showed the falsehood of US 
President Bush's allegations and refuted the claims by his generals 
that the occupation forces have begun to make security progress in 
Iraq.... 
 
"Bush, who lost his mind after the recent resignation of his chief 
adviser, Karl Rove, turned all of Iraq into a mass grave for Iraqis 
as a result of the increasing mistakes of his administration, his 
intransigent refusal to withdraw American troops from that country, 
and his insistence on prevailing over terrorism that Iraq would not 
have experienced without the occupation of the country and the 
presence of the invading forces there...." 
 
Corbin