07DAKAR2332
Street Merchants Protest in Downtown Dakar
Thu Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO8760
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #2332 3331207
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291207Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9687
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 002332 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM SG
SUBJECT: Street Merchants Protest in Downtown Dakar 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: On November 21, protests by small-time street 
vendors frustrated by a decision from Senegalese President Abdoulaye 
Wade to remove their ubiquitous street stalls from the streets of 
Dakar bubbled over into violent demonstrations.  On Friday 23 
November Wade retreated saying that the vendors would be allowed to 
return to their stalls until the New Near.  End Summary 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to eye-witness accounts and police reports, a 
wave of spontaneous protests broke out in the downtown district of 
Colobane and its surrounding side streets and districts.  The 
protesters, described mostly as young men, were protesting the 
(at-times violent) dismantling of their street stalls by the police 
at a time when the rising cost of living has made life very 
difficult for the average Senegalese.  The protestors had planned to 
march to the Ministry of Interior (right next to the Embassy) but 
were thwarted by riot police, which led to a cat-and-mouse game 
between the protesters and the police.  The protesters moved from 
district to district burning tires, tearing down street signs and 
throwing rocks at the police who were chasing them.  Two government 
buildings including the town hall of the highly populated Medina 
district and the local headquarters of the state-owned electricity 
company, Senelec, were damaged by arson.  The protesters were also 
planning to burn down the headquarters of the government-owned media 
company, RTS, but were blocked by Gendarmes who fired bullets in the 
air. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Poloff went to the affected areas during the first day of 
demonstrations and observed that no shops were damaged or looted, 
although the next day Polcouns noted that a snack bar restaurant in 
the Mermoz district was damaged by arson.  However, the level of 
force used by the police was clear as small stalls were smashed to 
pieces.  Businesses came to a standstill as shops closed; there were 
very few cars on the streets.  In reply to a question about what 
happened, a group of young men seemed supportive of the protesters 
and this, in fact, seemed to be the general mood in the street. 
There was no sense of fear and, while the streets themselves were 
empty, the pavements were full of people eagerly watching or waiting 
for action. 
 
Wade Steps Back 
--------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Faced with his first major protest since he became 
President in 2000, Wade on Friday 23 November stepped back from his 
decree and stated that street vendors would be allowed to return to 
their activities, at least until the New Year.  On Monday, he 
followed this up by sending Minister for Women and Women's 
Enterprises Awa Ndiaye, to the main arteries of Dakar with a message 
to female street vendors who had their stalls destroyed that they 
would be compensated for their losses. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) These protests are not a surprise.  People are angry at the 
rising cost of living, and Wade's decision to displace street 
sellers without offering them an alternative site affects the 
pockets of people who already have very little.  Meanwhile, the 
protests are not limited to street vendors, as students from a small 
university in Dakar took to the streets on Wednesday 28, November to 
protest unfulfilled promises that the government would introduce a 
Masters program at their college.  Worse for Wade, is the fact that 
the protestors are the very people that have perennially supported 
him as he has long been seen as the champion of the poor.  If he is 
unable to find a means of mollifying the restive public mood, it is 
unlikely that these demonstrations and disturbances will be the 
last.  The disconnect between the state and the people is further 
evidenced by a statement made by the Minister of Finance, Abdoulaye 
Diop, during a discussion on the budget when he said that he is in 
the process of thinking about how Senegal can purchase a new 
presidential plane, a plane which he calls a matter of sovereignty 
and pride for the country.  He went on to point out countries that 
are poorer than Senegal have a presidential plane, overlooking the 
fact that often it is these very same states that end up suffering 
from civil unrest as a result of popular resentment of the political 
elite.  These events appear to be the latest manifestation of the 
leadership's seeming estrangement from the prevailing public mood. 
End comment. 
SMITH