07DAMASCUS553
Syria/Italy, Lebanon, Iraq, Israel/Palestinians (6/6)
Wed Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0553/01 1571248
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061248Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3629
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6853
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4568
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3208
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7710
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1794
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5126
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1330
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7453UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000553 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:   Syria/Italy, Lebanon, Iraq, Israel/Palestinians (6/6) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on June 6 reported President Asad's 
meeting on June 5 with Italian Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign 
Minister Massimo Dalima focusing on bilateral relations and the 
latest developments in Iraq, the occupied Palestinian territories 
and Lebanon.  Both sides stressed the necessity of cooperation to 
find a solution to the Middle East crisis.  They also conferred on 
the possibility of building mutual work mechanisms to find solutions 
for the current crises on the regional level.  The two sides 
underlined the significance of combating the terrorism that is 
spreading in the region.  Dalima affirmed the necessity of making 
Syria part of the efforts to achieve peace and stability in the 
region, stressing the importance of Syria's role on this issue. 
 
In a joint press conference with FM Mouallem on    June 5, Dalima 
described his talks with President Asad as "very important," 
stressing that "this visit is a turning point for consolidated ties 
between Syria and Italy to face challenges in the region." 
 
"My country supports establishing a partnership Association between 
Syria and the European Union and working to remove obstacles which 
hinder realization of this Association," Dalima added. 
 
The Italian Minister stressed the important and effective role of 
Syria in solving problems in the region, saying, "We are convinced 
it is not possible to solve issues in the Palestinian, Lebanese and 
Iraqi arenas without Syria's participation." 
 
He noted that Italy attaches great importance to the Arab peace 
initiative, which "opens horizons for a comprehensive solution to 
issues caused by the 1967 war", and that "the restoration of 
occupied Golan is an essential point to achieve peace in the 
region." 
 
Dalima expressed his country's readiness to help Lebanon avoid 
terrorism and all that might destabilize Lebanon, and to encourage 
dialogue among the Lebanese to find a way out of the current crisis. 
 
 
"I'm optimistic about the possibility of cooperation between Syria 
and Italy to find a solution to the problems occurring in Lebanon, 
and help Lebanon avoid terrorism, which harms its security and 
stability," Dalima said. 
 
On the latest events in Lebanon and repercussions on the Italian 
troops deployed within UNIFEL in South Lebanon, Dalima said, "We 
have warned against the danger of infiltrating terrorist militants 
into the Palestinian camps." 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad reviews bilateral relations and means of achieving 
peace in the region and combating terrorism with Massimo Dalima, 
Italian Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister.  Dalima:  We are 
convinced that there will be no solution in the region without 
Syria.  Foreign Minister Mouallem:  He who accuses Syria of being 
involved with Fatah al-Islam is concealing the real identity of 
those behind this group"  (Government-owned Tishreen, 6/6) 
 
"Israel studies the possibility of resuming peace talks with Syria" 
(Independent al-Watan, 6/6) 
 
"Clashes continue in Nahr al-Bared.  Lebanese circles: The governing 
team is responsible for all that is happening" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 6/6) 
 
"Confessions by detained Fatah al-Islam fighters expose the 
governing team's involvement with this group.  The Lebanese army 
tightens siege on Fatah al-Islam fighters.  Nationalist Lebanese 
figures warn against a conspiracy to export terrorism to Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 6/6) 
 
"President Lahoud:  I will use my constitutional authority to 
prevent Lebanon's drowning.  They can kill me, but they cannot force 
me to kneel" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/6) 
"On the 40th anniversary of June 6 War, Abbas warns against a 
Palestinian civil war.  82 Palestinians killed because of the 
security lapse in the Palestinian territories" (Independent 
al-Watan, 6/6) 
 
"The Baghdad security plan faces some obstacles.  73  of Americans 
believe that they are on the wrong path in Iraq" (Independent, 
al-Watan, 6/6) 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"To the Advocates of Justice" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(6/6):  "Terrorism against the Palestinian people is an official 
Israeli policy.... Those who claim to be fighting terrorism must 
stop turning a blind eye to Israeli terrorist acts against 
Palestinians.... 
 
"So far the international community has failed to hold Israel 
accountable for its crimes against humanity, as represented by the 
occupation of Palestinian territories and the killing of innocent 
people and the destruction of their homes.... 
 
"The criminal Israeli occupation has always been covered up by the 
United States and Europe without any convincing reason, with neither 
of them calling on Israel to end this explosive situation and 
violation of UN resolutions and international law...." 
 
---------------------- 
 
"To Avoid Being Alone" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, an editorialist in government-owned      Al-Thawrah, 
wrote (6/6):  "With the increasing number of fatalities among US 
soldiers in Iraq and the talk about an imminent British withdrawal 
from that country, the crisis of the US Administration in Iraq is 
becoming more obvious than ever.... 
 
"While US officials continue their obstinacy about the obvious 
collapse of their plans in Iraq, we read some American statements 
saying that victory in Iraq is becoming more and more difficult.... 
President Bush, who is seeing all those who pushed him to war 
against Iraq, on the basis of lies and deception, fall one after the 
other, might think of new arrangements to evade the moment of 
confrontation with the truth when he finds himself alone in Iraq and 
in the White House itself" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
"Lebanon, between Nahr al-Bared and Ein al-Hilweh, Whereto?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
Khurshid Dalli, an editorialist in independent Al-Watan, wrote 
(6/6):  "No observer can separate the events in Nahr al-Bared from 
what Lebanon has been witnessing since the al-Hariri 
assassination....  The situation is becoming more serious in 
Lebanon, with the clashes spreading to a second Palestinian camp and 
the political crisis remaining without solution.... 
 
"Facts on the ground indicate that Lebanon is heading toward 
internationalization and a repetition of the Iraqi experience.... 
What is the secret behind the urgent American military supplies to 
Lebanon...?  Who allowed the fundamentalist groups to grow in that 
country...?  The accusations that the governing team is leveling 
against Syria strengthen the belief that what is happening is part 
of a political plan to achieve already set objectives...." 
 
------------------------------ 
"Cindy Sheehan and Our Causes" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
Dr. Buthaina Sha'ban, Minister of Expatriate Affairs, wrote in 
government-owned Tishreen(6/6):  "Cindy Sheehan's resignation from 
the Democratic Party was disappointing, because the American antiwar 
activist was a beacon for all defenders of freedom and justice in 
the world.... 
 
"But when I read her eloquent and expressive resignation letter, I 
realized the magnitude of the problem she faced.... 
 
"Sheehan lost the support of Democrats after she resigned from the 
party and made it clear that her opposition to the war was based on 
ethical not partisan considerations.... No one in the United States 
is allowed to change the criteria of the American system, as this 
change would mean a change in the position toward the Arab region 
and perhaps a completely different American policy, something that 
neither of the two American parties is willing to do.... 
 
"Republican and Democratic presidential candidates make statements 
in which they express full support for Israel and cast Arabs and 
Muslims in a negative light.... Sheehan did a noble job and it is 
her right to rest if she wants, but it is not our right to let what 
she struggled for collapse and die.  She has reached a very 
important and sensitive point for herself and for us, and all 
honorable people in the world must support one another and continue 
the march, for the alternative is inhuman, unethical, and has no 
future among nations that aspire to freedom, independence, and 
dignity." 
 
Corbin