07DAMASCUS266
Syria/Italy, Solana's Visit, Syria/Egypt, Arab Summit,
Wed Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0266/01 0731221
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141221Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3153
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6646
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4405
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3021
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7566
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1627
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4966
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1176
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7304UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000266 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Italy, Solana's Visit, Syria/Egypt, Arab Summit, 
Palestinian Territories, Lebanon, Iraq, Iran (3/14) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Papers on Mar. 14 reported that President Asad 
received a telephone call on Mar. 13  from Italian Prime Minister 
Romano Prodi.  They discussed the visit of the European Union's High 
Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana 
to Damascus and the recent conference held in Baghdad.  They agreed 
to continue consultations between Syria and Italy. 
 
On Syrian-Egyptian relations, papers reported President Asad's 
message to President Mubarak conveyed by Vice President Shara on 
Mar. 13, regarding the situation in the region and coordination 
between the two countries prior to the forthcoming Arab Summit.  In 
a statement to reporters following the meeting, Shara expressed 
great satisfaction with the outcome of the meeting, saying that 
Syria is doing its best to restore Arab solidarity because "the next 
stage is very dangerous and we should be ready to face challenges." 
Regarding reports on the possibility of modifying the 2002 Arab 
peace initiative, Mr. Shara said "the Arab initiative is all of one 
piece and can't be modified.... The demands for modifications come 
from the Israeli side because the Arab peace initiative is not 
admired by Israel, particularly on the issues of refugees and 
borders."  Asked about the recent conference in Baghdad and whether 
it restored warmth to Syrian-US relations, the Vice President said 
that "warmth in relations needs a deep and long dialogue in a way 
that removes mutual suspicions."  Answering a question on the 
possibility of a swap between Damascus and Washington on regional 
issues following the Baghdad Conference, Mr. Shara underlined that 
"Syria won't swap; dialogue is always give and take." 
 
Independent al-Watan featured an article published in the Guardian 
on March 13 by Syrian ??Ambassador to London Sami Khiyami, saying 
that US policies in Iraq are "fuelling the disintegration" of the 
country.  Khiyami encouraged the US to foster, instead, a "climate 
of understanding" between Arab states and western countries.  In his 
article, Khiyami accused the US of implementing a policy "to 
encourage sectarianism, ethnic divides, regional xenophobia, and the 
eventual Balkanization of the Middle East."  He went on to say, 
however, that the one-day Baghdad conference "could be a prelude to 
more fruitful negotiations."  "The US must help create a climate of 
understanding between the west and Arabs.  "A stable, secular and 
prosperous Middle East is the best way to undermine terrorism," the 
Syrian ambassador wrote. Khiyami called on what he said were the 
"nations ruling the world" to be "wiser, fairer and more determined 
than in the past to find a solution both to the Iraqi conflict and 
the Arab-Israeli conflict." 
 
All papers featured a statement by Chairman of Hamas Politburo 
Khalid Mashaal, in a press conference held in Sana'a on Mar. 12, 
that the formation of the Palestinian national unity government will 
be announced this week, calling on the Arab and Islamic worlds to 
exert efforts to lift the siege on Palestinians.  Mashaal hailed the 
Mecca Accord between Hamas and Fateh and held the Israeli government 
responsible for hindering the process of swapping the Israeli 
prisoner for Palestinian prisoners. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad receives a telephone call from Italian Prime 
Minister Romano Prodi on the visit of the EU High Representative for 
Common Foreign and Security Policy, Javier Solana, to Damascus and 
on the Baghdad Conference" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 3/14) 
 
"A message from President Asad to President Mubarak conveyed by VP 
Shara.  Shara:  Our working paper at the summit aims at reforming 
the Arab situation....  The Arab peace initiative is indivisible.... 
We reject politicization of the International Tribunal" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 3/14) 
 
"Mashaal:  The Mecca Accord has confused Israel. Israeli endeavors 
to provoke Europe" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 3/14) 
 
"Al-Maliki is in al-Anbar for the first time, supporting tribes and 
pledging to fight al-Qaeda" (Independent Al-Watan, 3/14) 
 
"Having no proof of arms smuggling through the Syrian-Lebanese 
 
border, Paris calls on Damascus to make use of the chance of 
dialogue with Europe" (Independent al-Watan, 3/14) 
 
"Iran is ready to offer guarantees if its file is withdrawn from the 
Security Council.  The permanent UNSC member states propose a new 
draft resolution to tighten sanctions against Iran" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 3/14) 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------- 
 
"Deception Again" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(3/14):  "It is not the first time that Israel has claimed interest 
in peace in the form of ambiguous statements coupled with 
international suggestions, to absorb the anger of peoples of the 
region on terrorist Israeli practices and biased US policy towards 
Israeli aggression. 
 
"The most recent Israeli claim is that Tel Aviv is discussing with 
Washington the Arab peace initiative proposed in Beirut in 2002, 
saying that Israel believes that modification of this initiative 
will change the political atmosphere prior to the Riyadh summit. 
Such modification, according to Israeli FM Livni, means reversing 
the Arab peace initiative by giving precedence to normalization 
prior to making peace.  This means placing the cart before the 
horse.... 
 
"Israel rejected the Arab peace initiative immediately upon its 
announcement.  Later it rejected the Roadmap. It rejects any 
Palestinian right to sovereignty and does not respect international 
resolutions.  Any Israeli talk about positive aspects in the Arab 
peace initiative is merely hidden deception to abort the best Arab 
proposal to serve peace and end tension in the region.... AL SecGen 
Amr Mousa said that the Arab peace initiative in unchangeable.  It 
is supposed to be a unified Arab strategic position so as not to 
dissipate more Arab rights." 
 
------------------ 
 
"Prize of Courage" 
 
------------------ 
 
An unsigned editorial in government-owned Al-Thawra, said (3/14): 
"It is not enough that Israel rejects dialogue, but it also wants 
others not to embark on such dialogue.  Israeli FM Livni objected to 
Solana's visit to Syria, considering it a prize that Syria gets 
without changing its policy.... 
 
"Actually, Syria did not change its policies, simply because it has 
been proven that those policies are correct and do not need any 
change.  Others must make the demanded changes because they are 
wrong.... 
 
"It has become crystal clear that Syria couldn't be isolated.  The 
reward which Syria has won is a recognition of its role, but it 
doesn't feel satisfied with that.... 
 
"Syria wants the return of the Golan Heights and an end to Israeli 
occupation of occupied Arab territories....  Syria is fully 
confident that the real rewards are coming...." 
 
------------------- 
 
"The Decisive Step" 
 
------------------- 
 
Ghazi al-Dada, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(3/14):  "If the Baghdad conference was a step in the right 
direction, the decisive step is the removal of the occupation 
 
through the withdrawal of all foreign forces on a specific 
timetable.... 
 
"As the conferees in Baghdad were discussing ways and possibilities 
for a solution, the answer came from President Bush in his 
announcement that 4,400 additional American troops will be sent to 
Iraq....  This shows entrenchment of the military option unaffected 
by any political choices.... 
 
"The United States is fueling the sectarian violence in Iraq because 
it wants to keep the justifications for its stay in Iraq until it 
accomplishes the mission of rearranging the country in a way that 
serves its own interests, which necessarily converge with Israel's 
interests...." 
 
Corbin