07DAMASCUS496
Asad/Referendum, Syria/UNDOF, Lebanon, Iraq, Palestinian
Thu May 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0496/01 1441141
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241141Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3534
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6823
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4544
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3179
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7688
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1768
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5100
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1307
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7431UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Asad/Referendum, Syria/UNDOF, Lebanon, Iraq, Palestinian 
Territories, Human Rights Report (5/24) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on May 24 reported VP Shara's lecture at 
Damascus University on May 23 in anticipation of the May 27 
referendum on a new term for President Asad.  Vice President Shara 
renewed Syria's rejection of the war in Iraq, stressing support for 
the political process in the country based on genuine national 
reconciliation and a timetable for withdrawal of foreign troops.  He 
said that the appearance of extremist groups in Lebanon is the 
outcome of the "weakness of the state" and that the only solution is 
"a political solution to the current political crisis."  He wondered 
how trials can be conducted for crimes committed in Iraq while the 
UNSC is used to set up a tribunal for a single crime.  He accused 
Lebanese factions of "seeking foreign security, which becomes 
Syria's problem, because the situation in Lebanon reflects on the 
neighborhood."  On the possibility of a war in the Gulf between Iran 
and the US, he said, "the US does not want to protect the Gulf 
countries;  it wants to protect its own interests, and the proof is 
that it is about to engage Tehran in negotiations as it did with 
Syria."  He stressed that the "military presence in the region is 
not for the sake of Arab security, but for American oil interests." 
 
The Minister of Defense, General Hassan Turkmani, discussed on May 
23 with the Commander of the United Nations Disengagement Observer 
Force (UNDOF), General Wolfgang Jilke, the latest developments in 
the region.  The two also conferred about UNDOF and cooperation 
between Syria and the United Nations. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶3.   Selected Headlines: 
 
"Vice President Farouk Shara meets faculty and students of Damascus 
University.  Shara:  People in Syria have now become more satisfied 
and confident about the future under President Asad's leadership. 
Washington misleads and blocks the peace process and hinders UN 
Security Council" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/24) 
 
"Defense Minister Turkmani discusses regional developments and UNDOF 
cooperation with Syria, with Wolfgang Jilke, Commander of the United 
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 5/24) 
 
"A third explosion in A'leh.  Washington rushes to support the 
governing team.  The Lebanese army prepares to enter the Nahr 
el-Bared refugee camp.  Thousands of refugees evacuate the camp, 
taking advantage of the fragile ceasefire.  Paris:  We are not in 
agreement with Lebanese who level accusations against Syria" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/24) 
 
"Former Lebanese PM al-Hoss criticizes accusation against Syria" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/24) 
 
"Amnesty International issues its human rights report:  Bush has 
exploited fear of terrorism to violate human rights" 
(Government-owned A-Thawra, 5/24) 
 
"Palestinian PM Hanieh and President Abbas discuss cool-down in 
Gaza.  Israeli assaults kill seven Palestinian children" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/24) 
 
"Washington flees its failure in Iraq by expanding the UN role" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/24) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------------- 
 
"A Strong Syria Is our Choice" 
 
---------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, wrote (5/24): 
"Amid a troubled Middle East and growing world tension due to the 
policies of the US Administration, Syria stands out as a model of 
security, stability, coexistence, and tolerance among all groups of 
the Syrian people.... 
 
"When Syrians stage marches of love and loyalty in every village, 
town, and city, they express this positive Syrian situation and 
announce their support for a political approach and a leader who 
understands the requirements of his people, who knows the dimensions 
of regional and international events, and who defends justice, 
dignity, sovereignty, and independence.... 
 
"The referendum in a few days will be an opportunity for Syrians to 
announce that their choice is a strong and proud Syria.  It is a 
referendum to preserve the climate of tolerance and brotherhood in a 
disturbed world.  It is a referendum for work and building so that 
we can enter the future through its widest door and maintain a free, 
strong, and healthy homeland in which the coming generations will 
take pride...." 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
"For These Reasons Syria's Position 
Is New and Distinguished" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Dr. Mahdi Dakhlallah, former Information Minister, commented in 
government-owned Tishreen (5/24):  "Syria's steadfastness in the 
face of pressures and challenges in the past seven years has 
bordered on the miraculous.... Syria confronted sole-superpower 
hegemony without reliance on or support from anyone.... It adopted a 
defiant position although American and British forces were on its 
eastern border.... 
 
"For the first time, almost the entire world, including Arab 
countries and establishments, participated in the siege on Syria in 
implementation of the Syria Accountability Act and in support of US 
policies in the region.... But despite all this, and despite the 
pressing Lebanese situation and retreat in Arab solidarity, Syria 
stood fast and escalated its steadfastness to defiance.  What 
consolidated this steadfastness, perhaps, was the fact that Syria 
does not beg for wheat and bread from anyone, does not ask aid and 
loans from anyone, and is not burdened by a heavy foreign debt.... 
 
"A difficult stage has passed, from which the brave Syrian people 
have emerged with head held high.  These people now enter a new 
stage whose concerns will not be smaller, but their experience has 
become more mature." 
 
------------------- 
 
"Creative Sedition" 
 
------------------- 
 
Hanan Hamad, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote (5/24): 
 "What is happening in Iraq cannot be separated from what is 
happening in Gaza and recently in Lebanon....  These events are part 
of attempts to create domestic sedition in light of the 
disappointing results of the American plan and the Israeli 
aggression on Lebanon.... 
 
"The Lebanese stage is being prepared to accomplish what the July 
aggression failed to accomplish.... 
 
"Dick Cheney's recent tour of a number of countries in the region, 
David Welch's visit to Lebanon, Terje Roed-Larsen's reappearance, 
and Javier Solana's brief visit to Lebanon are only details in the 
game-conspiracy that is being concocted, and which does not exclude 
anyone, contrary to what some parties imagine, especially the 
parties that found it easy to give up their countries' sovereignty 
and sink in the game up to their ears.  These parties are now paving 
the way for the internationalization conspiracy, which began with 
the International Tribunal and which continues through voices 
demanding the deployment of forces on the border between brothers 
and kinfolk.... 
 
"Suspicious voices continue to level accusations against Syria, 
which offered what it offered for Lebanon's stability and unity.... 
The conspiracy is big, and the danger threatens everyone.  Will 
 
plotters return to reason and logic?" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
"What Logic Are They Talking About?" 
 
------------------------------------ 
Omar Jaftali, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/24):  "Although Israel is launching a genocidal war against 
Palestinians using F-16 planes and tanks in response to primitive 
Palestinian fire, some forces in the international community adopt 
the Israeli argument that Israel is acting in self-defense against 
terrorists who do not want peace.... 
 
"The Israeli aggression targets houses of peaceful people and 
indiscriminately kills children, women, and old people.... 
 
"The Olmert government officially announced that it does not rule 
out targeting Prime Minister Hanieh and other leaders, and a few 
months ago Israel detained members of the Palestinian Legislative 
Council.  Who, after all, is the terrorist?" 
 
Corbin