07DAMASCUS491
Events in Northern Lebanon, Mouallem/Ki-Moon,
Wed May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0491/01 1431155
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231155Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3519
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6820
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4541
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3169
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7685
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1765
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5097
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1304
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7428UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Events in Northern Lebanon, Mouallem/Ki-Moon, 
Mouallem/Mashaal, Jumblatt, Attar, Asad/Referendum, Palestinian 
Territories, Iraq (5/23) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on May 23 reported that 
FM Mouallem received a phone call on May 22 from UN SecGen Ki-Moon 
about events in the Nahr al-Bared Palestinian refugee camp in north 
Lebanon.  Mouallem expressed regret over the events, saying, "the 
leaders of Fatah al-Islam are wanted by the Syrian security 
apparatus," and adding, "their activities won't serve the 
Palestinian cause."  Mouallem expressed Syria's deep concern about 
the deteriorating human conditions in the camp.  The UN Chief hailed 
Syria's efforts and contacts to end the deteriorating situation in 
the camp. 
 
Papers also reported FM Mouallem's meeting on May 22 with Khaled 
Mashaal, Chairman of the Hamas Political Bureau, about the latest 
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly 
the Israeli aggression against Gaza, and the recent developments in 
northern Lebanon.  Mouallem reiterated the importance of maintaining 
Palestinian unity in light of the Mecca Accord, and the need to 
implement a ceasefire between Fateh and Hamas in order to confront 
the continuing Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people in 
Gaza, calling on the international community to press Israel to stop 
the aggression and lift the siege on Palestinians. 
 
Papers also reported that Syrian Vice President Najah Attar arrived 
in Moscow May 22 to participate in the international conference on 
civilizations dialogue to be held in St. Petersburg. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Foreign Minister Mouallem receives a telephone call from UN 
Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon on the latest developments in the Nahr 
 
SIPDIS 
al-Bared Palestinian refugee camp in northern Lebanon.  Mouallem 
holds talks with Khaled Mashaal, Chairman of Hamas Political Bureau: 
 Leaders of Fateh al-Islam are wanted by the Syrian security 
apparatus.... their activities do not serve the Palestinian cause" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/23) 
 
"Cautious calm prevails in Naher el-Bared refugee camp.  Thousands 
of Palestinians flee the camp.  Tension dominates the other 
Palestinian camps.  A UN humanitarian aid convoy enters the camp. 
Lahoud warns against weakening the army by internationalizing 
security in Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/23) 
 
"Lebanese powers reiterate the importance of a national unity 
government and call for a committee to investigate the bloody events 
in northern Lebanon:  Exhausting the army is a rancorous conspiracy 
to hit stability in Lebanon.... The campaign to settle Palestinian 
refugees has already started by internationalizing the status of 
refugee camps" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/23) 
 
"Clashes continue in the neighborhood of Naher el-Bared refugee 
camp.  Al-Saniora requests military aid from the US" (Independent 
al-Watan, 5/23) 
 
"In a press conference in Beirut Jumblatt retracts his testimony to 
the International Investigation Committee on the al-Hariri 
assassination, confessing that he provided fake witnesses to 
incriminate Syria" (Independent al-Watan, 5/23) 
 
"China calls for caution in establishing International Tribunal on 
the al-Hariri assassination" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/23) 
 
"Israel continues assaults in Gaza, reinstating its threats to 
assassinate leaders of Palestinian factions" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 5/23) 
 
"Palestinian diplomatic moves to stop Israeli military aggression 
against Gaza.  Israel uses internationally prohibited weapons" 
(Independent al-Watan, 5/23) 
 
"Killing of a British soldier in Basra.  Scores of Iraqis killed in 
car-bomb explosions in Baghdad" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/23) 
 
"Vice President Dr. Najah al-Attar in Moscow to participate in 
 
 
dialogue of civilizations conference" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
5/23) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------- 
"Lebanese Black Comedy" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Ibrahim Darraji, an editorialist in independent     al-Watan, 
commented (5/23):  "What is happening in Lebanon since the 
assassination of late PM Hariri? Whose interests do the continuing 
violence and tension in Lebanon serve? 
 
"We have to contemplate this issue objectively and without the 
over-simplification and deception used by some politicians of the 
February 14 team in Lebanon, who have grown accustomed to accusing 
Syria on every occasion without resorting to reason and logic.  We 
notice that since the al-Hariri assassination it has become a rule 
for the governing team in Lebanon that whenever they want to settle 
a controversial issue, a security outbreak or a political 
assassination takes place for which Syria is blamed, in order to 
settle the issue in an atmosphere of tension.... 
 
"And now with the dispatch of al-Saniora's memorandum to the UNSC to 
endorse the International Tribunal under Chapter 7, regardless of 
the positions of the majority of Lebanese political powers and their 
legislative reservations, it is natural to see a new security 
outbreak to cover up the governing team's position;  and that is 
what has happened from Tripoli to Beirut.... 
 
"Therefore, we must understand the scenario of endorsing the 
International Tribunal under Chapter 7 within this context.... 
 
"What is happening in Lebanon is a political farce with comedians 
and lots of extras.  But unfortunately it is a gloomy and black 
farce that makes us worry a great deal about Lebanon and pray for 
it." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
"Blair, His Successor and Iraq" 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
Turki Saqr, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/23):  "With Tony Blair's departure from power next month, the 
gang of the Iraq invasion will have collapsed from around Bush and 
the Iraq curse will have hit all the hotheads who supported and 
backed Bush's decision to occupy and destroy Iraq and commit the 
greatest crime of the age.... 
 
"What worries Bush is that Blair's successor in Downing Street, 
unlike Blair, is not ready to dispatch British forces to Iraq on 
orders from the White House to support Bush's preemptive wars.... 
 
"The British Prime Minister offered himself as an accomplice to Bush 
in this crime, which continues to shake the world and to torpedo the 
security of the Middle East every day...." 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Day of Allegiance" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/23):  "The popular rallies and festivities that are being held 
throughout Syria to express support for President Asad and joy over 
his nomination for a new term in office show the national unity that 
Syria is experiencing and reflect Syrians' commitment to offer 
everything needed to help strengthen the homeland's pride, 
consolidate its steadfastness, and uphold its national and pan-Arab 
 
 
principles.... 
 
"President Asad has emerged as a national and Arab leader who knows 
how to deal with challenges wisely and in a civilized conduct.... 
 
"On the day of the referendum, Syrians will express loyalty to their 
president, commitment to his policy, and pride in the dignified 
positions that he has adopted in all domains...." 
 
Corbin