07DAMASCUS730
Asad, Cousseran, Lebanon, Bush/ME Peace, Iraq, Palestinian
Thu Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0730/01 2001040
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191040Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3883
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6960
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4653
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3304
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7786
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1881
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5206
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1417
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7526UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000730 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Asad, Cousseran, Lebanon, Bush/ME Peace, Iraq, Palestinian 
Territories (7/18) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  President Asad's oath-taking ceremony and speech at 
the People's Assembly on July 17 was the main topic in Syrian papers 
on July 18.  Banner headlines were dedicated to the speech, which 
was carried in its entirety.  President Asad said that "Syria has 
emerged stronger a 
fter facing challenges" and that "these challenges 
have sharpened Syria's potentials."  He confirmed that what protects 
Syria and preserves its stability are not its resources or material 
potentials but all aspects of its rich moral heritage, particularly 
the pan-Arab aspect and its correct political positions. 
 
Asad expressed hope that the Palestinian brothers will agree on a 
national project in the face of the Israeli occupation, stressing 
Syria's readiness to perform her duties and exert every effort 
possible with the brothers in order to reach that end.  President 
Asad added that "what Iraq is witnessing of national and human 
tragedies in light of the occupation troops' incapability to ensure 
the minimum limit of security, must be a good lesson to all those 
who ignore the realities of the region, and think that stability can 
be attained by foreign troops."  Asad stressed that the solution 
lies in the achievement of national reconciliation through dialogue 
with the participation of all Iraqis, and on the basis of a 
timetable for withdrawing occupation troops.  President Asad 
stressed Syria's solidarity with the Iraqi people, extending every 
possible help to them. 
 
Papers also reported that French envoy on Lebanon Jean-Claude 
Cousseran arrived in Damascus on July 17 and is expected to meet 
with President Asad on July 18, and will meet with VP Shara and FM 
Mouallem regarding French efforts to find a solution to the Lebanese 
crisis before deciding whether to travel directly to Cairo, where he 
is supposed to hold coordination meetings with Amr Mousa and 
Egyptian officials, or to Beirut. 
 
On Middle East peace, independent al-Watan reported that the 
International Quartet will convene in Lisbon on July 19 to define 
Tony Blair's mission, and also cited Egypt's demand to make the Arab 
Peace Initiative a basis for the international conference on Middle 
East peace proposed by President Bush. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"A speech of optimism and confidence:  I will be one of you, working 
for your interests, breathing with the blessing of God and the 
satisfaction of the people. Our steadfast Golan is in my heart and I 
am sure of its return to the motherland Syria.  Our priority is for 
the living conditions of Syrian citizens. Commitment to the 
resistance is a guarantee for the future of the nation and its 
pride.  Negotiations with Israel require guarantees on the 
restoration of the entire Golan.  National belonging that unites and 
does not divide is the motto of our policy.  Challenges have made us 
stronger and sharpened our potentials.  I call on you to be 
optimistic.... Invaders will perish.  We will maintain our heritage 
and identity.  2007 is a decisive year, and the remaining months 
will decide the future of the region and the whole world" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/18) 
 
"Cousseran arrives in Damascus" (Independent al-Watan, 7/18) 
 
"France succeeds to some extent in restoring its political 
importance in the region.  Damascus a sensitive phase in the 
Arab-international move to solve the Lebanese crisis" (Independent 
al-Watan, 7/18) 
 
"Split among Palestinians over Bush's new proposal on peace.  Ten 
Palestinians injured in clashes with Egyptian security forces in 
Sinai" (Independent al-Watan, 7/18) 
 
"Arabs call for making the Arab Peace Initiative a basis for the 
peace conference proposed by President Bush" (Independent al-Watan, 
7/18) 
 
"France supports an international conference on final status in 
Palestinian territories" (Independent al-Watan, 7/18) 
 
"Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema warns of the negative 
consequences of Western policy on Hamas" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 7/18) 
 
"Ban Ki-Moon proposes facilitation of peace talks between Israel and 
Syria" (Independent al-Watan, 7/18) 
 
"Rice:  We are ready for direct negotiations with Iran over Iraq" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/18) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------- 
 
"Al-Asad Takes the Oath" 
 
------------------------- 
 
An unsigned commentary in government-owned Al-Ba'th said (7/18): 
"President Asad took the constitutional oath for another seven-year 
term in office and delivered a comprehensive speech on the domestic 
situation and Syria's positions on Arab and international issues.... 
 
 
"President Asad did not need to recall the achievements of the past 
seven years because the Syrian people made the assessment themselves 
and unanimously voted for the president and pledged to support his 
wise and courageous leadership.... 
 
"President Asad managed the political game wisely and competently, 
foiled the wagers of 'creative chaos' and its relevant alliances, 
and upset the calculations of the aggressors [on Lebanon] last 
July....  Syria today begins a new stage toward further openness, 
democratic participation, and the building of the institutionalized 
state.... It will continue to shoulder its responsibilities and 
defend national and Arab principles...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"Political Contradictions and Banquets of Lying" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Ali Qasim, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/18):  "There are tragic ironies in the US policy .... President 
Bush stated that he rejects withdrawal from Iraq so that Hizbollah 
will not prevail in Lebanon. 
 
"In principle, the withdrawal of occupation forces from any inch of 
Arab land is undoubtedly a victory for all those who reject 
occupation.  But for the link to be established by President Bush in 
such a blatant way leaves a host of important signals for 
understanding the dimensions of the American plan in the region, 
whether in Iraq, Lebanon, or Palestine...." 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Will Bush Wake Up?" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Ghazi al-Dada, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(7/18):  "President Bush continues to mislead the American people 
and to challenge the will of the overwhelming majority of Americans 
when he talks about progress in Iraq despite the horrible 
destruction of that country and the growing losses among US 
troops.... 
 
"We wonder if Bush will wake up, even if late, and withdraw his 
troops from Iraq and leave the Iraqis to manage their own affairs by 
themselves.... 
 
"But even if Bush decides to follow in the footsteps of Tony Blair 
and order a troop withdrawal, the Zionist circles might not allow 
him to do that." 
 
Corbin