07DAMASCUS718
Syria/Kuwait, Syria/UAE, Lebanon, Iraq, Palestinian
Fri Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0011
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0718/01 1940904
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130904Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3864
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6947
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4642
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3291
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7774
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1870
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5194
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1406
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7515UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000718 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Kuwait, Syria/UAE, Lebanon, Iraq, Palestinian 
territories 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on July 12 reported that President Asad 
on July 11 received al letter from Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al 
Ahmad al-Jaber Al Sabah connected with bilateral relations between 
the two sisterly countries and issues of common concern.  The letter 
focused on the latest developments in the region, particularly in 
Iraq, occupied Palestinian territories and in Lebanon and on the 
necessity for continuation of consultation and coordination among 
Arab countries to boost joint Arab solidarity.  The letter was 
handed to President al-Assad by Emir of Kuwait Special advisor 
Abdul-Rahman Salim Al-Ateeqi. 
 
Independent al-Watan reported that Sheikh Khalifah bin Zayed 
Al-Nhayan will conduct a two day visit to Damascus starting July 15. 
 The talks will deal with bilateral relation and developing them on 
the economic, commercial, investment, technological and cultural 
levels.  The visit is the first leg of a tour which will include 
Algeria and France. 
 
Papers also commemorated the first anniversary of the Israeli war 
against Lebanon on July 2006.  Papers featured statements by 
Lebanese figures on this anniversary citing a statement by Ali 
Qansu, Chairman of the Syrian Social Nationalist party in Lebanon 
confirming on July 11 that "the victory of the Lebanese resistance 
against the Israeli aggression last summer constitutes an honorable 
page in the Lebanese modern history to be added to another brilliant 
pages made by the resistance in 2000. 
Qansu said "the Lebanese national resistance has foiled a group of 
Israeli and US schemes aiming to end the resistance and turn Lebanon 
into US military base."  Another statement by al-Wafa Bloc for 
Resistance at the Lebanese Parliament asserted that the strategic 
and historic victory of resistance over the Israeli aggression  last 
July represents a victory for Lebanon, Arabs and all honorable men 
and freedom fighters in the world because resistance foiled 
aggression's projects in spite of all international support to this 
aggression.  The al-Wafa Bloc statement said that "every one is 
invited to make use of the lessons to increase resistance's will 
till shattering all Israel's illusions and dreams."  "The US 
Administration is a partner with Israel in responsibility of July 
aggression" the statement added.  Former Lebanese Prime Minister 
Salim al-Hoss said that during last July Israeli aggression, the 
resistance was capable to stand in the face of Israel which was 
backed by the US since the starting of war till the end. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad receives a message from the Emir of Kuwait on 
bilateral relations, developments in the region and enhancement of 
Arab solidarity" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/12) 
 
"President of United Arab Emirates in Syria next Sunday" 
(Independent al-Watan, 7/12) 
 
"One year past the July aggression against Lebanon, Lahoud:  Israel 
has been humiliated, Lebanon emerged as victorious.  Nationalist 
Lebanese factions:  The resistance maintained its preparedness; the 
governing team's commitments placed it at loss" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 7/12) 
 
"The aggression started one year ago.  Israel's defeat is a defeat 
for the US project" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/12) 
 
"Anti-war demonstrations on the anniversary of the July aggression 
against Lebanon" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/12) 
"A draft US Congressional resolution to schedule withdrawal from 
Iraq within 120 days.  Bush trusts hi military more than his 
politicians" (Independent al-Watan, 7/12) 
 
"Iraq will be divided into three separate entities" (Independent 
al-Watan, 7/12) 
 
"Bush requests more a time limit in Iraq hinting at veto against 
Democrats.  Bush to Americans: Like you, I would like a US 
withdrawal from Iraq if circumstances are appropriate" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/12) 
 
 
"A fifth Republican senator opposes Bush's policy on Iraq" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/12) 
 
"Israeli intelligence:  An Iranian nuclear bomb in 2009, a war with 
Syria is possible" (Independent al-Watan, 7/12) 
 
"France confirms Hizbollah's attendance of a summit of Lebanese 
political leaders in France" (Independent al-Watan, 7/12) 
 
"Palestinian factions and remaining Palestinian civilians depart the 
Nahr al-Bared refugee camp.  The Lebanese army prepares to put bring 
the battle in Nahr al-Bared to an end" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
7/12) 
 
"The Amnesty International criticizes failure to bring officials 
responsible for the July war against Lebanon:  The UN Security 
Council is biased" (Independent al-Watan, 7/12) 
 
"Hanieh rejects dispatch of international forces to Gaza.  Failure 
of the Palestinian Legislative Council convention raises questions 
about the Fayyadh government" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/12) 
 
"The Palestinian Legislative Council is suspended due to Hamas 
boycott.  Verbal disputes resume in Palestine" (Independent 
al-Watan, 7/12) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
"Awaiting De Gaullist France in Sarkozian Attire" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, wrote (7/12): 
"French president Sarkozi accused Hizballah of being a terrorist 
organization.... 
 
"We had hoped France would take off Jacques Chirac's cloak and move 
closer to the free and independent de Gaullist thought, which wanted 
France to be the master of its own decision, not to implement the 
policies and wishes of others.... 
 
"While the Chirac era was characterized by the personalization of 
politics, where personal interests were given precedence over 
national interests, the current stage under President Sarkozy does 
not seem to have gotten rid completely of Chirac's legacy, 
especially in Lebanon.... 
 
"We hope that France will play its role in the region from the 
position of a neutral and fair partner willing to achieve peace and 
justice.... 
 
"Blind bias to a certain Lebanese party under the pretext that it 
represents the parliamentary majority is not the right option.... 
Ignoring the popular majority and accusing a team within this 
majority of terrorism do not serve Lebanon and its cause...." 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"Fabrications under Bankruptcy" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
Khalid al-Ashhab, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (7/12):  "The United States is using a policy of fabrication 
and distortion of facts against Iraq, Lebanon, Palestinian 
territories and against Syria.... 
 
"This policy, which was initiated with force and vitality, is now 
suffering in the throes of death.... 
 
"The same naturally applies to the local tools that were used to 
promote this policy, namely the March 14 team in Lebanon...." 
 
-------------------- 
 
"On the Victory Day" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Amr Nasif, a commentator in independent al-Watan, wrote (7/12):  "If 
Hizbollah dedicated its victory in the July war last year to the 
Lebanese and Arab peoples, Israel dedicated its defeat to Zionized 
Arabs who supported the Israeli-American effort to annihilate 
Hizbollah. 
 
"These Arabs are subservient followers of the White House policy, 
implementing its order very accurately even if this entails forging 
history, distorting divine books, and feeding sectarian 
seditions...." 
 
Corbin