07DUBAI88
U/S BURNS SPEAKS ON GULF SECURITY AT DUBAI THINK TANK
Tue Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Dubai
VZCZCXRO9315
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDIR RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHDE #0088/01 0371312
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061312Z FEB 07
FM AMCONSUL DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5111
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2127
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDE/AMCONSUL DUBAI PRIORITY 8179
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 0021
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 0013UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBAI 000088 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV OPRC MARR AE IR IS LE
SUBJECT: U/S BURNS SPEAKS ON GULF SECURITY AT DUBAI THINK TANK 
 
REF: ABU DHABI 0103 
 
DUBAI 00000088  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Summary.  Under Secretary Nicholas Burns spoke to an audience 
of roughly 100 local officials, academics, and journalists at 
the independent Dubai-based think tank, the Gulf Research Center 
(GRC) January 23, after which he took questions from the 
audience.  Burns discussed how the US views the changing 
landscape in the Middle East, and emphasized four main 
challenges for US policy in the region:  Iraq, Lebanon, 
Israel/Palestine, and Iran.  Burns said the US will continue to 
work toward a diplomatic solution with Iran, but also emphasized 
the US commitment to Gulf security in the face of Iranian 
attempts at regional dominance.  U/S Burns said that the US can 
not and will not walk away from Iraq, as the consequences of 
doing so would be far worse than the challenges of staying. 
Burns stated the only way forward in the Israel-Palestinian 
conflict is to work together to realize the creation of two 
states and to accept the existence of the state of Israel.  The 
US is prepared, noted Burns, to commit a long-term, financial 
contribution to support the government of Lebanon against those 
who wish to destabilize it.  The question and answer session 
featured skeptical, but balanced questions from both guests and 
media present.  The appearance received heavy media coverage in 
the region (reftel).  End Summary. 
 
¶2. U/S Burns spoke for about 20 minutes and then took questions. 
 Burns said that the Middle East has been a vital national 
interest to the US since World War II and that the US works hard 
- in conjunction with its partners - to encourage peace and 
security in the region.  U/S Burns emphasized the value of close 
relations with Gulf countries, and affirmed that the US is a 
trustworthy and reliable partner.  Burns said that the Middle 
East will continue to be a particular focus for President Bush 
in his final two years in office.  The US faces four main 
challenges in the Middle East:  Iraq, Lebanon, a solution to the 
Israel/Palestine issue and Iran. 
 
Iran 
----- 
 
¶3. U/S Burns said that the greatest challenge facing US foreign 
policy is the formation of a productive working relationship 
with Iran.  Burns reiterated that the US has no argument with 
the people of Iran, and in fact supports cross-cultural 
exchanges and greater people-to-people understanding.  U/S Burns 
expressed hope for rapprochement with the people of Iran, and 
someday the government of Iran, although that is not possible at 
this time.  U/S Burns listed three key issues of concern 
regarding Iran: 1) the US and the majority of the international 
community are convinced that Iran intends to produce nuclear 
weapons; 2) Iran continues to be the central banker for 
terrorism; 3) Iran's efforts to dominate the Gulf region are 
counterproductive for regional security.  While noting that the 
US continues to work toward a diplomatic solution on the nuclear 
issue, Burns emphasized that if its interests in the region are 
threatened, the US will protect them. 
 
¶4. On Iran's nuclear program, Burns asserted that it is clear 
the world community believes Iran's nuclear program is designed 
to produce nuclear weapons - an outcome, said Burns that the 
global community cannot accept if we want peace in the Middle 
East.  Burns reiterated that the P5+1 June 2006 offer to 
negotiate and assist Iran with building a civil nuclear program 
is still on the table, but that Iran must suspend enrichment to 
begin negotiations.  UN sanctions could tighten as of February 
21, warned Burns, depending on IAEA Secretary General 
El-Baradei's scheduled report to the UN. 
 
¶5. Media coverage on the event focused heavily on Burns' Iran 
comments.  Responding to questions on the "unilateral" nature of 
US policy in the Middle East, Gulf News quoted Burns as saying, 
"the whole world is supporting the US stand toward Iran, except 
for Cuba, Venezuela, Belarus and Syria."  Suspension of 
enrichment activity is not just a US condition.  The IAEA and 
the UNSC are calling for suspension, said Burns.  He reminded 
the audience that the UN Security Council vote on UNSCR 1737 was 
15 to 0 -- universal judgment was passed.  Burns told the 
audience that if it disagreed with the sanctions policy, it 
disagreed with most of the world.  Iranian press called Burns' 
commitment to civil nuclear policy a "moderation" or shift in 
USG rhetoric. 
 
Iran and Gulf security 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. A number of press questions focused on Gulf security and the 
 
DUBAI 00000088  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
impact of US Iran policy on the Gulf.  U/S Burns said the US is 
cooperating with regional and international partners to prevent 
arms sales, and seeking assistance in preventing nuclear and 
missile technology from reaching Iran.  He expressed the hope 
that countries that trade with Iran will send a message through 
their trade policy that Iran cannot continue its aggressive 
behavior.  Responding to a question about the USG "Iran office" 
in Dubai, U/S Burns said that it is an office within the US 
consulate engaged in normal diplomatic activity, including 
addressing the enormous interest of Iranians to travel to the 
US.  It also encourages people-to-people and cultural exchanges, 
and works to increase US understanding of Iran. 
 
Iraq 
----- 
 
¶7. U/S Burns said that the US cannot and will not walk away from 
Iraq, as the consequences of doing so would be far worse than 
the challenges of staying.  The US, noted Burns, would like 
political support from the region and the EU for economic 
reconstruction and the International Compact.  Furthermore, 
Burns said he hoped that Iran and Syria would be agents of 
stability in Iraq rather than their current role as divisive 
forces.  As quoted by the Associated Press, Abu Dhabi-based Gulf 
Negotiations Center Head Mohammed al-Naqbi told Burns, "Iraq is 
your problem, not the problem of the Arabs.  You destroyed a 
country that had institutions.  You handed that country over to 
Iran.  Now you are crying to Europe and the Arabs to help you 
out of this mess."  Burns reiterated that the US will remain 
committed to assisting the Iraqis overcome sectarian violence as 
long as the GOI requests US support. 
 
Israel/Palestine 
------------------ 
 
¶8. U/S Burns reminded the audience that George Bush was the 
first US President to endorse the creation of an independent 
Palestinian state alongside Israel.  Both Secretary Rice and 
President Bush, noted U/S Burns, wish to work with Arabs and 
Israelis to realize the creation of two states that can live 
together in peace.  Audience members questioned the US ability 
to act as an honest broker between Israel and Palestine.  U/S 
Burns said the only way forward in the Israel-Palestinian 
conflict is for Arab countries to accept the state of Israel; 
otherwise the region is resigning itself to another generation 
of conflict. 
 
Lebanon 
---------- 
 
¶9. U/S Burns said that the US is prepared to commit to long term 
support for the government of Lebanon against those who wish to 
destabilize it.  In response to press inquiries regarding what a 
"Lebanon solution" would look like, U/S Burns alluded to a 
sizeable US financial contribution that would be made at the 
January 24 donor's conference on Lebanon.  There is 
international consensus to support the Siniora government, he 
said, noting that only Syria and Iran stand against peace in 
Lebanon. 
SUTPHIN