07HILLAH109
KARBALA AND ANBAR SECURITY DIALOGUE
Thu Jul 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO6829
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIHL #0109/01 2000756
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 190756Z JUL 07
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0916
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 0977UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HILLAH 000109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PGOV IZ SA
SUBJECT: KARBALA AND ANBAR SECURITY DIALOGUE 
 
HILLAH 00000109  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (U) This is a PRT Karbala and PRT Anbar reporting cable. 
 
¶2. (U) SUMMARY: The governors of Anbar and Karbala provinces met 
at the  Regional Embassy Office (REO) in al-Hillah on July 17 to 
talk about security concerns along their provinces' shared 
border.  By the conclusion both governorates signed an agreement 
of cooperation establishing a joint security committee through 
which they will eventually share intelligence on terrorist 
activities, orchestrate joint border patrols and establish a 
Hajj pilgrim security strategy along the road to Mecca, Saudi 
Arabia.  Both Governors were extremely pleased about the outcome 
and look forward to a future meeting, to be held at the REO or 
possibly a location in Anbar.  END SUMMARY 
 
-------------------- 
MEETING DELIVERABLES 
-------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Anbar Governor Ma'amoun Sami Rasheed and Karbala Governor 
Aqeel Mahmoud Al-Khazali agreed to establish a joint security 
committee and to boost intelligence sharing at a July 17 meeting 
at the US Regional Embassy Office at Hillah, Babil Province. 
During the  two-hour meeting the governors discussed ways to 
improve security along their common boundary.   The security 
committee will be co-chaired by the governors and have 
representation form each provincial council and both police 
forces.  Principally tasked with orchestrating joint border 
patrols, the committee is also the channel for cross border 
intelligence sharing.  Both governors agree that Al-Qaida in 
Iraq is a common enemy threatening security in both provinces, 
and this committee is expected to improve counterterrorist 
efforts by both security forces.  Governor Aqeel also mentioned 
last year's incidents involving the assassination of Shi'a 
pilgrims on the Hajj route in Anbar between the Saudi Arabian 
border and Karbala Province.  This inspired the Anbar Governor 
to task the committee with developing a joint security plan to 
protect all Hajj pilgrims later this year.  The committee will 
begin functioning effectively immediately. 
 
--------------------------------- 
TALK OF ACTION AND NATIONAL UNITY 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U)  Governor Aqeel offered Ma'amoun, the opening remarks in 
which he focused on the historic nature of the meeting. 
Ma'amoun highlighted national unity, the need for all sects in 
Iraq to work together, and the example this meeting and future 
meetings like it will set for the country as a whole.  (NOTE: 
these two Governors have never before met to discuss joint 
security issues.)  Ma'amoun offered to host the next meeting in 
Anbar, highlighting that this meeting is not a confrontation of 
Sunni versus Shi'a but is representative of one nation 
overcoming sectarian divides and foreign terrorist 
manipulations.  Ma'amoun used Anbar and Karbala's boundary to 
exemplify unified and peaceful cohabitation in the face of 
foreign terrorists seeking to divide the nation. 
 
5.(U) Aqeel's opening remarks were issue oriented, focusing on 
trouble spots along the lake and the border crossings between 
Karbala and Anbar.  He named several checkpoints, the coastline 
of Lake Razzaza, and routes around Ain Tamur where Karbala 
travelers have encountered problems with suspected Sunni 
terrorists.  Aqeel drew attention to last week's incident 
involving suspected Sunni terrorists killing six Karbalans, 
including a local council member.  That incident and a recent 
operation near the southern border of Anbar that ostensibly 
pushed fleeing terrorists into Karbala province provided the 
impetus for Aqeel to ask both the Anbar security forces and 
Coalition Forces to provide advance warning of future 
operations.  He then added that increased intelligence sharing 
between the two provinces' security forces will lessen each 
province's vulnerability.  In closing, Aqeel informed the Anbar 
delegation of an invitation by the Karbala government and the 
Holy Shrines to host a Sunni and Shi'a tribal sheikh conference 
later this month. (SEPTEL) 
 
----------------------------- 
ROOM FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Although the topic of commerce between the two provinces 
surfaced late in the meeting, it was not overlooked.  Both 
governors agreed that the joint security committee should also 
identify areas of joint economic development and reconstruction 
that will benefit residents from both provinces.  The Mayor of 
Ain Tamur drew attention to the importance of further 
strengthening the business linkages between the Ain Tamur 
district and the al-Rajhalyia area to the north in Anbar.  He 
asked if there was any credibility to a rumor warning Anbari 
residents away from visiting Ain Tamur. Ma'amoun denounced the 
 
HILLAH 00000109  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
rumor going on to respond that all Iraqis, meaning both Sunni 
and Shi'a, should have access to important centers of commerce 
and religious activities.  Ma'amoun then drew the parallel 
between the importance of Ain Tamur to al-Rajhalyia residents as 
the Saudi border crossing town is Hajj pilgrims.  He then 
emphasized the need for both sects to have equal access and 
security in reaching that Anbari city during the Hajj. 
 
----------------------- 
TRANSCRIPT OF AGREEMENT 
----------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The Provincial Council Chairman of Anbar anxiously 
drafted notes and key points throughout the meeting which 
culminated in the following agreement that both governors, both 
provincial council representatives and police chiefs signed: 
 
BEGIN QUOTE: In the Name of Allah, Most Merciful, Most Gracious 
"Help ye one another in righteousness and piety, but help ye not 
one another in sin and rancor", Holy Quran 
 
Joint Statement of Karbala and Anbar Provinces 
 
With the help of Allah, a meeting was held today, July 17, 2007, 
between Karbala and Anbar provinces. It included the governors 
and the representatives of both provincial councils. The purpose 
of the meeting was to start a blessed conversation, in which we 
lay the foundation for cooperation between the two provinces as 
they have a lot in common: their administrative borders, their 
tribal relations, and their Islamic brotherhood. All considered 
it a platform for keeping Iraq unified, and to defeat the 
attempts by others to create conflict in this country. 
 
The two partners agreed on mutual collaboration to deal with 
issues that affect adjacent areas through forming a joint 
security committee. It will include representatives from the two 
governor's offices, the provincial councils, and their security 
forces. The committee will work in collaboration with the 
coalition forces. It will study the current situation and the 
means to improve it. It will work on securing the administrative 
borders and following up the implementation of all agreements. 
It will demand the central government to help and support this 
intention and provide all that it takes to succeed in this 
collaboration, facilitate the communications and mutual visits 
between the two provinces, and secure the highways for the 
pilgrimage to Mecca as well as the visitors to the holy shrines 
in Karbala. In addition, it will seek joint investment projects 
that serve the best interest of both provinces and our beloved 
country. END QUOTE 
 
-------------------------- 
LOGISTICS AND PARTICIPANTS 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) The dialogue was made possible through the efforts of 
MNF-W Deputy Commanding General John Allen, MND-C Deputy 
Commanding General Edward Cardon, James Soriano, Team Leader of 
PRT Anbar; and Robert Reed, Team Leader of PRT Karbala. 
Governor Ma'amoun was accompanied by the Anbar Provincial 
Council Chair Dr. Abdulsalam Abdullah, the Anbar Police Chief 
General Abdulsalam al-Ubeidi, Ministry of Interior official for 
Anbar Province, Tariq Yussef Al-Thiyabi, the Governor's advisor 
Dr. Aboud, and Sheikh Lawrence al-Anaiza who represents a 
prominent tribe from al-Nukhayb, a town on the road to Mecca. 
The Karbala delegation consisted of Governor Aqeel Mahmoud 
al-Khazali, Ain Tamur Mayor Mahfoud al-Sattay, Provincial 
Council Member Qasid Kareem Riyah, Provincial Police Chief Raid 
Shakir Jawdat, Iraqi Army Commander General Imad Majhool, and 
Sheikh Ahmed Faisal Hameed Al-Roakan from the Ain Tamur district 
which lies along the Anbar border. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment:  The meeting had brief moments of tension but 
was overall collegial and productive leaving both governors 
pleased.  They both made statements about national unity and 
setting an example for the rest of the country.  Aqeel 
recommended that Ma'amoun should hold a similar meeting with his 
Najaf counterpart. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Possibly in an effort to win favor with Prime Minister 
Maliki, Ma'amoun came with the intention of recording the 
outcomes of the meeting so they could be shared with the central 
government.  The governors agreed that the issue their provinces 
face is not sectarian in nature, but efforts by terrorists to 
discredit their governments, and their ability to secure their 
citizens.  Early on in the meeting both governors agreed to 
throw out talk of blaming one another in exchange for focusing 
 
HILLAH 00000109  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
on ways to work together. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Aqeel appeared hesitant about signing the agreement 
drafted by the Anbari side.  One sticking point may have been 
the mention of cooperation with Coalition Forces.  Where the 
Anbar Government is bolstered by its relationship with MNF-W, 
most south central provincial governments are under pressure to 
repel the Coalition Force presence in the country.  As word of 
the agreement leaks to the public, it may create future pressure 
for the local governor. 
 
¶12. (U)  On a positive note, Aqeel reminded his interlocutors 
that the sermons at the shrines are given in all three of the 
Islamic traditions.  He then invited the tribal sheikhs and 
Anbar Government to the Sunni-Shi'a Tribal Sheikhs Conference at 
the Holy Shrines later this month.  No more details were 
available regarding the meeting other than it is co-sponsored by 
the Holy Shrines.  If successful, the security logistics alone 
will be evidence of the GOI's ability to address internal 
security issues. (SEPTEL) End Comment 
REED