07HILLAH152
NAJAF LEADERS ASKED USG TO HELP FUND IDP CAMP PROJECTS
Mon Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO4111
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIHL #0152/01 3161640
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121640Z NOV 07
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0982
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 1046UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HILLAH 000152 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL PGOV SOCI IZ
SUBJECT: NAJAF LEADERS ASKED USG TO HELP FUND IDP CAMP PROJECTS 
 
 
HILLAH 00000152  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
This is a PRT Reporting Cable 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Members of the Najaf Provincial Council 
(PC) requested USG assistance to fund some Najaf projects, 
especially at the internally displaced persons (IDP) camp, 
during 
a November 8 Najaf PRT visit to the IDP camp in Manathera 
and a subsequent meeting at the PC offices.  Ali Al Fayad, 
Director General (DG) of the Najaf Department of Displacement 
and Migration, pleaded immediately for USG funds to secure a 
school for the 265 families residing at the IDP camp at the 
beginning of the meeting.  He noted that children were injured 
by oncoming traffic as they crossed highways to reach a school 
two miles away.  In addition, during a walkthrough of the camp, 
PRT members noted that most families were living in made-shift 
tents.  Ali underscored the importance of upgrading to caravans 
for the families as winter approaches but also lamented the lack 
of financial support from both the USG and Baghdad.  More 
positively, Ali assured PRT Leader that the camp residents have 
complete freedom of movement, and that sufficient food is 
provided by the Public Distribution System (PDS).  In terms of 
security, each family had to provide detailed personal 
information in order to register as camp residents and receive 
official identification.  The meeting ended on a positive note 
as 
the DG stated that some former Baghdad residents have begun 
returning to Baghdad in the last two months, though he added 
that Najaf is still receiving IDPs from other provinces.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) On November 8, Najaf PRT Leader and members 
observed acceptable living conditions during a first visit to 
the 
IDP camp in Manathera that was established by the Red 
Crescent in March this year.  The PRT met with Ali Al Fayad, 
Director General (DG) of the Najaf Department of Displacement 
and Migration (MoDM), Dr. Muneer Al Ja'aafri, a PC member 
and Chair of the PC IDP Committee, Dr. Nawal Al Ibrahimi 
(female), a member of the PC and its IDP Committee, and 
Mazin Al Shihani, a Baghdad PC member and Chair of Baghdad 
PC IDP Committee.  DG Ali asked immediately for the USG help 
in setting up a new school for children of the camp.  He also 
stated that all the made-shift resident tents have to be 
upgraded 
to covered caravans for the winter, which at present are too 
costly to purchase.  Other issues discussed included medical 
help, freedom of movement, and camp registration, all of which 
were satisfactory.  The PC offered no long-term strategy in 
resettling the Manathera and other IDP residents, however. 
 
Funds to Build a School on Site 
------------------------------- 
¶3. (SBU) Right off the bat, DG Ali lamented at the beginning of 
the meeting of "too little support" from the USG and pleaded for 
funding to help build a school for the children who settled at 
the 
Manathera camp.  He also complained that funds promised by 
the central government were not delivered to help out the IDP 
camp, which is already at full capacity.  Around 2500 people 
currently reside at the camp, 550 of which are children.  The 
nearest school is located two miles away and children of all 
ages walk to the school.  Several children were involved in 
traffic accidents crossing several major roads during their 
daily 
commute.  The DG had several ideas for the children including 
building a 6-caravan/classroom school on site, or purchasing 
several buses to transport the children to school.  DG Ali 
quoted 
the price of USD18,000 for each of these bigger schoolroom 
caravans.  He indicated that the PC will supply school teachers 
and school materials if the location can be built.  (Note: PRT 
will 
attempt to fund this through a QRF project. End Note) Building a 
school appeared to be DG Ali's top concern for the Manathera 
camp. 
 
200 Caravans Needed, Only 117 Funded 
------------------------------------ 
¶4. (U) During a walkthrough of the PRT group with DG Ali, PRT 
members noticed the deteriorating conditions of the made-shift 
tents, some of which were torn.  Ali indicated that sandstorms 
often destroy the tents, and in addition, the tents need to be 
upgraded to caravans before winter arrives.  According to Ali, 
some PC funds initially budgeted for building a school 
elsewhere had been reallocated to Manathera, although he did 
not indicate the total amount.  These funds have been 
earmarked for the purchase of 117 caravans, some of which 
were already installed at the time of the visit.  A total of 200 
caravans is needed but the budget allows only for the purchase 
of 117, falling short by 83 caravans.  Each caravan, costing 
USD5000 each, comes with windows, air-conditioning, and a 
 
HILLAH 00000152  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
bathroom with plumbing.  The price appears comparable if 
delivery is included. 
 
Madhlum for Najaf-born Persons Only 
----------------------------------- 
¶5. (U) On the question of resettlement efforts at Madhlum, 
another area in Najaf designated for IDPs, DG Ali preferred to 
refer to it as the Madhlum "low-income housing" area, to 
distinguish it from Manathera.  He stated that Madhlum is only 
offered to low-income "Najaf residents," thereby reaffirming 
earlier PRT reporting that Madhlum disqualifies most IDPs with 
its requirement of Najaf-born residents only.  While Manathera 
camp was created to host IDPs who were living in random areas 
of Najaf city, Madhlum was designated for Najaf-born persons 
only. 
 
Registration, Freedom of Movement, Medical Care 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶6. (U) DG Ali assured PRT Leader that each entrant to camp is 
vetted through a thorough registration process requiring 
detailed 
personal information.  A PDS card is required for registration, 
and in return, food and fuel rations are provided to the 
residents. 
The province does not receive in return any reimbursement from 
Baghdad for the food and fuel expenses, however.  The DG 
office issues an official letter to successful applicants, along 
with 
an identification number and card.  With the card, all camp 
residents are free to leave the area as they wish.  Some 
managed to find work in the city.  There is also a medical 
facility 
on site that coordinates with the DG hospital in the city.  The 
facility charges a nominal fee for medicine. 
 
Rumbling Below the Surface? 
--------------------------- 
¶7. (SBU) Although the camp appears tranquil during the visit, 
and DG Ali assured PRT Leader that disputes among residents 
were settled peacefully, PRT member observed the annoyance 
of one resident against the PRT visit.  During the PRT group's 
walkthrough of the camp, a woman dressed in an abaya 
abruptly snatched away her infant toddler who stood with other 
children, curious at the spectacle of "the visiting Americans." 
She walked away in disgust carrying the crying child and 
disappeared into one of the tents. 
 
Biography: DG Ali Al Fayad 
-------------------------- 
¶8. (SBU) Ali resides in Karbala and travels regularly to 
Manathera to manage the camp.  A soft-spoken and direct 
person, Ali appears to be frank in his opinion of the USG and 
the central government.  He was born in 1969 in Thi-Qar 
province and graduated from the Teachers Institute in Thi-Qar 
province.  He is currently a third year law student at the 
College 
of Law in Karbala, in addition to being the Director General of 
Najaf at the Ministry of Displacement and Migration.  He is 
married and has no party affiliation. 
 
¶9. (SBU) COMMENT:  Although living conditions at the 
Manathera camp appeared acceptable, the camp only hosts 
265 families, or approximately five percent, of the 10,000 IDP 
families currently residing in Najaf.  Each day, 20 to 30 new 
families still enter Najaf from Baghdad.  These numbers are an 
improvement from the 70 or so families who used to move to 
Najaf everyday during the height of sectarian violence in 
Baghdad.  Most significantly, starting two months ago, Najaf 
province started to see the returning of some Baghdad IDPs 
back to the capital, although there are still refugees arriving 
in 
Najaf from other (Sunni majority) provinces.  The DG indicated 
that around 150 IDP families in Najaf have thus far returned to 
Baghdad.  Whether more IDPs would return to Baghdad, and 
begin a trend, depends highly on the security situation in 
Baghdad, which has improved in some areas of Baghdad to the 
point where some Shi'a refugees have prepared to give return a 
chance. END COMMENT 
AMBASSADOR