07JAKARTA1129
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS SOLICITATION FOR G/TIP FY 2007 ESF
Mon Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0018
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #1129/01 1130827
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 230827Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4438UNCLAS JAKARTA 001129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EAP/RSA, G/TIP, EAP/MTS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL ELAB KWMN SMIG ID
SUBJECT:  TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS SOLICITATION FOR G/TIP FY 2007 ESF 
AND INCLE FUNDS: INDONESIAN PROPOSALS 
 
REFERENCE: State 28292 
 
¶1.  U.S. Mission Jakarta submits to G/TIP the following five 
Indonesian Anti-Trafficking in Persons project proposals for 
consideration of funding from FY 2007 INCLE and ESF appropriation. 
Also listed are two regional proposals. These are listed in the rank 
order recommended by a Mission panel composed of State and USAID 
officers that met on April 20 to consider seven Indonesian proposals 
and two regional proposals, as follows: 
 
Indonesian Projects: 
 
¶2.  First: 
International Organization for Migration 
Budget:  $300,876 
Title:  Strengthening the Capacity of Criminal Justice Agencies to 
Combat Human Trafficking as Well as to Protect Victims of 
Trafficking in Indonesia 
Duration:  One year 
Abstract: 
Within the framework of this project, IOM proposes to work in 
partnership with Government of Indonesia (GOI) to strengthen local 
capacity to combat human trafficking through effective criminal 
justice responses. Particularly, IOM will provide technical 
assistance and targeted trainings to the police, prosecutors, 
immigration officials, labor inspectors and judges in an effort to 
increase the numbers of convictions of human traffickers, while at 
the same time provide better protection to victims. Importantly, IOM 
will link the criminal justice agencies (CJA) with the victim 
assistance agencies. IOM is well suited to empower the GOI in this 
endeavor given its extensive experience the last three years working 
with GOI on comprehensive victim assistance as well as law 
enforcement programs. The project is designed to maximize Government 
ownership, and sustainability at all levels. Although a new project 
with GTIP, the project will build upon the successful results of 
IOM's recent law enforcement program to combat human trafficking, 
funded by NZAID. The NZAID funded law enforcement project began in 
March 2004 and ended in March 2007. The proposed project will also 
complement IOM Indonesia's current Return, Recovery and 
Reintegration Programs in Indonesia (funded by both the US PRM under 
the Presidential Initiative and the US DOL). Currently, additional 
pledged funds from PRM will run through approximately December 2007 
and the USDOL program (which targets only school age children) will 
run through March 2009. 
 
¶3.  Second: 
Department of Justice, ICITAP Indonesia 
Budget:  $400,000 
Title:  Technical Assistance, Training and Limited Equipment to the 
Indonesian National Police 
Duration:  One year 
Abstract: 
The purpose of this proposal is to provide continued ICITAP 
technical assistance, training, and limited equipment to the 
Indonesian National Police (INP) Assistance Program to assist the 
Government of Indonesia (GOI) to increase and continue the 
development of sustainable efforts initiated in the ICITAP "Point of 
Origin Strategy.  This proposal capitalizes on the integrated 
multi-disciplinary anti-trafficking strategy for identification, 
investigation, information sharing and prosecution of transnational 
trafficking organizations and the protection and safety of 
trafficking victims that began in late 2006.  ICITAP worked directly 
and collaboratively with local IOM, NGO's, and USAID to integrate 
and train law enforcement and non-governmental personnel together in 
geographic areas where the most vulnerable of populations reside, 
specifically in North Sumatra and East Java.  Micro-training 
sessions have resulted in the training of 320 police officers and 75 
NGO staff, representing 58 NGO organizations in less than one year. 
The result has been an increase of arrests, NGO's now feel more 
comfortable to contact police regarding victims and traffickers and 
have done so on a regular basis since the strategy was initiated. 
As important is the police now understand the role and benefit of 
NGO's and IOM. Further, this strategy was expanded to border areas 
of Malaysia where ICITAP received funding to conduct an 
Indonesia-Malaysia Bi-Lateral TIP Project developing operational 
relationships with Malaysian law enforcement counterparts and also 
non-governmental organizations and stakeholders at Points of Transit 
along the porous borders and waterways of common trafficking routes. 
This project proposal would expand the strategy to include 
prosecutors being integrated into the process working directly with 
IOM that is currently involved in the training and education of the 
procuracy and judiciary. With a new trafficking law recently passed, 
increased collaboration with IOM and other NGO's, demand for 
assistance, and a new and consistent willingness by the police to 
work with other non-law enforcement components, it is important to 
maintain the momentum generated in the last year. Outcomes would 
include a and augmented, synthesized, multi-disciplinary response to 
trafficking issues in the previously identified areas of North 
Sumatra and East Java; areas plagued by trafficking organizations 
that have preyed upon the vulnerable populations of young women for 
sexual exploitation.  Stakeholders, including police, prosecutors, 
 
IOM, and NGO's would be again be integrated into training modules to 
develop requisite skills, competencies, and working relationships to 
produce a seamless process of prevention, rescue, investigation, and 
arrest of traffickers and disruption of trafficking organizations in 
Indonesia. This would be supplemented by already existing ICITAP 
initiatives with the Marine Police Special Boat Units interdiction 
capacity along trafficking routes, the ICITAP Cyber Crimes 
Investigative Unit and Child Exploitation Tracking System (CETS) 
that operationally address transnational criminal activities. 
 
¶4.  Third: 
Save the Children 
Budget:  $388,690 
Title:  Combating Exploitation of Child Domestic Workers 
Duration:  Two years 
Abstract: 
The trafficking of Indonesian children for domestic labor within and 
outside of Indonesia is a serious and often overlooked human rights 
concern. Official figures estimate that 25-50 percent of Indonesia's 
1,350,000 domestic workers are under the age of 18, with many under 
the minimum working age of 15. Children who are trafficked for 
domestic work face long working hours with no opportunity for 
education, exposure to physical, emotional and sexual violence, 
frequently little to no pay, and a variety of occupational hazards. 
In addition, they often have little or no freedom of movement. 
These same children often aspire toward migrant domestic work as a 
way to increase their earnings.  Without basic education, they 
become a reliable source for traffickers and brokers who seek to 
lure them with the promise of a more prosperous life.  Save the 
Children Federation, Inc (SC) is pleased to submit this proposal for 
$388,690 over two years to reduce the number of Indonesian children 
trafficked for domestic labor within and outside of Indonesia.  SC 
and its Indonesian partners, JALA, Laha, Children's Crisis Center 
and Women's Crisis Center will work in Bandung, Surabaya, and 
Jogjakarta to withdraw and provide quality reintegration services to 
children trafficked into domestic work; improve the quality of 
reintegration services and referral networks; increase community 
awareness of domestic servitude and trafficking for domestic work, 
increase the knowledge and improve behaviors of employers toward 
child domestic workers; and increase the Government of Indonesia's 
(GOI) capacity to reintegrate child survivors of trafficking. Over 
the past six years, SC's strong network of experienced staff and 
local and international partners have made groundbreaking progress 
in Indonesia's fight to eliminate trafficking in persons and in the 
meanwhile, earning SC global recognition as a leader in 
anti-trafficking programming for children. 
 
¶5.  Fourth: 
American Center for International Labor Solidarity (ACILS) 
International Catholic Migration Commission (ICMC) 
Budget:  $330,000 
Title:  Sustaining the Efforts of Government and Civil Society in 
Eastern Indonesia to Combat Human Trafficking 
Duration:  One year 
Abstract: Recent field research documents a growing industry of 
trafficking in women and girls for commercial sexual exploitation in 
the provinces of Papua and West Irian Jaya (WIJ).  Thousands of 
women, girls, and boys are vulnerable to trafficking in the 
economically disadvantaged communities of East Nusa Tenggara (ENT) 
province, where international migration for work is an increasingly 
attractive option for economic survival. In trafficking to Papua for 
commercial sexual exploitation, the province of North Maluku plays 
an important role as a holding and redistribution center for 
trafficked women and girls. Under a USAID-supported Anti-Trafficking 
in Persons project commissioned in March 2007, the Solidarity 
Center/ICMC implements actions in five western Indonesian provinces 
in order to optimize the impact of funds available. In that project 
grant, no assistance for counter trafficking programming is provided 
for Indonesia's eastern provinces. In Solidarity Center/ICMC's five 
previous US Government-funded projects, little attention was paid to 
the eastern provinces other than East Java, West Nusa Tenggara 
(WNT), and North Sulawesi. However, east Indonesian provinces are 
known to be major sources (particularly North Sulawesi, East Java, 
East Java, and ENT) and destinations (particularly Papua and WIJ) of 
domestic and international trafficking for the purpose of 
prostitution, domestic work, and slave-like labor in Malaysia's 
plantations and factories. Based on an application submitted to 
G-TIP through the US Embassy in Jakarta in February 2006, Solidarity 
Center/ICMC has been notified of pending approval of $400,000 in 
funding for a one-year project to combat trafficking in eastern 
Indonesia. However, given the intensity of the problem, a longer 
intervention is critically needed in order to be effective. This 
application intends to extend support to the project for another 
year. 
 
¶6.  Fifth: 
The Asia Foundation 
Budget: $300,330 
Title:  Linking Law Enforcement with Local Community Groups to Stop 
Trafficking in Indonesia 
Duration: Two years 
 
Abstract: The Asia Foundation requests a grant of $300,340 for a 
two-year program to replicate a proven model that links law 
enforcement with community groups to stop trafficking, protect 
victims, and prosecute traffickers in major trafficking centers in 
East Java.  In 2006, the U.S. Department of State rated Indonesia a 
Tier 2 Watch country because of its lack of persistent efforts to 
combat trafficking in persons (TIP).  Indeed, both internal and 
international trafficking of Indonesians remains a serious problem. 
Women and children are especially vulnerable to being trafficked 
into the sex trade and domestic servitude. However, some recent 
steps by the Government of Indonesia, including passing a 
comprehensive anti-TIP law, indicate that the problem has become a 
higher priority.  The Asia Foundation has worked with local partners 
in Surabaya in East Java, a trafficking hot-spot, to establish an 
anti-trafficking task force comprised of community and religious 
leaders, police, prosecutors, judges, and civil society 
organizations that has been remarkably successful in combating 
trafficking in the surrounding area.  The task force model creates 
synergy among different actors working to combat trafficking, 
drawing on their individual resources and strengths to stimulate 
community-wide action to stop trafficking.  The Foundation will 
utilize its own expert staffs, who provided technical assistance to 
local organizations to form the Surabaya task force, and carefully 
selected local partners, to identify and engage local community 
stakeholders from both civil society and law enforcement to 
establish four new anti-TIP task forces.  The Foundation will use 
strategies and training materials from its successful community 
policing program in Indonesia to build partnerships between 
communities and law enforcement in each target location that will 
form the basis of the new anti-TIP task forces in each area. 
The proposed program will increase the capacity of the Surabaya task 
force to enable it to provide technical assistance and training in 
four other major trafficking areas of East Java- Banyuwangi, Jember, 
Blitar and Ponorogo - to replicate the task force.  At the end of 
the two-year program, there will be a network of community-based 
task forces across East Java that are mobilizing and coordinating 
community resources, leaders, law enforcement, and ordinary citizens 
to stop trafficking in their respective areas. 
 
Regional Projects: 
 
¶7.  First: 
International Catholic Migration Commission (ICMC) 
Budget:  $204,809 
Title: Protection of and Assistance to Indonesian Women and Girls 
Trafficked to Sabah in Eastern Malaysia for Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation 
Duration: One year 
Abstract: The trafficking of Indonesians has been profiled for 
several years, yet annually tens of thousands of people continue to 
be trafficked, both domestically and internationally. The majority 
of international trafficking takes place to Malaysia, particularly 
through Nunukan, Entikong and Tanjung Pinang to the Malaysian states 
of Sabah, Sarawak and Jahor respectively, and especially into 
construction, plantation and domestic work as well as the hotel and 
entertainment industry, where many migrant women and girls are 
forced into prostitution.  The proposed program is to be implemented 
over a year by the International Catholic Migration Commission 
(ICMC), in partnership with Human Development Committee (HDC), 
Diocese of Kota Kinabalu, a leading NGO advocating for the rights of 
and providing services to migrants. The primary objective of the 
project is the development of a replicable model of bilateral 
cooperation between Indonesia and Malaysia at local level; and 
particularly between the local governments of Nunukan (E. 
Kalimantan, Indonesia) and Tawau (Sabah, Malaysia) which see about 
one-thirds of all Indonesian migrants to Malaysia passing through 
every year, and a proportional number of trafficking victims. The 
program will be implemented at district and municipality levels in 
four locations: in Nunukan in East Kalimantan and in Tawau, Sandakan 
and Kota Kinabalu, in Sabah. Nunukan and Tawau are the primary exit 
and entry points along the so-called eastern trafficking corridor to 
Malaysia and therefore represent a critical juncture at which 
trafficking can be addressed. The Indonesian Ministry of Women's 
Empowerment (KPP) has specifically requested assistance in such 
border areas. Sandakan and Kota Kinabalu, in addition to Tawau 
itself, represent primary destinations for Indonesian women and 
girls trafficked for commercial sexual exploitation in Sabah. 
 
¶8.  Second: 
International Catholic Migration Commission (ICMC) 
Budget:  $449,914 
Title:  Increasing the Access to Shelters and Other Essential 
Migrant Services for Indonesian Women Migrant Workers in Taiwan Who 
Are Exploited and/or Held in Involuntary Servitude 
Duration: One year 
Abstract: 
In the recent years, Taiwan has emerged as the second most preferred 
East Asian destination for Indonesian migrant workers after 
Malaysia. The two major reasons for this are, the systematic 
promotion of Indonesians women as caregivers by placement brokers in 
Taiwan, and the lure of a salary equivalent to US$ 495 per month - 
 
high by the standards of any other country of destination. For 
Indonesian migrant workers to Taiwan the costs incurred in migrating 
are considerable: firstly, because of high salaries in Taiwan, 
recruiters typically "sell the job" requiring a considerable down 
payments from potential migrants even before they leave Indonesia, 
which in itself may force the migrant into debt; and secondly 
because considerable recruitment, holding center and transport 
costs, initially borne by recruiters, are most often passed down 
contractually as debts to the brokers and then employers in Taiwan 
who recoup the costs through usurious salary deductions, effectively 
placing the migrants in situations in which debt is used as an 
instrument of bondage, exposing migrants to exploitation and abuse. 
There is little to distinguish trafficked persons from most migrant 
workers held in debt bondage; both have experienced deceit in their 
recruitment, the withholding of documents while in debt, and varying 
levels of confinement. Many Indonesian migrant workers in Taiwan 
realize that they are in servitude, and the promised salaries are 
illusory because of various deductions enforced by agents. They also 
find that Taiwanese labor laws do not offer them many options to 
leave one employer and seek another. They must either endure, or 
"run away" to the irregular employment market, opening themselves to 
risks of further exploitation or arrest, detention, and deportation. 
In similar situations, migrant workers from other south-east Asian 
countries - especially Filipinos - get crucial support such as 
temporary shelter, legal assistance, counseling etc. from church-run 
migrant worker service centers, which also help a migrant worker 
with problem to find another job. Indonesian migrant workers 
however, rarely access these services - firstly because they are 
less aware of their existence, and secondly, for fear of being 
chastised by their Muslim religious leaders for associating with 
other religions. On the other hand, the clergy of the five mosques 
in Taiwan, so far, have shown little interest in supporting migrant 
workers with problems. In fact, some of the Chinese Muslim clergy 
openly oppose unaccompanied migration by Muslim women - Indonesian 
or otherwise.  Debt-bondage of migrant workers to Taiwan requires a 
comprehensive response - the foremost being the enactment of a 
suitable anti-trafficking legislation. Pending that, however, 
Indonesian migrant workers in Taiwan, almost 90% women, need better 
information about institutions that could help them to get out of 
involuntary servitude and abusive situations. They also need 
approval by their religious leaders to approach service 
organizations managed by persons with different faiths or to receive 
support from organizations of their own faith. The proposed project 
is expected to achieve this result through sensitization of Muslim 
religious leaders, Indonesian migrant workers' associations; and by 
bolstering the capacity of service providers, sometimes church 
based, to extend shelter to migrant workers seeking change of 
employer, and to repatriate survivors who want to return to 
Indonesia but are stranded as they cannot pay their passage. At the 
same time, it will give ICMC a base in Taiwan from where to advocate 
for a comprehensive new AT law.