07JERUSALEM1718
PROGRAM UPDATE: NDI FOCUS GROUPS DISCUSS FATAH
Thu Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO2082
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #1718 2281422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161422Z AUG 07
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8722
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC PRIORITYUNCLAS JERUSALEM 001718 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM ECON PREL KMPI PAO KPA IS
SUBJECT: PROGRAM UPDATE: NDI FOCUS GROUPS DISCUSS FATAH 
 
REFORM 
 
¶1. Summary: As part of its NEA/PI funded political party 
strengthening program, the National Democratic Institute 
(NDI) conducted focus groups with Fatah activists in 
Bethlehem and Nablus. Focus group participants evidenced 
continued interest and enthusiasm for reform of Fatah to 
enhance its viability as a political party and identified 
internal Fatah structures, the absence of youth outreach, and 
the development and selection of new leaders as Fatah,s 
greatest challenges. This cable is based upon the detailed 
minutes of each session. MEPI coordinator did not attend 
either focus group. End Summary 
 
Focus Groups: Nablus, Bethlehem 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. On July 27 and August 4, NDI convened Fatah activist focus 
groups in Nablus and Bethlehem to discuss topics including: 
Fatah's challenges and opportunities; internal reform; Fatah 
relations with local communities; internal elections; and 
potential activities for the next year.  There was no USG 
presence at either focus group, but MEPI coordinator reviewed 
detailed minutes of both sessions.  The minutes indicate the 
following conclusions. 
 
Fatah's Challenges: Too Many Committees, Too Little Vision 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶3. Fatah is still trying to evolve into a functioning 
political party: Activists want to see Fatah develop a clear 
political platform, hold internal elections to determine 
leadership, communicate more effectively (between the 
leadership and the base) and develop mechanisms to reach out 
to new members -- particularly young people -- and bring them 
into the movement. Focus group participants pointed to 
Fatah,s historical identity as the leadership of the 
Palestinian national resistance and drive for independence, 
but activists, especially in Nablus, criticized Fatah,s lack 
of a strategic vision. One participant said, "The last time 
the Fatah vision and mission were upgraded was in 1989." 
Activists also criticized Fatah,s numerous, overlapping 
organizational structures.  One activist said, "There are in 
Nablus 33 institutions belonging to Fatah but there is no 
coordination among them." 
 
¶4. Fatah is not ready for general elections: Activists in 
Bethlehem unanimously agreed that Fatah will not be ready for 
general elections until there are internal elections for 
party leaders. Nablus activists were hesitant to hold general 
elections for a number of reasons including the possible 
outcome and the situation in Gaza. 
 
¶5. Fatah,s involvement in the PA led to increased 
corruption: One participant explained that Fatah signed 
agreements changing its platform from resisting to 
establishing a state. He said, "We transformed Fatah members 
into people only interested in having a job in the government 
and getting a salary." Several activists in Bethlehem 
suggested that Fatah members should not be allowed to work in 
the PA. 
 
¶6. Fatah is not interacting successfully on a local level: 
One Bethlehem activist said the people blame Fatah for Hamas 
winning the elections, and another said Fatah,s standing is 
bad, because of its performance in the PA and in the security 
apparatus. A third Bethlehem activist said Fatah,s 
popularity relative to Hamas is deteriorating, because the 
movement does not deliver benefits directly to the people. 
Nablus activists also criticized Fatah for "neglecting the 
masses." 
 
Potential Fatah Program Ideas 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  The Bethlehem focus group participants mentioned the 
following program ideas: support for families of martyrs and 
prisoners, permanent youth centers, sports clubs, increasing 
women's involvement in Fatah, and supporting volunteerism. 
 
¶8.  The Nablus focus group participants suggested that Fatah: 
create projects based on community needs, target students 
through tutoring lessons, train Fatah members to reach out to 
potential new members, and enlist women activists to enter 
homes to speak with community members.   They emphasized that 
Fatah must address the "security chaos." 
DUFFY