07JOHANNESBURG35
SOUTH AFRICA: MINERALS AND ENERGY NEWSLETTER "THE ASSAY" --
Fri Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Johannesburg
VZCZCXRO6489
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHJO #0035/01 0331447
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021447Z FEB 07
FM AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5570
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 2268UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 JOHANNESBURG 000035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EMIN ENRG EINV ECON SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: MINERALS AND ENERGY NEWSLETTER "THE ASSAY" -- 
ISSUE 1, JANUARY 2007 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000035  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
This cable is not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (U) Introduction:  The purpose of this monthly newsletter, 
initiated in January 2004, is to highlight minerals and energy 
developments in South Africa.  This includes trade and 
investment as well as supply.  South Africa hosts world-class 
deposits of gold, diamonds, platinum group metals, chromium, 
zinc, titanium, vanadium, iron, manganese, antimony, 
vermiculite, zircon, alumino-silicates, fluorspar and phosphate 
rock, and is a major exporter of steam coal.  South Africa is 
also a leading producer and exporter of ferroalloys of chromium, 
vanadium, and manganese.  The information contained in the 
newsletters is based on public sources and does not reflect the 
views of the United States Government.  End introduction. 
 
--- 
Key 
--- 
¶2. (U) Key to some of the terminology and abbreviations used is 
given to facilitate understanding. 
 
BEE (Black Economic Empowerment) - the scheme whereby the South 
African Government promotes black participation in business. 
 
t = tons, 
t/d = tons per day, 
c/l = cents per liter, 
t/m = tons per month, 
t/y = tons per year, 
oz = troy ounces (31.1 grams), 
cmg = centimeter grams, 
mcf = million cubic feet, 
tcf = trillion cubic feet, 
R = SA currency (rand), 
MW = megawatts, 
kt = thousand tons, 
bbl/d = barrels per day, 
MW = megawatts, 
PGM = platinum group metals. 
 
-------- 
HOT NEWS 
-------- 
The Inconvenient Truth about SA Electricity Supply 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶3. (U) On January 18, South Africa was hit by widespread power 
failures that affected five provinces.  Although these were 
cleared by the weekend, their occurrence has given rise to 
concerns about the adequacy of electricity supply over the next 
few years and the likely impact this could have on critical 
operations and future investment in energy-intensive industries. 
 South Africa generates some 50% of the continent's electricity 
and is heavily reliant on power to drive its energy-intensive 
economy, including mines, smelters, refineries, and factories. 
According to the spokesman for the state-owned utility Eskom, in 
addition to plants closed for routine maintenance, six stations 
failed, including one unit at the Koeberg nuclear power 
facility.  As a consequence, about 9,500 MW of Eskom's 36,800 MW 
of generating capacity was not available during the power 
failure.  Of that, 4,900 MW was unplanned and the rest was 
closed for maintenance. 
 
¶4. (U) The cause of the failure is thought to be the automatic 
shutdown of the Koeberg unit (900 MW), which overloaded a system 
already experiencing unplanned and planned outages.  Other 
fingers point to poor government and management planning, a 
shortage of skilled technical staff, and coal delivery problems. 
 An investigation into the cause of the outages should reveal 
the truth, in time.  Whatever the reason, South Africa is in for 
a difficult power supply period until major new capacity comes 
on line in 2008.  The inconvenient truth is that while the 
international norm for spare generation capacity is 10%-15%, 
South Africa's spare capacity is well below 10% and some 
authorities believe it to be as low as 2%, leaving little margin 
for unplanned supply cuts. 
 
¶5. (U) In the mid-1990's, the newly elected SAG put a freeze on 
Eskom's power plant construction, in the name of privatization. 
Since then numerous energy experts, including Eskom itself, 
predicted that the country was heading for a power crunch unless 
the government rapidly facilitated the building of new capacity. 
 The SAG vacillated for nearly eight years, believing that the 
private sector would get in line to build new capacity.  This 
did not materialize. 
 
¶6. (U) By 2004, it was clear that growth in electricity demand 
far exceeded government projections as a result of the country's 
strong economic growth and that by about 2007 peak demand would 
exceed supply capacity.  At that point the then Minister of 
Trade and Industry, Alec Erwin, rescinded the freeze and once 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000035  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
again mandated Eskom as South Africa's major supplier of 
electricity.  It was also decided that Eskom would remain in 
State hands and that it would resume the role of the country's 
foremost energy provider.  In order to continue to engage the 
private sector, they were asked to take responsibility for 
building 30% of new capacity with Eskom responsible for the 
remaining 70%.  Government has budgeted $14 billion to upgrade 
generation capacity by 8,000 MW over the next five years, with 
first new power due in 2007-8.  Until then South Africa seems 
set for a winter of planned load shedding. 
 
Domestic Steel Sales Set New Records 
------------------------------------ 
¶7. (U) South Africa's five carbon steel producers dispatched 
5.337 million tons of primary carbon steel products to the 
domestic market during 2006.  This was the highest total on 
record and is 26 % higher than the 4.230 million tons delivered 
in 2005.  During the same 12 month period, 2.351 million tons 
were exported.  This was 30.8% less than the 3.397 million tons 
exported in 2005.  In 2006, total sales increased marginally by 
0.8% to 7.688 million tons. 
 
¶8. (U) During 2006, imports of primary steel products into SA 
increased to 456,000 tons for the first ten months giving an 
annualized figure of 540,000 tons for the full year.  This 
represents an increase of more than 60% over the 336,000 tons 
for 2005 and is the highest level of imports for 30 years. 
Based on projections, domestic consumption of steel should total 
about 5.8 million tons for 2006.  This is an increase of 27% 
over the 4.56 million tons consumed in 2005 and 10% higher than 
the previous record of 5.27 million tons in 1981.  The record 
demand for steel, cement and other construction materials is 
indicative of the economic and construction boom that the 
country is experiencing. 
 
-------------- 
PLATINUM GROUP 
-------------- 
Platinum Group Metal Ruthenium is up 1658% since 1999 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶9. (U) A recent report by PGM analyst Anthony Lipmann, reviewed 
the price movements of the top ten metals between April 1, 1999 
and January 15, 2007.  Of the PGMs, Ruthenium was the best 
performing metal with a price rise of nearly 1660% and worst 
performing was palladium.  The performance of the other 
PGM-associated metals is given below for interest.  Not to be 
outdone by these 'exotics', many industrial commodities and 
their ores also performed well, including copper, lead, zinc, 
tin, steel and iron ore, nickel, chromium, cement and a number 
of others. 
 
¶10. (U) The overall increase in the price of most commodities 
clearly shows the general strength of the world economy, driven 
by China with a year-on-year growth rate of more than 10% and 
followed, to a lesser extent, by India.  China is responsible 
for more than 50% of the increased demand for copper and a 
number of other metals.  The figures below show prices of some 
commodities as of January 15, 2007, and their percentage 
increases over prices on April 1, 1999: 
 
Rhodium $185,666 per kg - up 600% 
Platinum $36,940 per kg - up 220% 
Ruthenium $21,540 per kg - up 1660% 
Gold $20,184 per kg - up 125% 
Iridium $12,699 per kg - up 2.5% 
Osmium $12,217 per kg - down 5% 
Palladium $10,673 per kg - down 8.5% 
Rhenium $5500 per kg - up 292% 
Copper $2.54 per lb - up 274% 
 
--------- 
COMPANIES 
--------- 
Exxaro - a Major New Mining Company is Born 
------------------------------------------- 
¶11. (U) Exxaro, the black-empowered JSE-listed mining company, 
was formed when Kumba Resources, 67% owned by Anglo American, 
was split onto Kumba Iron Ore and Exxaro Resources.  Anglo 
retained its majority holding in Kumba, which owns the huge 
Sishen iron ore mine, one of the top ten such deposits in the 
world.  Exxaro was set up as a BEE-owned company to hold all 
non-iron ore assets, including coal, and immediately merged with 
another BEE coal producer, Eyesizwe Coal, to create the biggest 
coal producer in South Africa.  Anglo also gave Exxaro the 
option of taking over some of its other so-called non-core 
assets, which they are in the process of exercising.  These 
include Anglo's mineral sands operation Namakwa Sands and a 26% 
stake in its zinc and lead operation Black Mountain.  This will 
position Exxaro as one of the world's largest suppliers of 
titanium dioxide feedstock and zircon and strengthen its 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000035  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
position in the South African zinc market.  Exxaro will pay $300 
million in cash for the Namakwa plant and mine and $30 million 
in cash for the stake in Black Mountain, which includes the 
Gamsberg project - one of the world's largest undeveloped low 
grade zinc deposits. 
 
De Beers Cutting Technical Diamond Capabilities in South Africa 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
¶12. (U) De Beers is about to retrench 200 staff from its head 
office of 800 people, affecting many of the most experienced 
technical and exploration staff.   This is the third round of 
cuts over the past two years and is specifically aimed at De 
Beers Consolidated Mines (DBCM) which houses the group's South 
African mines.  The layoffs will also affect the separate De 
Beers Group operation that services its international 
operations. 
 
¶13. (U) De Beers' posture in South Africa has changed 
substantially over the past five years.  Five out of seven of 
its mines are considered to be non-profitable - depending on who 
is making the evaluation. The new SAG has from the very start 
viewed De Beers with suspicion and much of the new legislation 
and government rhetoric against the white-controlled mining 
industry has been directed at De Beers.  The draft royalty, 
beneficiation and diamond bills have all singled out diamonds 
for special treatment and higher tariffs and levies based on 
assumptions that South Africa is competitive with India and 
China in diamond cutting and jewelry manufacturing despite 
higher local wage rates and lack of capacity. 
 
¶14. (U) De Beers' new CEO Gareth Penny, appointed in February 
from the Diamond Trading Company (DTC), has developed a 
different business model for De Beers, which relies on 
purchasing technical skills rather than developing technology 
inhouse.  His background is in marketing.  He is in the process 
of driving an aggressive process to retrench technical and 
scientific staff.  As a consequence, De Beers is not a 'happy 
place' to be currently employed. 
 
¶15. (U) De Beers Diamond Company began life by consolidating the 
fabulously rich diamondiferous kimberlitic pipes in Kimberley, 
South Africa.  They developed technologies for exploiting these 
discoveries and conducted extensive research and exploration 
work into finding and exploiting alluvial and marine deposits. 
Until the mid-1990's, De Beers acted as custodian, promoter and 
chief nurturer of the global industry, using monopolistic 
practices to maintain the price of diamonds.  This enabled the 
industry in Africa to grow and prosper. 
Unfortunately, this also gave rise to some less beneficial side 
effects including 'conflict diamonds'. 
 
¶16. (U) De Beers also established partnerships with world-class 
research groups to develop synthetic industrial diamonds and to 
understand and develop the science of the genesis of diamonds. 
Progress in this latter venture opened the world to diamond 
exploration and contributed to finds in Canada and elsewhere. 
De Beers have been more than simply a producer of diamonds. 
They have developed new technologies and skills that have wider 
applications in medicine and other disciplines and this has been 
of considerable benefit to host countries.  Their greatest 
strength has been its great depth of in-house technical diamond 
mining, processing and exploration expertise.  This is 
apparently changing under the new leadership. 
 
----------------------- 
South Africa's Minerals 
----------------------- 
¶17. (U) The following are some of the major minerals produced in 
South Africa, according to the South African Council for 
Geoscience 
 
Platinum Group Minerals (PGMs) 
------------------------------ 
¶18. (U) South Africa hosts the Bushveld Complex (BC), the 
world's largest basic igneous intrusion covering an area of some 
65,000 square kilometers.  It is a veritable treasure chest of 
minerals, the best known being the platinum group minerals 
(PGM): platinum, palladium, rhodium, ruthenium, osmium and 
iridium.  South Africa is the world's major producer of PGMs and 
possesses over 87% of the known reserves.  In 2005, the total 
sales value was $6 billion.  The major use of PGMs is in 
catalytic converters, used in most modern cars to ensure that 
they meet increasingly stringent emissions control legislation. 
The Merensky Reef has produced the bulk of the world's platinum 
to date, although other important reefs, namely the UG2 - Upper 
Group chromitite seam number 2 - and the Platreef will become 
increasingly important as new mines are developed on the eastern 
and northern limbs of the BC, respectively. 
 
Coal 
 
JOHANNESBU 00000035  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
---- 
¶19. (U) Coal represents a reliable and abundant source of 
affordable energy and is fundamental to the development of the 
South African economy.   The country possesses the seventh 
largest resource-base in the world and coal has contributed 
significantly to South Africa's industrial and economic 
development.  In addition to being used for energy production, 
coal is vital in the metallurgical industry where it is used to 
reduce iron ore to steel and steel alloys.  South Africa is a 
world leader in the production of liquid fuels and chemicals 
from coal and Sasol produces some 30% of the country's liquid 
fuel needs.  Sasol also markets its coal-to-liquid (CTL) and 
gas-to-liquid (GTL) technology world-wide.  In 2005, the total 
sales value of coal was $5.6 billion, of which 69 million tons 
were exported, 112 million tons went to generate electricity, 45 
million tons was converted to liquid fuel, and 20 million tons 
went to the domestic market. 
 
Gold 
---- 
¶20. (U) Gold mining in South Africa began in 1871, in the 
Eesteling goldfield in the Limpopo Province.  Subsequent 
exploration revealed several other goldfields, the most 
important of which were Barberton, Sabie, and Pilgrim's Rest, 
all located in Mpumulanga Province.  These fields yielded over 
18 million ounces (560 tons) of gold.  In 1886, the fabulous 
Witwatersrand goldfield was discovered, which transformed the 
South African gold mining industry into the world leader, a 
position it still holds today.  The Witwatersrand is by far the 
largest known goldfield on earth, and has produced more than 1.5 
billion ounces (46,650 tons) of gold.  Its remaining resources 
amount to more than one billion ounces.  Although production is 
declining, total sales in 2005 were worth $4.2 billion. 
 
Diamonds 
-------- 
¶21. (U) The name diamond derives from the Greek word meaning 
invincible and refers to the minerals extreme hardness and 
resistance to acids and alkalis.  Diamonds were discovered in 
South Africa in 1866 and thereafter the country totally 
dominated world production until 1930.  The country has remained 
a smaller but significant producer and in 2005, it produced 15.7 
million carats worth $1.7 billion.  This made it the world's 
fifth biggest producer by weight and fourth by value.  It was in 
South Africa that diamonds were first found in their primary 
deposits, namely in kimberlite pipes (volcanic) and fissures and 
South Africa is the only country where diamonds are mined from 
primary and secondary alluvial and marine deposits. 
COFFMAN