07KAMPALA1351
NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (AUG 11 - AUG 24, 2007)
Fri Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO8990
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #1351/01 2360939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240939Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9262
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0637
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0426
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 3325
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KAMPALA 001351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL MOPS ASEC CASC EAID UG SU
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (AUG 11 - AUG 24, 2007) 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: The following Northern Uganda Notes provides 
information on the situation on the ground and USG activities aimed 
at meeting Mission's objectives in northern Uganda.  These 
objectives include promoting regional stability through peace and 
security, good governance, access to social services, economic 
growth, and humanitarian assistance.  Post appreciates feedback from 
consumers on the utility of this product and any gaps in information 
that need to be filled.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION PROCESSES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Government of Uganda held its first in a series of 
community consultations on accountability and reconciliation (Agenda 
Item 3 of the Juba peace process )  in Gulu August 20 to 22.  The 
consultation process is national and will culminate in a Kampala 
meeting to be held on September 26-27. The remaining community 
meetings will be held in Adjumani, Soroti, Lira, Mbale, Masaka, 
Mbarara, Masindi, and Arua.  The Gulu consultation was attended by 
almost three hundred representatives from all levels of local 
government, civil society, traditional leaders, opinion leaders, 
religious leaders, women, youth, IDP camp leadership and other 
victims groups. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Initial feedback reinforces suggestions to use a 
combination of traditional systems and the formal legal system to 
achieve accountability and reconciliation.  Neither will be 
satisfactory separately.  There is popular support to amend Ugandan 
law to include a list of crimes stipulated by the International 
Criminal Court (ICC) in order to try senior LRA in a way that 
satisfies the Rome Statute/ICC requirements nationally.  There are 
concerns that amnesty and disarmament, demobilization and 
reintegration (DDR) packages for the LRA may be seen as rewarding 
perpetrators, when the majority of the population in the north has 
been victimized by the war.  Finally, there is a strong desire for a 
truth telling process that includes UPDF.  Overall, the consultative 
process, as a national process, is being viewed positively, and the 
community appreciates the opportunity to have its voices heard. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (U) USAID has designed a new program aimed at mitigating the 
causes and consequences of conflict in order to promote stability, 
peace and reconciliation in Uganda. The program will be entitled 
Stability, Peace and Reconciliation In Northern Uganda (SPRING). 
Building on earlier and ongoing Mission programming in the North, 
including the Northern Uganda Peace Initiative (NUPI) and the 
Community Resilience and Dialogue (CRD) program, the new program 
will specifically seek to reduce current conflict, prevent the 
escalation of social, economic and political tensions and strengthen 
institutions for the promotion of peace and reconciliation.  To 
achieve this goal, SPRING will support a core set of activities in 
three component areas: (1) Peace-building and reconciliation; (2) 
Economic security and social inclusion and (3) Access to justice. 
SPRING will implement model activities which are scaleable, 
replicable, and sustainable. Activities will aim to have a lasting 
impact on promoting stability and consolidating peace by combining 
peace building efforts with economic opportunities that foster and 
entrench peace, while also improving access to justice for 
vulnerable populations. 
 
¶4. (U) SPRING will support the GOU's stated priority to end the 
conflict in northern Uganda peacefully and help establish the 
conditions for a transition from relief to recovery and development 
for the conflict-affected population in the North, as outlined in 
the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda 
(2007-2010) and the GOU's Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) 
(2005-2008).  The proposed program will be the core activity in 
USAID's multi-sector effort to mitigate the causes and consequences 
of violent conflict in Uganda. Under the SPRING activity, USAID will 
make an award of up to USD 9,500,000 for a period of 36 months. 
¶5. (U) Heavy rains since July in Teso Region have damaged crops and 
displaced approximately 2300 to 2800 households according to 
Lutheran World Federation (LWF) and UN OCHA. The affected population 
includes persons displaced (IDPs) by the LRA and cattle raiders form 
Karamoja.  Most affected areas are Ngariam, Magoro, Kapujan, Katakwi 
and Omodoi sub-counties in Katakwi District, and Abarilela, Acowa, 
Obalanga and Asamuk sub-counties in Amuria District.  Initial 
reports that 33,000 people were displaced appear to be inflated; 
however, the total affected population might be as high as 30,000. 
 
KAMPALA 00001351  002 OF 002 
 
 
The affected area is difficult to access, and roads have been cut 
off by the rains.  Immediate needs are supplies to prevent cholera 
outbreaks, insectide treated nets to mitigate against an increase in 
malaria for the most affected, and plastic sheeting.  UN OCHA is 
leading an interagency assessment.  No external assistance has been 
requested at this time.  Rains are expected to continue until late 
September. 
¶6. (U) IDP returns continue at a slow pace in Acholi sub-region, but 
the pace is expected to increase significantly in November to 
December when grass is widely available for thatching roofs 
(SEPTEL).  The increase in returns is expected with or without a 
final peace agreement.  However, it is likely that across Acholiland 
many IDPs will keep some presence in the camps to access services, 
and as a back-up plan should fighting resume.  Limited access to 
basic services in return areas will continue to be a contributing 
factor to the splitting of families.  Faced with tough decisions, 
many families choose to leave school aged children in camps with 
relatives to attend classes while they start to rebuild and wait for 
the village school to re-open. 
¶7. (U) Congresswoman Nita Lowey, six other members of congress and 
five congressional staffers visited Gulu on Sunday, August 19 
accompanied by Ambassador Steve Browning.  The CODEL observed NGO 
and USAID projects at the Umyama IDP Camp, received a briefing at 
the World Food Program warehouse in Gulu, discussed current 
humanitarian relief programs at a working lunch with NGO partners, 
and met with local government officials and religious leaders. 
- - - - - - - - 
SECURITY UPDATE 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (SBU) August 15 to 17 Senior Advisor on Conflict Resolution, 
Timothy Shortley, traveled to northern Uganda to meet with local 
leaders and affected populations.  The primary objectives of the 
trip were to discuss the peace process in Juba, including community 
consultations on agenda item three; how the US can help ensure a 
successful conclusion to the peace process, and a dignified return 
of the displaced population (IDPs); and support reconciliation and 
recovery.  The Senior Advisor met with IDPs and returnees in 
Omiyanima sub-county, Kitgum District, district officials in Gulu 
and Kitgum, NGOs, UN agencies, members of the Acholi Religious 
Leaders Peace Initiative, and  the European Commission Humanitarian 
Office (ECHO).  The visit was well received.  There is positive 
momentum around the peace process and IDP returns; however, gaps 
remain in recovery assistance that if unaddressed could hamper slow 
the process of recovery. 
 
¶9. (U) No security threats in LRA areas.  Little activity along the 
eastern boarder with Karamoja, raids are usually low during the 
rainy season. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Deputy Chief of Police Otim and State Prosecutor Martin 
agreed to implement roll call training for constables with the 
assistance of a prosecutor providing legal updates.  This new 
process will improve skills and knowledge and allow constables to 
perform at a higher level in serving the public. 
 
------------------------ 
IN THE MEDIA AND THE WEB 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. (U) On August 10 Ambassador Browning met with Ben Keesey, CEO of 
Invisible Children, Inc., and other representatives from the 
non-profit organization. IC used the meeting to update the 
Ambassador on their activities and to describe their efforts to 
provide to their audiences timely information on conditions in 
northern Uganda. IC representatives visiting U.S. college campuses, 
for example, are instructed to update audiences on the current night 
commuter statistics. The Invisible Children website's "News and 
Press" Section runs the State Department's August 16 statement in 
support of the Juba peace talks. The website also reprints a letter 
from A/S Bergner to Senator Feingold, describing the appointment of 
Timothy Shortley as Senior Advisor Conflict in Africa. The website, 
updated on August 17, editorializes that "this is (sic) most 
significant visible progress in U.S. policy toward the crisis in a 
long time, and a direct result in (sic) the efforts of IC and our 
partners in Washington, D.C." 
BROWNING