07KAMPALA1435
NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (AUGUST 25 - SEPTEMBER 7, 2007)
Wed Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO5328
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #1435/01 2551216
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121216Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9359
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0650
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0439
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 3349
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KAMPALA 001435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL MOPS ASEC CASC EAID UG SU
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (AUGUST 25 - SEPTEMBER 7, 2007) 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: The following Northern Uganda Notes provides 
information on the situation on the ground and USG activities aimed 
at meeting Mission's objectives in northern Uganda.  These 
objectives include promoting regional stability through peace and 
security, good governance, access to social services, economic 
growth, and humanitarian assistance.  Post appreciates feedback from 
consumers on the utility of this product and any gaps in information 
that need to be filled.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION PROCESSES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) As part of his ongoing efforts to help advance the peace 
process, U.N. Special Envoy for LRA Affected Areas Joachim Chissano 
met with President Francis Bozize of the Central African Republic on 
August 24.  Chissano then proceeded to Juba to consult with the 
Government of Southern Sudan mediator, Riek Machar. President Yoweri 
Museveni also met with Bozize on August 23 and reportedly received 
assurances that the LRA would not be allowed to use CAR territory 
for sanctuary. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On August 27, Minister of Internal Affairs Ruhakana Rugunda 
announced that the GOU would be mobilizing 350 million USD for a 
reparations fund to help victims of the LRA.  Funds were expected to 
come from donors.  Rugunda said that the funds for the three-year 
project were aimed at the overall development of victims' 
communities.  He emphasized that individuals would not receive 
payments. 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to a survey entitled "New Population Based Data 
on Attitudes about Peace and Justice," northerners indicate that 
health (45.2 percent), peace (44.1 percent), livelihood concerns - 
land, food, money, and education remain their top priorities.  The 
survey of eight northern Ugandan districts was conducted by the 
University of California Berkeley's Human Rights Center which 
interviewed 2,875 northerners in Gulu, Kitgum, Pader, Oyam, Lira, 
Soroti, and Amuria from April to June 2007.  Other key findings 
include: only three percent of the respondents mentioned justice as 
a priority, but 70 percent said it was important to hold accountable 
those who committed human rights violations.  A majority (76 
percent) said that pursuing trials prior to the conclusion of the 
peace talks would endanger the peace process. 
 
¶5. (SBU) During the Government of Uganda consultations in Gulu, 
Adjumani, Soroti and Lira, the desire for a truth commission was 
repeated many times.  There was considerable support for the use of 
traditional mechanisms instead of formal justice.  Northern 
residents in these districts stressed the importance of peace and 
reconciliation.  Some residents favored punitive justice.  A UNOCHA 
observer described the meetings as highly successful, well- 
structured, and actively involving participants.  The national 
consultations will continue until the end of September. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Africa Bureau Assistant Secretary Jendayi Frazer traveled 
to Uganda from September 4-5 and met with President Museveni and 
northern leaders.  She was accompanied by Tim Shortley, Senior 
Advisor for Conflict Resolution, who remained behind to meet with 
GOU negotiators, donors, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 
and military officials.  He traveled to Juba to meet with GOSS 
mediators and UN officials. 
 
¶7. (SBU) USG Activities: Senator Russell Feingold visited Uganda 
from August 26-30.  Feingold met with President Museveni, Minister 
of Defense, Government negotiators, parliamentarians, local elected 
and religious leaders and internally displaced persons.  During a 
visit to Onangko IDP camp, residents expressed a strong desire to 
return home.  Discussions centered on security reform, particularly 
deployment of civilian police, disarmament, demobilization, and 
reintegration of the LRA. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (SBU) Local northern leaders continue in their rhetoric against 
"non-performing" non-governmental organizations (NGOs) operating in 
Northern Uganda.  During a dinner to celebrate the passing of the 
2007/2008 budget, Gulu District Chairman Norbert Mao announced that 
he and the Vice Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, Reagan 
Okumu, would be opening "war" against poorly functioning NGOs.  Mao 
asserted that NGOs target Gulu and other northern districts to raise 
funds.  He argued that this insincerity leads to poor service for 
 
KAMPALA 00001435  002 OF 003 
 
 
Ugandans.  On August 24, Mao ousted the Spanish arm of Medecins San 
Frontiers from Gulu.  He claimed that the organization provided the 
community of Omoro County, Gulu with outdated tuberculosis 
medication and unauthorized HIV/AIDS medication.  WHO has 
investigated and found MSF to be providing treatment in line with 
national protocols. 
 
¶9. (SBU) UNOCHA launched the 2008 Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP) 
August 21-22.  United Nations agencies, international and national 
(NGOs), donors, Government of Uganda ministries and departments, and 
representatives from 12 districts in the Acholi, Lango, Teso and 
Karamoja sub-regions participated.  Humanitarian and transition 
priorities for 2008 include: 
 
  -- Education: support for the rehabilitation of 
  schools, construction of staff quarters and return of 
 
                                displaced schools; 
--Health: maintenance of health centers in camps. 
          Increased staffing, rehabilitation of health units and 
construction of staff quarters and provision of health services in 
the parishes of return; 
--Water and sanitation: distribution of sanitation kits, maintenance 
of facilities and hygiene promotion; 
--Livelihoods: food aid in camps, especially for EVIs, camp 
rehabilitation as IDPs move out, phasing down food aid in transit 
camps and stepping up production, intensified livelihood 
diversification and expanded production; 
--Protection: re-establishment of rule of law; disarmament and 
demobilization of local defense units (LDUs); DDR of "reporters"; 
-- Community development: psychological interventions, 
                                         strengthening of government 
structures, youth employment/skills development, combating 
environmental degradation. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The New Vision newspaper reported that Rotary Club 
International will sponsor over 100 local doctors and doctors from 
India to treat victims of the LRA.  The Indian doctors have also 
successfully treated patients in Tanzania, Lesotho, and Swaziland. 
The treatment will take place at seven hospitals in Gulu, Kitgum, 
Pader, Apac, Lira and Oyam districts.  A conference entitled, 
"Access to Surgical Service" followed on August 30. 
 
¶11. (SBU) The reopening of the Coorom Primary School in Barlonyo, 
Lango District demonstrates the challenges ahead in return areas. 
The renewal of classes coincided with the influx of returning IDPs. 
However, Coorom like many other schools already lacks sufficient 
supplies, books, and teachers.  Some argue that the reestablishment 
of such communities is premature, because GOU resources are 
stretched thin and can not meet the growing educational needs of 
returning IDPs. 
 
¶12. (SBU) USG Activities: A U.S. Department of Labor funded program, 
KURET, continued to help war and HIV/AIDS affected children who are 
vulnerable to labor exploitation.  On August 28, Marjorie Lagen, 
Project Manager, stated that KURET's current objective was to 
educate and train up to 8,100 children in the north.  This would 
remove children from exploitative labor situations.  KURET currently 
provides students with scholarships, health and psychological 
counseling, and training for teachers to manage trauma affected 
children. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
IN THE MEDIA AND THE WEB 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13. (U) Vincent Otti, the LRA's second-in-command, lashed out 
against the ICC during a recent telephone interview with the Daily 
Monitor.  Otti declared that the ICC aims to squash opposition to 
bad governments.  Moreover, he accused the ICC of a double standard 
because the court does not prosecute current presidents who 
participate in criminal activity.  Otti argued that this 
quasi-immunity also applies to the former National Resistance Army 
(NRA), which brought Museveni to power, and UPDF commanders. 
 
¶14. (U) A/S Frazer's visit to Uganda received extensive press 
coverage.  A/S Frazer expressed U.S. support for the ongoing peace 
talks in Juba, but warned that the negotiations would not be 
open-ended. "Make peace quickly or we'll be coming after you, US 
tells Kony," headlined the Nairobi based "The East African." The 
same paper also said that "Marines will hunt down LRA rebels if 
talks fail." Walter Ochora, Gulu Resident District Commission, is 
quoted as saying "We did not push for that position in our meeting 
 
KAMPALA 00001435  003 OF 003 
 
 
with Dr. Frazer... The U.S. government supports the peace talks, but 
they don't want endless talks." Ochora also noted that the Assistant 
Secretary had committed U.S. support for recovery in the north, 
 
SIPDIS 
saying that, "The government of the U.S. is going to support the 
resettlement programme fully. This programme is very expensive, it 
is going to cost about $500 million, but she assured us that her 
government will support this programme substantially." The 
government-controlled "New Vision" newspaper led with the more 
restrained, "U.S. Wants Deadline for Talks."