07KABUL4211
THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN AGRICULTURAL FAIRS IN
Sat Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO1705
PP RUEHIK RUEHPOD RUEHPW RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #4211/01 3631250
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291250Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2048
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC 0576
RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4330UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KABUL 004211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/RA, AND SCA/A 
DEPT PASS AID/ANE 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR GERBER AND KLEIN 
DEPT PASS OPIC FORZAHNISER 
DEPT PASS TDA FOR STEIN AND GREENIP 
CENTCOM FOR CSTC-A 
NSC FOR JWOOD 
TREASURY FOR LMCDONALD, ABAUKOL, BDAHL, AND MNUGENT 
OSD FOR SHIVERS 
COMMERCE FOR DEES, CHOPPIN, AND FONOVICH 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV EFIN ENRG ETRD ECON AF
SUBJECT: THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN AGRICULTURAL FAIRS IN 
AFGHANISTAN IN 2007 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. USAID hosted seven successful Agricultural Fairs (AgFairs) 
in CY 2007 with a variety of partners.  Nearly 
300,000 people attended the two national AgFairs 
held in Kabul and five regional AgFairs held in the 
provinces of Helmand, Nangarhar, Badakhshan, Balkh, 
and Herat. Agricultural professionals ranging from 
farmers to farm equipment suppliers and 
veterinarians had the opportunity to network and 
gain information that they can apply to improving 
their farms and agri-businesses. On October 24, 
2007, at the Second National AgFair in Kabul, U.S. 
Ambassador William Wood unveiled the plaque to 
officially inaugurate the adjacent 57-hectare 
demonstration farm that was built through 
the support of USAID. Events took place without 
security incidents due to cooperation between USAID, 
the Regional Security Office, ISAF Headquarters, 
Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs), U.S. 
Military, and local police and security forces. 
Local and international press coverage was 
extensive and positive. End summary. 
 
---------------- 
WHAT IS AGFAIR? 
---------------- 
 
¶2. AgFair is an agricultural trade show and festival 
co-sponsored by the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL), the Afghanistan 
International Chamber of Commerce (AICC) and USAID. 
The purpose of the fair is to boost private sector 
agriculture initiatives, educate farmers on modern 
farming techniques and raise the profile of the 
Ministry of Agriculture. 
 
¶3. AgFair is an excellent example of the public- 
private partnerships beginning to spring up in 
Afghanistan. In addition to MAIL, USAID and AICC, 
several diverse corporate sponsors supported AgFairs 
including: Kam Air (Airlines), Tolo/Lemar/Arman 
(Media), Coca Cola (Beverage), Case New Holland 
(Agricultural and Construction equipment), Cristal 
Water (Beverage) and the Serena Hotel (Hospitality). 
 
------------------------------------ 
WHERE? NATIONAL AND REGIONAL AGFAIRS 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. The First National AgFair was held in Kabul on 
April 21-23, 2007. The AgFair was attended by 
approximately 52,000 Afghan visitors and more than 
175 local and international exhibitors participated. 
Prominent luminaries attending the event included: 
Mr. David Murdock, CEO, Chairman and Owner of Dole 
Foods Company; Danko Stambuk, Dole Senior Vice 
President of Manufacturing; and Overseas Private 
Investment Corporation (OPIC) President Robert 
Mosbacher. Local and international media coverage 
was extensive. 
 
¶5. The First Agricultural Fair in Lashkar Gah, 
Helmand was held on August 22 and was organized by 
the USAID-funded Alternative Development Program 
South (ADP/S). More than 1,700 people attended, 
 
KABUL 00004211  002 OF 005 
 
 
including farmers and traders from Herat, Kandahar, 
Ghazni and Helmand. The event took place without 
incident due to cooperation between Task Force 
Helmand and local security forces. The Afghan 
Innovative Consulting Bureau (AICB) conducted a post 
event survey by interviewing 28 traders, 15 
farms/cooperatives and 36 farmers to track 
attendance and business transactions. Producers and 
traders reported $5,404 in actual sales on the day 
of the event and $70,874 of agriculture and related 
products after the fair (as of September 2007). The 
main trade products at the AgFair were tractors, 
agricultural fertilizers, carpets, vegetables and 
dairy products. Local and international press 
coverage was extensive, including a positive article 
by the New York Times on August 26, 2007 featuring 
the fair and quotes by USAID representatives. 
 
¶6. The USAID-funded Alternative Development Program 
for Eastern Afghanistan (ADP/E), MAIL and 
regional trade associations organized the Jalalabad 
2007 Agro-Industrial Trade Fair from September 4-6. 
The event was aimed at strengthening market linkages 
in the agricultural supply chain and build trade 
opportunities as well as help capitalize on its 
proximity to major domestic and international market 
centers. More than 12,500 people participated in the 
event, including more than 90 produce buyers from 
other regions of Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, 
Turkey, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. The exhibitors 
included over 143 input suppliers, farmers, 
processors, traders and service providers. Media 
coverage of the AgFair event was extensive: 
including 17 media representatives from TV, radio, 
Internet, newspapers, and news wires. The economic 
impact reported to date is also impressive as 
initial sales  and transactions include: 400 MT of 
wheat seeds sold (value of $160,000); 200 MT of 
melons exported to India (value of $78,000); 60,000 
fruit trees sold (value of $72,000). Jalalabad 
traders and producers also participated in the other 
national and regional AgFairs. 
 
¶7. The Second Kabul AgFair (October 24-26) attracted 
record crowds and received positive press coverage 
by approximately 20 media outlets throughout 
Afghanistan, as well as BBC, The Independent and 
The Scotsman, both major British daily papers. The fair 
attracted 175 exhibitors and an estimated 160,000 visitors 
exceeding pre-fair goals of 165 exhibitors and 100,000 visitors. 
New farm machinery was demonstrated to Afghan farmers. 
Key events included the unveiling of the new AgFarm 
to the public and a Knowledge Center that hosted 
programs on important agriculture issues. AgFair 
exhibitors varied from small, women owned businesses 
to large, multi-national corporations such as DHL. 
The majority of participants fell into the 
Agriculture Resources category, which included 
banks, transportation firms, donors and 
international NGOs. Participants from the Farm 
Outputs category, such as dry fruit and nut 
associations/exporters and fresh fruit producers, 
were well represented at the fair.  Only a few End 
Products exhibitors (food processors) participated 
in the fair. USAIDQs Alternative Development and 
Agriculture Office is working towards increasing 
commercial agriculture opportunities. The lack of 
participants in this sector is probably due to the 
 
KABUL 00004211  003 OF 005 
 
 
fact that there are few food processing businesses 
in Afghanistan.  Four AgFair networking events took 
place on and off site. A 50 person Indian delegation 
also attended the AgFair to network with Afghan 
companies. A womenQs networking dinner was held at 
the Serena Hotel to help women make to the most of 
the AgFair opportunity. 
 
¶8. The USAID-funded Alternative Development Program 
North (ADP/N), MAIL and regional trade 
associations organized the BadakhshanQs first-ever 
Agricultural Fair. The fair attracted an estimated 
15,000 attendees over two days (October 29-30), 
triple the expected attendance rate. 106 exhibitors 
of agricultural goods, techniques, and crafts from 
all over Badakhshan participated in the AgFair. 
Notably, 29 of the 106 exhibitors were women. The 
AgFair created business connections between 
cooperatives, traders, and entrepreneurs and allowed 
information sharing on commercial agricultural 
techniques between farmers from all across 
Badakhshan province. While an economic survey is in 
process, the initial data is promising. WomenQs 
groups reported overall strong sales. The First 
Micro-Finance Bank reported a 10% increase in new 
clients after exhibiting at the Fair. A womenQs 
textile company generated $1,200 in sales Q a huge 
amount for Badakhshan. Beyond the initial economic 
impact, the social impact is evident on the impact 
on local officials. Muhammad Alim, Badakhshan 
Provincial Director of Agriculture noted that: QAt 
the AgFair, I have seen things that I had never 
imagined could be found in Badakhshan...  This 
AgFair is successful beyond all my expectations. 
 
¶9. The first Mazar AgFair (November 1-3) attracted 
an estimated 36,000 attendees for the two public 
days. The fair attracted 94 exhibitors in booths, 
over 100 cultural presentations in tents, four food and 
beverage vendors, and over a dozen agricultural 
equipment displays.  The Agriculture commercial 
exhibitors included: 12 seed companies, 17 
agricultural associations small and medium sized 
tool companies/associations; two animal skin 
companies; eight carpet and handicraft companies; one 
fertilizer company; two dairy companies; five dry fruit 
companies; and three livestock businesses. An additional 
200 women exhibited handicrafts in the Cultural 
Center. A demonstration plot was erected to 
demonstrate various farming technologies and a 
greenhouse was constructed to demonstrate greenhouse 
management and water irrigation. Teaching 
demonstrations also included the use of modern farm 
machinery. The teaching demonstrations and demo plot 
enhanced the hourly lecture presented within the 
Knowledge Center.  The 150 seating was almost always 
at capacity and included topics ranging from 
marketing, production techniques and water 
management. 
 
¶10. The Herat AgFair (November 15-18) was completed 
successfully, despite heightened security risk 
following the unrelated bomb incident in Baghlan on 
November 6. More than 20,000 people attended the 
fair with 150 exhibitors participating. The Herat 
agricultural trade show featured national and 
international businessmen, farmers, exhibitors, 
traders and investors.  The Herat AgFair also 
 
KABUL 00004211  004 OF 005 
 
 
highlighted USAID programs including the Grape 
Export Program, the Melon Fly Eradication Project, 
the Trellis Project, Brooding Coops (chicken and egg 
production), and an ice cream plant. Additionally a 
greenhouse was on display and farmers had the 
opportunity to learn about cucumber production. 
While the Herat AgFair was scaled down after the Baghlan 
bombing in terms of advertising and entertainment, 
which were cancelled for political reasons (out of 
respect for the victims), USAID and partners were 
able to quickly respond to create a meaningful 
AgFair. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
AGRICULTURE DEMONSTRATION FARM AT BADAM BAGH (KABUL 
ONLY) 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶11. Adjacent to the Badam Bagh fairgrounds in Kabul 
is AgFarm, a 57-hectare demonstration farm built 
through the support of USAID.  AgFarm was built to 
demonstrate new technologies in water resource 
management, season extension and new fodder crops 
that are beneficial to the soil. 
 
¶12. A drip irrigation system was introduced to 
Afghan farmers during the fair. Drip irrigation 
provides targeted irrigation water to crops.  This 
technology is used by farmers world-wide to increase 
water efficiency. Improved flood irrigation was also 
demonstrated through the use of the 6,500,000-liter 
water reservoir and precision, laser-leveled fields. 
Additionally, simple siphons were demonstrated. 
These measures and other simple and technically 
appropriate measures can improve water use 
efficiency by more than 30%. AgFarm was designed to 
show farmers how. 
 
¶13. Visitors to AgFarm also learned about the many 
test crops that were recently harvested at the farm. 
Drip irrigation and plastic mulch technology were 
employed to increase the length of the growing 
season, save water, and grow higher value crops such 
as strawberries, tomatoes, peppers, squash, zucchini 
and okra. New fall and winter crops designed to 
increase soil nutrition, reduce fertilizer cost, and 
reduce soil erosion are being planted. These include 
canola, field peas, fodder oats, and other 
experimental fodder crops, like turnips. These kinds 
of crops allow farmers to produce nutritious fodder 
for their livestock year-round while building up 
their soil. Visitors were offered the opportunity to 
take a guided tour of the farm to learn about new 
crop possibilities. 
 
¶14. USAID has also installed an improved Kishmish 
Khana, or raisin drying shed, on the AgFarm. This 
facility provides shade to dry about 15,000 kg of 
fresh grapes into about 4,000 kg of premium green 
raisins. The improved drying shed was developed 
after researching other drying sheds in the region. 
The new design produces a prized traditional product 
with strong market potential under much cleaner and 
more efficient conditions. There are currently five 
Kishmish Khana prototypes being tested in Kandahar. 
Although they have only been in use for one season, 
initial experience suggests that the redesign 
reduces wastage by as much as 20%; produces a 
 
KABUL 00004211  005 OF 005 
 
 
cleaner, more attractive product; and helps Afghan 
farmers meet market demand in India. Mechanized 
plows, cultivators and other equipment were 
demonstrated during the fair. 
 
-------------------------------- 
ECONOMIC IMPACT / FUTURE AGFAIRS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶16. While AgFair economic impact surveys are in 
process, overall attendance levels, initial sales 
transactions, business deals, and impact on foreign 
firm delegation visits is promising. USAID and 
implementing partners are already planning the 2008 
AgFairs. As the planning progresses, including 
specific dates and locations, USAID will coordinate 
closely with partners to generate an even greater 
impact next year. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶17. AgFairs work and are becoming a growing 
tradition and driving force in boosting the 
agriculture sector in Afghanistan; linking people to 
partners, ideas and business opportunities. The 
events have raised the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation, and LivestockQs profile and have 
underscored the importance of agriculture in 
Afghanistan. The seven AgFairs without incident are 
one of several helpful signs that instills more 
confidence by Afghans in their government to 
organize events. End comment. 
 
WOOD