07KABUL1744
UPDATE ON AFGHAN REFUGEES, DEPORTEES, AND SQUATTERS
Thu May 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO7941
OO RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHPW RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #1744/01 1441404
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241404Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8306
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY 0031
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 4110
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 6720UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KABUL 001744 
 
SIPDIS 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y  (GENEVA ADDED) 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR HARRIMAN 
OSD FOR SHIVERS 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76 POLAD 
GENEVA FOR PRM M. STORELLA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PREL PHUM AF
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON AFGHAN REFUGEES, DEPORTEES, AND SQUATTERS 
 
REF: A. KABUL 1594 
     ¶B. KABUL 1605 
 
KABUL 00001744  001.3 OF 005 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Recent developments relating to three distinct 
segments of the wave of Afghan "returnees" - refugees 
from Pakistan, deported irregular migrants from Iran, 
and Kuchi squatters near Pol-i-Charki - have renewed 
focus on refugee/displaced persons issues.  Over 
200,000 refugees have returned from Pakistan in 2007, 
with over half returning to Nangarhar.  Approximately 
62,000 Afghans have been deported from Iran. 
International Organization on Migration (IOM) reports 
that the government and local communities are 
providing adequate support for those passing through 
the transit centers near the Iranian border, but also 
expresses concern regarding the implications of the 
significant number of single men returning to Nimruz 
and Farah provinces.  Finally, 350 Kuchi families are 
squatting in the Kabul area, claiming right to the 
land.  President Karzai has asked Second Vice 
President Khalili to lead GoA efforts to address the 
issues relating to the returnees from Iran and 
Pakistan.  In a May 24th meeting convened by Karzai, 
Khalili highlighted the importance of providing 
returnees with reintegration assistance.  The 
Ambassador highlighted the significant U.S. assistance 
already being provided and welcomed UNAMA's 
announcement of a special appeal for assistance to 
deal with the recent wave of returns.  Other donors 
also expressed support.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. Approximately 5 million Afghans have voluntarily 
returned since 2002, contributing to the explosive 
population growth of Kabul and other cities.  A 
comparable number still reside in Iran and Pakistan. 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
estimates that there are as many as one million 
irregular Afghan migrants and 920,000 registered 
refugees in Iran.  There are an estimated 2.6 million 
Afghan refugees in Pakistan, 2.1 million of whom are 
registered.  Most will return to their own houses or 
stay with family or friends (Nangarhar, Farah, Nimruz, 
Herat, Ghazni, and Kandahar have seen the most 
population growth due to recent returnees), although 
some will end up moving on to Kabul or other cities 
seeking job opportunities and a relatively stable 
security situation. 
 
-------------------- 
Refugee Repatriation 
-------------------- 
 
¶3. Both Iran and Pakistan have signed separate 
trilateral agreements on refugees with Afghanistan and 
UNHCR.  These agreements, which apply to registered 
refugees, aim to return refugees in a gradual and 
dignified manner, taking into account the absorptive 
capacity of GoA.  In February, the Pak-Afghan-UNHCR 
Trilateral Commission decided to close four refugee 
camps in Pakistan, two in NWFP and two in Baluchistan. 
Two camps are to be closed by June 15, the second set 
by August 31.  We support the program as part of a 
larger strategy to remove targets of opportunity for 
Taliban recruitment and source of contention between 
Kabul and Islamabad.  The refugees have the option of 
returning to Afghanistan or relocating to other camps 
(in northern NWFP, inaccessible in the winter).  80% 
 
KABUL 00001744  002.4 OF 005 
 
 
of registered refugees in Pakistan (many of whom have 
been there for decades) express reluctance to return 
to Afghanistan due to insecurity, lack of employment, 
and relative lack of comparable social services, 
including health care and education. 
 
¶4. UNHCR's 2007 voluntary repatriation program is 
being conducted in two phases.  The first phase, from 
March 1 to April 15, gave undocumented Afghans the 
opportunity to leave Pakistan with UNHCR assistance. 
206,112 took advantage of the offer, many motivated by 
the threat of arrest, detention, and deportation. 
(Note: There are some indications that many of these 
"returnees" are not genuine refugees but regular 
border-crossers eager to take advantage of a generous 
UNHCR repatriation package.  The 2007 UNHCR 
repatriation package is $100 per returnee verses an 
average of $23 per returnee in 2006.  On average, 
25,000 cross the border daily, often without 
documentation. End Note.)  78% of these returnees 
went to eastern provinces; 145,933 returned to 
Nangarhar.  The second phase for registered refugees 
began on April 19 and will run through November. 
10,000 have returned thus far, but the rate is 
expected to increase.  Much will depend upon the 
evolving security situation in the southern and 
southeastern provinces. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Deportees from Iran: Just the Opening Salvo? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Following Teheran's announcement on January 21 that 
it intended to "regularize" illegal Afghans living in 
Iran -- and unproductive negotiations with the GOA, 
Iran's Disciplinary and Special Forces began forcibly 
removing Afghans on April 21.  An estimated 62,108 
Afghans have been forcibly deported.  IOM and UNHCR 
stress that, with very few exceptions, these returnees 
are not refugees, but irregular migrants, some who 
have been living in Iran for years.  Returnees are 
transiting through two primary border crossings - 
Zaranj in Nimruz (37,778 crossed, mostly families) and 
Islam Qala in Herat (24,330 crossed, mostly single 
males).  In Nimruz, returnees are directed toward a 
transit center, where twenty tents, drinking water, 
food, and medical care are available.  IOM reports 
that the conditions in the centers are adequate, due 
to support from ministries, local communities, and the 
Red Crescent Society.  The deportees can stay in the 
center for up to 48 hours and then will return to 
their home provinces, most via private truck.  The 
majority of deportees are from Farah, which has 
received at least 1,674 families, with the remainder 
from Nimruz and Herat.  IOM notes it is clear that 
these very poor provinces do not have the capacity to 
absorb the deportees and provide even minimal 
services.  There is deep concern about the significant 
number of unemployed and likely disaffected young men 
being returned to this border region.  The problem 
will intensify if Iran continues to oust irregular 
migrants and repatriate one million Afghans by March 
2008, which is its stated goal.  Voluntary 
repatriations from Iran have been very low (1,262 
since March). 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Kuchi Squatters in Kabul: Setting a Dangerous 
Precedent? 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. According to a MoRR and UNHCR assessment team 
(corroborated by a CSTC-A/MoD team), around 350 Kuchi 
families of the Ahmad Zai tribe returned from Pakistan 
on April 27 and settled in the Butkhak area, near Pol- 
 
KABUL 00001744  003 OF 005 
 
 
i-Charki.  Their representative, Haji Munjai, who is 
well-connected to a number of GoA ministers (including 
General Wardak, which may explain MoD involvement) and 
who has been based in this area for nearly two years, 
reportedly received assurances from former Minister 
Akbar that MoRR would provide them with water if they 
returned.  The tribe then moved to the Butkhak area of 
Kabul, claiming right to the land (they have no 
documentation).  (Comment: Land use disputes between 
Afghan communities and the traditionally nomadic 
Kuchi are not infrequent.  End Comment.)  MoRR has 
been providing two or three tankers of water to the 
refugees each day, but hesitated in providing other 
assistance, concerned about establishing a permanent 
illegal camp and encouraging similar squatting.  On 
May 21, Minister Wardak nevertheless directed delivery 
of tents, blankets, and additional water; it is 
unclear whether he consulted MoRR or POA.  Other 
reports, which UNHCR and MoRR deny, have suggested 
that seven refugees have died.  The UN has 
unofficially adopted a "steer clear" attitude, citing 
political sensitivities of supporting one ethnic 
group's claim to a particular area.  The group there 
now says it intends to stay, and the number of Kuchi 
and other refugees could easily grow to 10-20,000 
persons this summer.  UNAMA is convening a meeting of 
interested parties with the National Emergency 
Commission on May 27 and a meeting with the Governor 
of Kabul on Monday, May 28 to discuss the status of 
these families. 
 
------------------------- 
Reintegration and Funding 
------------------------- 
 
¶7. A main element of MoRR's reintegration effort for 
returnees (focusing on those from Pakistan) has been a 
nation-wide land distribution plan for returnees, 
which has been hampered by limited infrastructure and 
resources.  UNHCR and donor nations, including the 
U.S. (through PRM), established a pilot project 
focused on five provinces (Nangarhar, Herat, Logar, 
Baghlan, and Ghazni) to improve land distribution 
sites and basic infrastructure.  In Nangarhar, there 
is one land distribution site for the province, which 
is located 35 km outside of Jalalabad.  There are 
8,000 plots of land, but more than 40,000 have applied 
for these limited resources.  Approximately 1,000 
families are living at the distribution center; 
shelter and water are being provided by donor nations, 
including the U.S. 
 
¶8. Anticipating emerging refugee/IDP needs, Congress 
allocated supplemental funding of $16 million in 
Migration and Refugee Assistance (MRA) funds and an 
estimated $18 million from the International Disaster 
and Famine Assistance (IDFA) for Afghanistan.  These 
funds may be used for shelter, fuel, and other 
necessities, including water and sanitation, health 
care, roads, livelihoods, education and training, and 
capacity building within the ministries charged with 
reintegration and relevant development.  Funds will be 
used "in and around Kabul," where many IDPs may 
eventually settle, as well as other provinces such as 
Nangarhar and Kandahar, where many returnees are 
expected to go initially.  These funds have some 
degree of inherent flexibility so that assistance can 
be tailored to the changing needs on the ground as the 
situation evolves.  A 3-person IFDA team will arrive 
in Kabul in early June to work with the GOA, UNHCR, 
donors, and NGOs to develop a strategy to meet the 
needs of returnees and IDPs in the short, medium, and 
long-term. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
KABUL 00001744  004.2 OF 005 
 
 
President Karzai Calls Refugee Meeting 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. President Karzai convened the diplomatic corps on 
May 24 to announce the GOA's determination to address 
the problem of the large number of Afghans returning 
from Pakistan (mostly as refugees) and Iran (mostly as 
deported illegal workers) and underline Afghanistan's 
urgent need for support.  The President said he had 
asked Second Vice President Khalili to lead the GOA's 
efforts.  Minister of Refugee Affairs Akbar (who 
remains in office despite parliament's no-confidence 
vote against him) spoke briefly.  Khalili, who led 
most of the discussion, claimed that Afghanistan's 
"enemies" were trying to use refugees and deportations 
to create instability and political difficulties for 
the GOA.  He underlined the importance of providing 
the support necessary to allow the returnees to 
reintegrate.  Priorities must be shelter and 
employment. 
 
¶10. Karzai told the ambassadors that he had sent a 
letter to President Ahmadinejad asking for a pause in 
the deportations from Iran.  In the meantime, an 
Afghan delegation was traveling to Teheran in an 
attempt to reach agreement on a more coordinated 
program for the return of the irregular Afghans that 
Iran is determined to return. 
 
¶11. Deputy SRSG Chris Alexander provided a summary of 
UNHCR IOM, and WFP efforts to provide assistance 
particularly to the Afghans being deported from Iran. 
Alexander emphasized that the Trilateral (GOA, GOI, 
UNHCR) mechanism was not an adequate mechanism for 
dealing with the problem of the deported irregular 
Afghans, as this population is not covered by the 
agreement.  He described Iran's actions as not meeting 
acceptable humanitarian standards, and commented that 
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission might 
be able to play a role.  Alexander noted the work 
being done by the Ministry of Housing and the Ministry 
of Rural Rehabilitation and Development to address the 
needs of the returnees and announced that Geneva will 
be sending out an appeal for international support. 
 
¶12. The Ambassador congratulated the GOA for 
mobilizing to deal with the recent wave of returns 
and welcomed the announcement the UN would be 
making an appeal for multinational support.  He said 
the U.S. would be prepared to response to such an 
appeal. 
 
¶13. Other Ambassadors expressed their support.  The 
French Ambassador volunteered that he would be 
reporting immediately ForMin Kouchner, whom he 
indicated is a close friend of Karzai.  Saudi Arabia 
was optimistic about providing assistance, as was 
Canada, especially for Kanadahar.  The Chinese would 
check with Beijing.  Others present were Norway, 
Japan, and Spain, as well as UNHCR and IOM. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶14. The GOA will need to work closely with 
UNHCR and IOM to develop and implement a comprehensive 
reintegration plan that can deal both with the recent 
influx of returns from Iran as well as the long- 
anticipated returns from Pakistan.  Given the 
political beating the Ministry of Refugees has 
received over its failure to prevent the Iranian 
deportations, the GOA is clearly trying to take a more 
proactive approach to the issue.  As made clear in the 
meeting with ambassadors, this includes appeals for 
 
KABUL 00001744  005.2 OF 005 
 
 
increased international assistance. 
WOOD