07KHARTOUM768
AEC PLENARY MEETING- May 15, 2007
Wed May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0768/01 1361134
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161134Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7220UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000768 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/SPG, AF/EPS, EB/IFD, AND EB/ESC 
STATE PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR, AND ALSO PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EFIN ECON EAID SU
SUBJECT: AEC PLENARY MEETING- May 15, 2007 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  The Assessment and Evaluation Commission (AEC) held 
its 20th plenary session in Khartoum on May 15.  AEC Chair Vraalsen 
delivered a summary of his May assessment trip to Kordofan, Blue 
Nile, Khartoum, and Bahr al Jabel states.  Noting difficulties in 
scheduling, attendance, and overall coordination with the National 
Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement 
(SPLM), Vraalsen questioned the commktment gf thuse par4ies$to t`e 
QDc.! There$#gommndsemicteQ$a `%nhqb8rwpnsu!Qrm$4le @c@#AneQK_RlO d3(uujL4c4omQeyhQQq9avs*v!t|$(@-{g Lih%QpQkzt}3Q`(Q 
w'nIp8&8'yz4il.U?3l%,v,QwuQed a detailed report of his 
May travel throughout Sudan.  Focusing much attention on the Blue 
Nile, chairman Vraalsen stated that there is a "sharp delineation" 
between SPLM and GNU controlled areas.  According to Blue Nile 
officials, the Government of National Unity (GNU) has not delivered 
funds to this state, leading to continued difficulties for the 
development of education sector, joint integrated units (JIU), and 
continued disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) 
efforts.  On his visit to Juba (May 1-3), Vraalsen found the city 
"booming with construction and trade."  According to his report, the 
WFP program, road construction, and the de-mining activities are all 
thriving. He also noted that AEC's new facility in Juba should be 
operational by August 2007.  Vraalsen stated that he understands 
funds from the 2007 budget for the census have not been disbursed. 
Chairman Vraalsen ended his comments urging the NCP and SPLM to take 
their commitment to the AEC more seriously, saying, ""I expect full 
cooperation [from the SPLM and NCP.]  We cannot continue going down 
this road." 
 
¶3. The NCP representatives, Idris Muhammad Abd Al-Qadar and Abdel 
Rahman Ibrahim El Khalifa, responded to Vraalsen's comments, stating 
that their commitment to the AEC should not be questioned, calling 
his remarks "unfortunate."  Al-Qadar objected to Vraalsen's bleak 
picture of the Blue Nile state and added that the funds for the 
census from the 2006 budget have been paid in full and that the 2007 
portion will be made through a quarterly allocation. 
 
¶4.  The SPLM representatives, Angelina Teny, Anne Itto, and  Kosti 
Manibe, praised Chairman Vraalsen's report on his trip, urging 
similar AEC trips in the future.  State Minister Itto, while 
enthusiastic about Juba's development, cautioned that Juba should 
not become the focus of all development in the south.  Itto warned 
that the center-periphery relationship between Khartoum and the rest 
of Sudan should not be replicated between Juba and the rural south. 
With regards to the census, Itto stated that quarterly funds should 
have arrived by March, but in fact had not been received by May. 
SPLM representatives painted a more sober picture of the Blue Nile 
state, naming corruption, the failure to pay salaries, and the lack 
of civil service infrastructure as significant problems. Teny also 
added that more work by the AEC is needed on two topics: the oil 
sector and Abyei.  She expressed concern about reports of attacks on 
southerners in Khartoum. 
 
¶5.  SPLM and NCP representatives assured Charge Powers that they 
would send a representative to the Wealth Sharing Working Group's 
visit to the Heglig Oil field on May 21, 2007.  The next AEC Plenary 
will be held June 7th, 2007. 
 
¶6.  The draft minutes from the May 15 AEC plenary meeting are as 
follows: 
 
Draft minutes from 20th AEC Plenary meeting held on May 15th, 2007 
 
The meeting was attended by representatives from Italy, NCP, the 
Netherlands, Norway, SPLM, U.S., U.K. and observers from E.U. and 
the U.N. 
 
Before the draft minutes from the 19th AEC Plenary Session held on 
April 17th, 2007 could be approved ( please find copy enclosed ), 
SPLM requested that the record incorporates SPLM's objection to the 
sentence 'Taha expressed the Government's objection to IGAD's 
involvement in the CPA implementation'. GONU consists of NCP, SPLM 
and other parties. The remark should be regarded only a reflection 
of NCP's position. SPLM considered this disrespectful to the CPA 
(Implementation Modalities of Machakos Protocol n.5 p.143) with its 
built-in guarantees. 
 
SPLM further noted that both the international community and IGAD 
should be involved in monitoring the implementation of the CPA and 
not only AEC and UNMIS (for the cease-fire) as NCP claims. 
 
The Chairman encouraged the parties to sort out the issue between 
them selves. The minutes were approved thereafter. 
 
The Chairman presented his elaborate report for the period April 
17th to May 15th, 2007 ( please find copy enclosed). It covered a 
wide range of issues such as the Chairman's meetings in Khartoum, 
Juba and Blue Nile State, as well as in Addis Abeba. 
 
The Chairman's report became the basis for most of the discussions 
at this Plenary: 
 
In connection with Blue Nile State , NCP objected to the Chairman 
reporting that local authorities were concerned with lack of federal 
funds. This was in contrast to what the Governor of Blue Nile State 
had reported at a Special AEC Session on Blue Nile State and 
Southern Kordofan on April 28th, 2007. 
 
SPLM, on the other hand, underlined that the Chairman's report had 
correctly noted the political rivalry between NCP and SPLM in the 
state and the disparity in allocations for development projects. 
SPLM further expressed concern that only salaries and bare 
operational expenses were paid. The entire funding situation should 
be looked into to address shortfalls. 
 
To obtain a clear picture of the situation, the Chairman asked NCP 
to request the Federal Ministry of Finance to provide a complete and 
updated overview of fund transfers to Blue Nile State. He further 
requested information on the performance of NRDF. 
 
Regarding the security situation in Blue Nile State, SPLM noted 
concern for the reports that recruitment was on-going . A new OAG 
situation was at hand. Finally SPLM informed the Commission that 
during the present consultations between the parties a new committee 
was formed to address the issues of CPA implementation in Blue Nile 
State and Southern Kordofan. The hope was to reach recommendations 
in the coming 60 days which ultimately would result in tangible 
solutions. 
 
In connection with the Chairman's visit to Juba and the observations 
on development on the ground, SPLM remarked that attention should be 
also kept on developments beyond Juba. Little was happening in other 
places A balanced development is required to avoid neglecting parts 
of the country. If the urban centers such as Khartoum and Juba were 
allowed to grow unchecked lots of problems would result . The 
growing city population would contribute to shortages in housing and 
 
problems in service delivery . The periphery should be kept in check 
also both to avoid the migration to urban centers and to avoid the 
decline in agricultural activities. 
 
SPLM made particular reference to the Chairman's report on the 
Anti-Corruption Commission and its determination to perform its 
duties effectively. 
 
The issue of the Census was taken up. The Chairman reported on the 
continuous problem of shortage of funding in connection with the 
mapping exercise in Southern Sudan.  He encouraged the donor 
community to look into the proposal by the Commissioner of SSCCSE 
for MDTF and GoNU to consider a switch in their engagements.  The 
donors could fund the mapping now and Government would fund the 
enumerators at a later stage. 
 
NCP noted that the Census would receive allocations on a quarterly 
basis in 2007.  Delays in disbursement needed to be looked into. 
 
SPLM encouraged the Chairman to continue his field visits to gauge 
the situation on the ground and to monitor CPA implementation. 
Further visits to Wau, Yambio, Yei and Kapoeta were recommended. 
 
The need to invest and support education programmes in the return 
areas was stressed in connection with the Chairman's meeting with 
UNHCR in Addis Abeba regarding the repatriation of refugees to 
Sudan. 
 
Furthermore, in light of the Chairman's meeting with JNTT, SPLM 
encouraged the cooperation between AEC and JNTT in identifing issues 
to address, particularly in terms of 'peace dividends'. The 
agreement between the two institutions to call a joint with the 
United Nations, the World Bank and the AEC's Wealth Sharing Working 
Group was welcomed. 
 
No Reports from the Working Groups were presented since NCP had 
called off Working Groups in May due to 'lack of consultation and 
coordination to organize meetings and set agenda, and due to the 
Party's engagement, with the SPLM, in continuous political 
discussions during May, 2007'. 
 
The Chairman recognized the fact that the Parties are currently 
engaged in preparation for Leadership meeting on May 27th. However, 
he requested clarification on the 'lack of consultation and 
coordination' point raised by NCP. He stressed that the Coordinators 
for the Working 
Groups had full understanding and respect of the procedures. 
 
Furthermore, the Chairman expressed concern over the Parties recent 
behavior which made him question their sincerity. He requested the 
Parties to clarify their position in connection with the AEC 
comprehensive reports on "Two Years of CPA Implementation". He 
reminded the Parties that the Commission's mandate was agreed upon 
by the Presidency. The Parties' commitment is essential for the 
effective work of AEC. NCP took exception to the Chairman 
questioning its sincerity. 
 
NCP underlined that its members had attended the Working Group 
meetings regularly. When it became evident that May would prove 
difficult in terms of NCP participation, NCP requested to call off 
the meetings. The problem was not the issues but rather timing. 
 
Furthermore, NCP confirmed that it wanted to complete the report in 
question by July 9th as planned. Work with the Coordinators would 
continue in mutual understanding. 
 
SPLM affirmed the importance it attaches to the AEC as an 
institution for the implementation of CPA. SPLM apologized for its 
absence and re-affirmed its willingness to work with the Working 
Groups and their Coordinators. 
 
During the discussion on how to conduct the Working Group meetings, 
the Coordinator for the Working Group on Security Arrangements 
explained that organizing meetings with the relevant authorities and 
guests is often logistically complicated. A certain degree of 
flexibility and understanding is required from everyone. 
 
The Coordinator for the Power Sharing Working Group Coordinator 
renewed his emphasis for 
the need to prioritise activities and topics. 
 
The Chairman informed that a new request would be sent out for 
members to forward the names of Commissioners and alternates to 
attend Working Group meetings. 
 
Finally, both NCP and SPLM were not in a position to share 
information on the ongoing meetings in preparation for the May 27th 
Leadership meeting.  SPLM underlined that progress was achieved in 
sitting together. The meetings had improved the environment and 
relations between NCP and SPLM. Many decisions were reached to 
improve coordination at the different levels of government. For 
example: 
¶1. the service ministries would meet jointly with the World Bank in 
Juba. 
¶2. as discussed earlier a committee for the two areas was formed to 
address outstanding issues such as the police and Civil Service. The 
establishment of an AEC at Blue Nile State and Southern Kordofan was 
expected next month. 
¶3. NPC related issues to make the Commission operational were mostly 
resolved. The petroleum sector remained a major issue. 
However: 
¶1. Abyei was deferred and would be would be discussed on May 21st. 
¶2. Security and especially OAGS was not discussed. An incident in 
Khartoum the previous day involving OAGs was under investigation. 
 
NCP informed that SAF and SPLA have agreed on a joint programme at 
the OAGCC, endorsed by JDB and Presidency. DDR of OAG, in 
cooperation with UNMIS, is almost completed in Equatoria, is ongoing 
in Wau and will start in Upper Nile next week. This information is 
informal until it is released by the Minister of Interior. 
 
The Coordinator for Wealth Sharing reminded the Commission that the 
visit to Higlig oil field is scheduled for May 21st. 
 
The Chairman finally notified that the AEC compound in Juba will be 
ready by the end of August. 
 
The 21st AEC  Plenary Meeting was scheduled for June 7th, 2007. A 
reminder will be sent out. 
 
POWERS