07KHARTOUM1177
PRIVATE OIL FIELD SECURITY TIED TO NISS, SAYS AL-JAZ AT
Sun Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1177/01 2101424
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291424Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8023UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001177 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, SE NATSIOS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PBTS PGOV MARR MOPS SU
SUBJECT: PRIVATE OIL FIELD SECURITY TIED TO NISS, SAYS AL-JAZ AT 
SPECIAL AEC SESSION 
 
REF: KHARTOUM 1138 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY AND COMMENT:  A July 28 Assessment and Evaluation 
Commission (AEC) special session on the oil sector revealed new 
information on the sensitive subject of oil field security.  The 
session featured a presentation by and dialogue with the Minister of 
Energy and Mining, Mr. Awad Al-Jaz.  The Minister deflected 
questions about further redeployments of Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) 
from oil fields, contending that a threat to the oil fields exists - 
one contained by private security companies' close collaboration 
with the Sudanese National Intelligence and Security Services 
(NISS).  Representatives from the Sudan People's Liberation Movement 
(SPLM) expressed concern about delays in redeployment from oil 
fields and asserted that private security forces with ties to NISS 
are essentially a militia controlled by the government.  These 
concerns follow only one week after an AEC plenary which raised 
similar concerns about delays in SAF redeployment (reftel) from 
southern oil fields.  Al-Jaz's frank admission of NISS's connection 
to private oil security forces raises more questions and adds 
another layer of complexity to an already contentious issue.  END 
SUMMARY AND COMMENT. 
 
¶2.  This July 28 meeting was the first time that Al-Jaz appeared at 
an AEC meeting, having turned down many previous offers to present. 
Although oil field security was one of the main themes of the 
meeting, Al Jaz further discussed community development initiatives 
in oil blocks, the environmental impact of the industry, and recent 
developments in the National Petroleum Commission.  The draft 
minutes and copy of Al-Jaz's automated PowerPoint slideshow with 
recorded voice annotation will be sent to the Sudan Programs Group. 
 
 
¶3.  (U)  After Al-Jaz's presentation, SPLM representatives quickly 
inquired about a number of issues including the remaining presence 
of some 3,600 SAF troops in southern oil fields.  They also inquired 
about the existence of a special division of the police assigned to 
oil fields in the south.  With respect to both of these issues, the 
SPLM representatives asked, "Is there really a threat to the oil 
fields in the south?" 
 
------------------------------------- 
"THERE IS A THREAT TO THE OIL FIELDS" 
------------------------------------- 
¶4. (U)  Responding to this question, Mr. Jaz quickly replied that a 
threat to oil fields does exist.  He stated that the threat is not 
from armies, but from disgruntled individuals who have very high 
expectations.  He acknowledged rumors about an oil security force 
often referred to as "Awad Al-Jaz's Police," but denied the 
existence of any such force.  He then stated that many people have 
confused the private security forces of oil companies as a new 
government entity.  (NOTE: In AEC Wealth-Sharing Working Group 
meetings on oil and the environment held in April and May, NCP 
representatives acknowledged the creation of a new "petroleum police 
force" of 800 police attached to the Ministry of Energy and Mines 
and currently deployed within the oil field areas. Al-Jaz's remarks 
conflict with these earlier statements.  END NOTE.) 
 
----------------------------------------- 
PRIVATE SECURITY FORCES HAVE TIES TO NISS 
----------------------------------------- 
¶5.  (U)  After learning of the existence of these private security 
forces, international members of the AEC further inquired how these 
private companies hire individuals for their security forces.  CDA 
Fernandez asked whether these private companies hire local people, 
or whether applicants come from a specifically designated pool 
approved by the government.  The Minister of Energy and Mining, Mr. 
Jaz, responded that the companies must "refer back" to the National 
Intelligence and Security Services (NISS) for their security 
personnel and clarified that while companies have their own criteria 
for hiring, the companies must select their employees from 
individuals designated by NISS.  Mr. Jaz did not elaborate about the 
actual screening, training, or ongoing support that these 
individuals receive from NISS. 
 
----------------- 
PRIVATE MILITIAS? 
----------------- 
¶6.  (U) SPLM representatives voiced concern about companies 
employing people from NISS "who may be better armed than the army 
itself."  They called this a serious matter and said that these 
private security personnel may be considered a militia.  Mr. Jaz 
rejected claims that the private security forces are a militia or 
better trained and equipped than the army.  He stated that these 
forces do not have tanks or heavy weaponry. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Throughout most of the presentation, Albino Akol Akol, the 
Minister of Industry and Mining of the Government of Southern Sudan, 
defended the National Petroleum Commission that he was officially 
representing at this meeting.  However, on the point of these 
private forces, Akol stated that "that some security companies are 
 
taking the law into their own hands," and added that the joint 
integrated forces need to take the lead. 
 
¶8.  (U)  The SPLM representatives also inquired why there is not 
more money available for development and salaries in the south, when 
the volume of oil production is up and the price of oil has risen. 
They then stated that that the Ministry of Defense and the NISS are 
the only two ministries that do not seem to complain about a 
shortage of funding.  They added that the CPA is very clear about 
control of the oil fields, and that protecting oil areas is the 
responsibility of only the SAF, SPLA, and JIU troops, and not 
private security forces. 
 
¶9.  (U)  After the meeting, one of the SPLM participants noted to 
PolOff that redeployment from the oil fields is one of the most 
specific, tangible, and measurable actions mandated by the CPA. 
This contact further questioned, "If agreement on oil field security 
cannot be reached, how can we work together on the more complex 
issues of the CPA?" 
 
-------- 
BIO NOTE 
-------- 
¶10.  (U)  Mr. Jaz has been the Minister of Energy and Mining since 
¶1996. He is from Merowe in North Sudan, and graduated from the 
University of Khartoum.  He was appointed the Minister of Internal 
Trade in 1990 and later a Cabinet Affairs Minister on the Council of 
Ministers in 1994.  He was one of the early proponents of the NIF 
and rarely meets with U.S. officials. 
 
 
 
 
1