07KHARTOUM2007
TURABI DECRIES LACK OF REAL POLITICAL FREEDOM
Sun Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2846
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2007 3500703
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160703Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9573
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS KHARTOUM 002007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS, AF SE NATSIOS 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: TURABI DECRIES LACK OF REAL POLITICAL FREEDOM 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Sudanese government is afraid of political 
freedom and the opposition parties don't know what political freedom 
means, Hassan al Turabi told CDA Fernandez during a meeting December 
¶12.  The former leader of the National Islamic Front, former Justice 
Minister, and current leader of the Popular Congress Party (PCP) 
described his efforts to rally opposition parties behind a letter to 
President Bashir proposing solutions on Abyei, Darfur, and political 
and press freedoms prior to the 2009 elections. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Appearing in excellent health and perfectly groomed in an 
immaculate robe, an animated and cheerful Hasan al Turabi received 
CDA Fernandez at his spacious home in Khartoum December 12.  CDA 
wished Turabi well over the upcoming Eid al Adha ("feast of the 
sacrifice") which launched Turabi into a lengthy discussion 
lamenting the loss of understanding that Muslims had of their own 
faith.  He said most Muslims don't know that the holiday celebrates 
Abraham's offer of his son in sacrifice.  Further, he said Muslims 
are overly focused on the prophet Mohammed at the expense of God, as 
most recently demonstrated in "foolish" arrest of a British teacher 
whose students had chosen to name a teddy bear Muhammad. He noted 
that the Prophet Muhammad was a humble man and that, of course, he 
was named Muhammad by his father "who was a pagan. Half the prisons 
in Sudan are filled with men named Muhammad." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Turabi described his efforts to bring together opposition 
political parties, but said it is difficult to unify the opposition 
because "most people don't like Sadiq al Mahdi" (his own brother in 
law) referring to the leader of the Umma Party.  With apparent 
venom, Turabi claimed that many Sunni Muslims including the Saudis 
still don't trust al-Mahdi because they suspect he may be some sort 
of Shia (since Sadiq is descended from the Mahdi).  Turabi claimed 
that at a recent meeting of opposition parties in Khartoum, Umma 
party faithful wouldn't allow him to speak because they "were not 
comfortable with me being in their headquarters." He sees both Umma 
and his own PCP as fighting for and appealing to the same core 
audience.  Although many opposition politicians speak of political 
freedom, he said, "they don't know what political freedom is" in 
terms of press freedom, the right to congregate, and rule of law. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Turabi said he had prepared a letter for President Bashir 
that he shared with opposition parties, prominent figures, and with 
the government.  The letter offered suggestions on Abyei, Darfur, 
and political freedoms before the elections.  On Abyei, Turabi said 
the Abyei Boundary Commission (ABC) report had reached a "natural 
conclusion" based on the evidence available.  However, the parties 
to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) could refer the matter to 
arbiters for a "final and binding" settlement.  On Darfur, Turabi 
said the people of Darfur should be offered a share of the oil 
wealth as part of a settlement to encourage peace.  Turabi said the 
location of the Darfur peace talks must be changed.  "I told Ban ki 
Moon that the location of the talks was a mistake."  Regarding 
political freedoms, Turabi said it's impossible to have a free and 
fair election in Sudan with full guarantees.  "It would only be 
possible under a transition military leadership, like the last one 
in 1985" said Turabi.  Unfettered press freedom is required prior to 
the election, and a new political party law must be passed. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Still viewing political events in Sudan as related to his 
own influence, Turabi viewed President Bashir's recent meeting with 
Sadiq al Mahdi primarily as a message to him (Turabi).  However, he 
said Bashir is probably worried about Sadiq al Mahdi because the old 
people may support al Mahdi in an election, while he claimed the 
young people will support (Turabi's) Popular Congress Party.  Turabi 
said the National Congress Party (NCP) is afraid of him and told CDA 
Fernandez that when he tried to organize a political meeting for his 
party faithful in Northern State last month, the government would 
not approve the meeting, and finally relented but only allowed him 
one hour, and then finally gave way completely when the PCP prepared 
to hold an illegal rally in the center of town.  Turabi said the 
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) has reached out to the PCP 
recently, and now recognize the mistake they had made in ignoring 
them.  "We were jailed for their cause," said Turabi, but now they 
need our support to resolve the crisis with the NCP. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: Trying to remain engaged politically from the 
sidelines, Turabi may overstate his influence but remains a keen 
observer of Sudanese politics.  The NCP watches Turabi closely, and 
is especially sensitive about his political activities on their own 
home turf in Northern states.  Turabi's letter to President Bashir 
may have some influence on the conventional wisdom of the Sudanese 
political class, but his ideas on Abyei and Darfur are conventional 
and have been expressed by others.  Virtually anyone outside the NCP 
would agree with his views on political freedoms. 
 
FERNANDEZ