07KHARTOUM1197
MEDIA REACTION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION
Wed Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7983
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1197 2131242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011242Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8063
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH 0017UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, SE NATSIOS, 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL UN KPAO UN SU
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 
1769 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY.  Most papers prominently featured news of United 
Nations Security Council Resolution 1769, but focused mainly on its 
details, and the reaction of the Sudanese Ambassador to the UN who 
stated that the resolution has "many positive aspects."  On August 
1, there were a limited number of other Sudanese reactions to the 
resolution.  The Sudanese Ambassador's reactions contrasts with a 
limited sampling of dissenting views, including one editorial with 
the headline, "Diplomatic victory for U.S. on Darfur force 
resolution."  This evening's nightly news and tomorrow's print media 
will present a more complete picture of the Sudanese reaction to the 
event.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U)  On July 31, almost all Sudanese papers published news about 
the resolution.  However, there were few reactions from government 
ministers and editorial columnists.  Most newspapers included the 
comments of Sudan's ambassador to the UN, Abdelmahmoud Abdelhalim, 
who described the resolution as  having "many positive aspects." He 
also added that the Sudanese government is going to study the 
resolution. 
 
¶3.  (U)  The extremist, pro-government Al-Intibaha Daily, which 
advocates northern secession from the South, appeared more critical 
of their Chinese ally than the resolution itself.  The front page 
article entitled, "China Supports the Hybrid Under Chapter Seven," 
stated that it was very "unexpected that China would consent to the 
deployment of the Hybrid in Darfur under Chapter seven."  The 
article hinted that the Sudanese government was disappointed with 
the Chinese role in the Security Council.  Al-Intibaha and several 
other newspapers also carried articles which stated that  the U.S. 
Congress is considering putting further sanctions on Sudan. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Also on August 1, the moderate pro-government Arabic daily 
Sudanese newspaper "Al-Sahafa" reported that some Sudanese officials 
expect that the hybrid forces may be put into a direct confrontation 
with Sudan. According to one  article, Ambassador Serag El-Din 
Hamid, the Director of the Peace Department at the Sudanese Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, gave a gloomy interpretation of the resolution, 
stating that UNAMID is authorized to disrupt the implementation of 
the Darfur Peace Agreement.  He added that this disruption will then 
open the door to accusations against the Government of Sudan. 
 
¶5.  (U)  The State-controlled Sudanese Television's 22:00 broadcast 
on July 31 forecast Sudan's official reaction to UN resolution 1769 
hours before the actual vote.  It featured a live interview with the 
Sudanese Ambassador to the UN, Abdelmahmoud Abdelhalim, saying that 
the resolution was better than previous drafts and that it respects 
Sudanese national sovereignty.  This was followed by an interview in 
the studio with political science professor Safwat Fanous who said 
that the resolution was balanced and that this was due to Sudan's 
friends on the Security Council, specifically mentioning China, 
Qatar and Indonesia.  He added that he did not expect US pressure on 
Sudan, in the form of sanctions, to lessen since American pressure 
"had more to do with America's problems in Iraq and Palestine." 
 
¶6.  (U)  An editorial in the English daily Sudan Tribune entitled 
"Diplomatic victory for U.S. on Darfur force resolution" by Wasil 
Ali stated that the U.S. was hoping for three things with the 
resolution: a single command and control structure provided by the 
UN, a Chapter VII mandate for the troops, and a specific timeline 
for deploying the force as expediently as possible.  According to 
Ali, the final resolution incorporating these three elements signals 
that the U.S. won this diplomatic battle.  Ali added that Sudan 
remained adamant till the very last moment, but when their "Chinese 
ally had a change of heart over the weekend" they had to change 
their strategy.  Ali states that the Chinese change may have been 
motivated by "the threat made last Friday by Steven Spielberg of 
quitting his role as artistic director of the Beijing Olympics." 
 
¶7. (U)  Following this Chinese "change of heart," Ali says that 
Sudan's ambassador to the UN, Abdalhaleem Abdalmahmood, began to 
tone down his criticism of the resolution.  He also wrote, 
"Following the adoption of the resolution, Abdalmahmood uneasily 
welcomed it saying that 'it contained many positive elements' which 
is a clear indication that Khartoum did not get all it wanted. 
Moreover he said that Sudan's government agencies would review the 
resolution."  Ali also wrote that "late last night Abdalmahmood made 
statements to the Al-Jazeera Arabic television in which he blasted 
the US and accused it of having a 'hidden agenda that goes beyond 
Darfur' because it threatened Khartoum with sanctions in the event 
of non-compliance with the resolution."  (Note:  The embassy has not 
been able to confirm that this was said on Al-Jazeera. End Note.) 
 
¶8.  (U)  Another media reaction cable  will be forthcoming in septel 
tomorrow.