07KHARTOUM1914
SOUTHERN SUDANESE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION VISITS CDA WITH
Tue Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3182
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1914/01 3381433
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041433Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9436
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 001914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/SPG, NSC FOR PITTMAN AND HUDSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KSCA OTRA EAID CDC SU
SUBJECT: SOUTHERN SUDANESE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION VISITS CDA WITH 
LETTER TO POTUS URGING INTERNATIONAL PRESSURE ON PARTIES TO 
IMPLEMENT CPA 
 
 
¶1.  A multi-party parliamentary delegation from the Southern Sudan 
(GOSS) Legislative Assembly called on CDA Fernandez December 3 as 
part of their visit to Khartoum.  The Delegation is in town 
appealing to GNU officials for an end to the current SPLM-NCP 
stalemate over implementation of the CPA with the message that the 
people of Southern Sudan "are tired of war."  The delegation is also 
urging international observers to bring pressure to bear on both 
parties. They presented CDA with a letter from the Speaker of the 
Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly Hon. Lt. Gen. James Wani Igga to 
President Bush (full text of letter below). 
 
¶2.  The eight-member delegation, headed by Gabriel Matur Malek, 
included representatives from a variety of parties in the Assembly, 
including from the NCP.  In his remarks to the CDA, NCP 
representative Hon. Caesar Baya Loyilala noted that among meetings 
in Khartoum, delegation head Malek had appealed to the "people of 
Sudan" in a speech before the National Assembly.  Malek said the 
delegation wanted to thank the people of the U.S. for its support, 
and for its leadership in concluding the CPA.  Loyilala said the 
Legislative Assembly is concerned at the current lack of momentum in 
implementation of the CPA, but especially that a miscalculation or 
accident could spark a renewal of war.  Pointing out the variety of 
tribes represented on the delegation, he also said that the leaders 
and people of Southern Sudan are working hard to overcome the 
limitations of tribalism. 
 
¶3.  In response, CDA thanked the delegation for their visit and said 
the USG is urging CPA implementation and is also working to help in 
the South, even though the task is so much larger that what we are 
able to provide, particularly after the destruction of the war and 
chronic neglect by Khartoum.  He assured the delegation that he 
would see that the Speaker's letter was passed to the President. 
 
¶4.  The letter, dated November 7, 2007 is entitled "Pushing Forward 
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) in the Sudan."  After 
reviewing the main areas of non-implementation, the letter calls for 
all international friends and observers to press both SPLM and NCP 
to abide by terms of the CPA. 
 
¶5.  COMMENT:  We were impressed by the cross-party and cross-tribal 
unity displayed by the legislative assembly delegation in addressing 
its various interlocutors, both Sudanese and international, in 
Khartoum.   The delegation's stress on ongoing efforts to overcome 
the divisions of tribalism in Southern society was particularly 
welcome, as this is a problem the South wrestles with daily.  As a 
cross-party message, the Speaker's letter stresses the need to press 
both parties over the source of the current political impasse. 
However, the list of particulars contained in the letter leaves not 
doubt that the NCP in particular is being called to account. 
 
¶6.  Below is the text of the letter from the Speaker of the 
Legislative Assembly to the POTUS. 
 
BEGIN TEXT OF LETTER: 
 
GOVERNMENT OF SOUTHERN SUDAN 
(GOSS) 
 
Southern Sudan Assembly 
Date: 7 th Nov 2007 
 
 
H.E. GEORGE W. BUSH, 
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
WASHINGTON D.C. USA. 
 
Dear Your Excellency 
 
RE. PUSHING FORWAD THE COMPREHENSIVE PEACE AGREEMENT (CPA) IN THE 
SUDAN 
 
 
On 11th October 2007 the Sudan Peoples Liberation Movement Interim 
Political Bureau (SPLMIIPB) met in Juba for eight days to review the 
progress on the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
(CPA) and especially the problems affecting the success thereof. 
That meeting resulted in the SPLM recalling its Presidential 
Advisors, Ministers and State Ministers in the Government of 
National Unity (GoNU) in Khartoum back to Southern Sudan. The 
decision was based on the lack of political will on the part of the 
NCP to implement the CPA. Thus the essential political partnership 
between the SPLM and NCP for upholding peace in the Sudan became at 
risk. 
 
In the light of this political development, the Southern Sudan 
Legislative Assembly (Parliament) resolved unanimously to: 
 
-- Support the decision of the SPLMIIPB in recalling its 
 
KHARTOUM 00001914  002 OF 003 
 
 
Presidential Advisors, Ministers and State Ministers in the 
Government of National Unity. 
 
-- Represent its views and concerns regarding the political impasse 
between the National Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan Peoples 
Liberation Movement (SPLM) over the implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) to the Presidency of the 
Republic; Heads of IGAD Member States; Friends of IGAD; the AU and 
all other Political Parties in the Sudan. 
(SSLA Resolution No: 5/2007 dated 23/10/2007) 
 
The said resolution was unprecedented because all the eight 
political parties representing the people of Southern Sudan 
including the NCP supported it. The decision was also a significant 
political development, which emanated from the stalled 
implementation of the CPA, that could plunge the country back to 
war. 
 
The reasons which precipitated the decision of the SPLM/IPB can be 
summarized as follows: 
 
-- Non-implementation of the Abyei Protocol: 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
According to the protocol, Abyei was to assume a special 
administrative status so that it could administer itself and prepare 
its people for a referendum to be held simultaneously with the 
referendum in Southern Sudan in 2011. The outcome of that referendum 
would determine whether Abyei would become part of Southern Sudan or 
retain its special status in Northern Sudan. Hitherto no single part 
of this protocol has been implemented. Furthermore the 
recommendations of the Abyei Border Commission have been entirely 
rejected. 
 
-- The Demarcation of the geographical and Political borders between 
Southern Sudan and Northern Sudan: 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
The demarcation of the borders between Southern Sudan and Northern 
Sudan is very crucial in several ways: 
 
-- The borders will clearly demarcate which part of the country is 
Southern Sudan and which other part is Northern Sudan. 
 
-- Clarity of the borders will assist in the process of carrying out 
the impending population census in Southern Sudan 
 
--Both the mid-term elections during the interim period and the 
referendum after the interim period will be determined through the 
demarcation of clear borders and the carrying out of the census. 
Unfortunately work on the border demarcation and census has been too 
slow considering the fact that we are already completing the third 
year of the interim period. 
 
 
-- Formation of the Joint integrated Units (JIUs): 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
The formation of the Joint Integrated Units (JIUs) comprising the 
Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) and the Sudan Peoples Liberation Army 
(SPLA) during the interim period was to serve as a symbol of 
national unity and national sovereignty. The JIUs was to be based 
upon a common doctrine. It was almost impossible for the two parties 
to agree on a common doctrine. The JIU s could also provide a 
nucleus for the post interim period Army should the Referendum 
confirm unity. 
 
-- The Redeployment of forces: 
------------------------------ 
 
It was also agreed that after the formation of the JIUs the rest of 
SAF Forces already deployed in Southern Sudan were to be redeployed 
North of South/North border of 1/1/1956 while those of SPLA deployed 
in Nuba Mountains and Southern Blue Nile be redeployed south of the 
same borders. The time frame fixed for troops movements was to be 
two and half years. This period is already over and the withdrawals 
have not been completed. Therefore the result of all this is an 
ongoing unwarranted clashes between SAF and SPLA forces in Northern 
Baher EI Ghazal (Rum-Aker, War -Awar and Meiram) and Northern and 
Western Upper Nile, leading to many losses of lives. 
 
-- The disbanding of other Armed Groups: 
---------------------------------------- 
 
No armed group allied to either party shall be allowed to operate 
outside the two forces" (s.7 (a) of the Security Arrangements in the 
(CPA). Unfortunately SAF deliberately continues to support the Other 
Armed Groups (OAG) which are destabilizing the Southern Sudan as 
 
KHARTOUM 00001914  003 OF 003 
 
 
evidenced by a shoot out between SAF and SPLA Forces from 26th to 
28th November 2006 in Malakal. 
 
-- Wealth sharing Agreement: 
---------------------------- 
 
As an attempt to equitably redistribute the resources of the 
country, it was agreed that Southern Sudan should get 50% of the oil 
revenue emanating from the Southern Sudan and 42% of the oil 
resources found in Abyei Area. To date the Government of Southern 
Sudan (GOSS) has never received any single dollar from the oil 
revenues from Abyei. Furthermore there has been no transparency over 
the amount of oil resources and the cash value of the oil got and 
sold from Southern Sudan. Financial remittances to the GOSS have 
always been on the decline from $100 million per month to $60 
million per month and finally to $40 million per month. How will 
GOSS sustain its administration in the face of this sharp financial 
decline? 
 
-- The integration of Southern Sudanese Civil Servants into the 
Government of National Unity: 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
The building of one nation requires the integration of the workforce 
from the Southern and Northern parts of the country into one Civil 
service to run the Government of National Unity (GONU). Surprisingly 
the 20-30% of administrative posts supposed to be filled by 
qualified cadres from Southern Sudan has not been made available. 
 
Considering the above mentioned bottlenecks in the implementation of 
the CPA our parliament feels that it is the responsibility of all 
stakeholders to ensure that war is averted by appealing to both NCP 
and SPLM to abide by the provisions of the CPA. The Assembly is 
hereby urging IGAD, IPF, AU, UN, League of Arab States to bring 
pressure to bear on the implementers of CPA to adhere on the same 
and work hard to keep to the implementation schedule. 
 
We appreciate the recent steps taken to resolve some of the 
outstanding issues mentioned in foregoing paragraphs. urge both 
sides not to renegotiate the CPA, but to implement all its protocols 
according to the their schedules. We are also deeply concerned about 
the deplorable conditions affecting the people of Darfur and the 
ongoing civil war in that region. We urge all stakeholders to the 
peace in the Sudan to quickly find a peaceful means to redress this 
conflict. 
 
Please accept assurances of our highest regards, 
 
 
Hon. Lt.Gen. James Wani Igga 
Speaker - Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly 
Juba. 
 
Cc: H. E. Gen. Salva Kiir Mayardit 
First Vice President of the Republic of Sudan and President of the 
Government of Southern Sudan. 
 
 
END TEXT OF LETTER TO POTUS 
 
FERNANDEZ