07MOSCOW5337
NEW FACES JOIN RUSSIA'S PUBLIC CHAMBER
Fri Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO2362
RR RUEHDBU RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #5337/01 3130345
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090345Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5146
INFO RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 2523
RUEHYG/AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG 2842
RUEHLN/AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 4672UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 005337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM RS
SUBJECT: NEW FACES JOIN RUSSIA'S PUBLIC CHAMBER 
 
 
MOSCOW 00005337  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) When Russia's 126-member Public Chamber convenes in 
January, its new ranks will include two well-known human rights 
activists, who had been dismissive of the Public Chamber when it was 
first established.  Civil society activists remain divided on the 
value of the Chamber, often concluding that it is "better than 
nothing." Moscow Helsinki Group's Lyudmila Alekseyeva, a strong 
critic has changed her stance towards the Chamber, accepting state 
funds in order to demonstrate that civil society is prepared to work 
constructively with the GOR.  Despite the addition of new members, 
it is unlikely the Public Chamber will work aggressively to hold the 
government accountable, preferring instead to tinker on the margins 
of major social issues.  End summary. 
 
Building the Public Chamber 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The second convocation of the Public Chamber will begin in 
January 2008.  As per the complicated nominations process, on 
October 1, President Putin appointed the first third of the 126 
members who will serve in the Chamber, half of whom are new to the 
Chamber, while the others are current members.  The next third will 
be selected by those who were appointed by the President.  They will 
come from national civil society organizations.  The final 42 
members will come from regional and local organizations.  They will 
in turn be selected by the first two-thirds.  In an effort to ensure 
better geographical distribution, each region of Russia will be 
assigned a number of Public Chamber slots. 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to Anatoliy Kucherena, a civil rights lawyer who 
has been reappointed to the Public Chamber, the selection of the 
second tranche will be competitive and interested members will only 
be considered if they have been with a civil society organization 
for at least a year and have results to show for their work.  More 
than 300 people have expressed interest in joining the Public 
Chamber, according to Kucherena. 
 
Changes in Membership 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Putin's appointees include a few serious human rights 
figures among a diverse group of academics, artists and economists. 
Notable among the new members are 1990's economic reform architect, 
Yevgeniy Yasin; Editor-in-Chief of the weekly "Arguments and Facts" 
newspaper, Nikolay Zyatkov; President of the Holocaust Foundation, 
Alla Gerber; and Director of the Moscow Human Rights Bureau, 
Aleksandr Brod.  Both Yasin and Brod told us they were surprised by 
their nominations.  Yasin's daughter Irina Yasina told us he was 
grateful for the "cover" provided by serving in the Chamber and 
looked forward to using the forum to express his reformist views. 
Yasina speculated that the addition of her father, Brod and Gerber 
to the Chamber was part of a strategy to bring in people who have 
cachet with those who have questioned the legitimacy of the Chamber. 
 Rabbi Lazar, a current member of the Chamber who will continue to 
serve in the second convocation, said the addition of the two human 
rights activists is a positive development. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Bishop Sergey Ryakhovskiy, who has been a member of the 
Public Chamber since its inception and will continue to serve, said 
he was pleased with the contingent nominated by the President.  He 
told us he expects the Chamber to be more professional than its 
predecessor.  Commentators noted that among those not reappointed to 
the Chamber were pop diva Alla Pugacheva and Olympic figure skater 
Irina Rodnina, who had made no pretense of toiling in the Chamber, 
and had declined even to attend its infrequent public sessions. 
 
Smokescreen or Voice of the People 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) When first established in 2005, the Public Chamber was 
criticized by some civil society and human rights activists as being 
a smokescreen to "distract the public's attention from what is a 
real diminishment of democracy," said independent Duma Deputy Oksana 
Dmitrieva at the time, who worried that the Public Chamber would 
"usurp parliament's role."  Alekseyeva of Moscow Helskinki Group was 
among those who argued that the Public Chamber was "a pathetic 
appendage of the government."  Alekseyeva further contended that 
some sought membership in the Public Chamber, not as a public 
service, but as a way of gaining credibility and legitimacy. 
 
¶7. (SBU) However, in the past two years, there has been some 
mellowing of the criticism, with activists seeking to exploit the 
Chamber's limited utility.  Alekseyeva reversed course and in 2007 
sought a grant from a state fund set aside to support civil society. 
 Grants were awarded to domestic NGOs through a competitive process 
led by 6 NGOs selected by the Public Chamber.  Moscow Helsinki Group 
 
MOSCOW 00005337  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
(MHG) requested and received a 2.5 million ruble grant to open a 
public office.  Alekseyeva told us that MHG did not want to fuel GOR 
charges that NGOs were beholden only to western governments, and 
sought to demonstrate civil society's readiness to work 
constructively with the Russian government.  Other Russian human 
rights organizations also received grants including Memorial and For 
Human Rights. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Vyacheslav Glazychev, President of the Academy of Urban 
Environment and a current Public Chamber member who has been 
reappointed by the President, insisted to us that the Public Chamber 
has proved to be valuable.  He cited one example of the chamber 
playing the role of "middle man" between students, who were 
protesting for better quality teachers, and faculty at a 
sociological institute.  He said the Chamber was not a substitute 
for the Duma but an institution that was important for society given 
the parliament's orientation toward party interests.  Kucherena told 
us the development of the Public Chamber was part of the long 
process of changing the Soviet mentality of the country.  While he 
said at first it was difficult to work with the Duma due to lack of 
understanding about the role of the Public Chamber, the situation 
has improved.  William Smirnov, executive secretary of the 
President's Human Rights Council, who is not affiliated with the 
Chamber, called it "better than nothing." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The Public Chamber, although conceived as an institution to 
develop civil society, will likely remain an institution that 
tinkers around the edges of major social ills but does little to 
hold the government or administration accountable.  In the two years 
since it was established, it has served as a forum for discussion of 
various issues, but these discussions have yet to include outright 
criticism of government or administration actions.  As the Public 
Chamber enters its third year, its willingness to tackle 
controversial issues will be the test of its value.