07MOSCOW5765
REINVENTING THE RUSSIAN DRUG STORE
Mon Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO7369
RR RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD
DE RUEHMO #5765/01 3440345
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100345Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5771
INFO RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEHYG/AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG 2895
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 2562
RUEHZN/EST COLLECTIVE
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 005765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR OES/IHA 
USAID FOR GH, E&E 
HHS FOR OGHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO ETRD EINV EIND RS
SUBJECT: REINVENTING THE RUSSIAN DRUG STORE 
 
REF: A. Moscow 4043 
 
 ¶B. Moscow 976 
      ¶C. 06 Moscow 12814 
 
MOSCOW 00005765  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
THIS CABLE IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT 
ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Much like Russia's booming pharmaceuticals market 
(Ref A), the Russian pharmacy business is rapidly expanding.  Major 
Russian drug store chains are consolidating their market-leading 
positions, but the industry is still relatively unconcentrated, with 
the leading drug store chain only accounting for a 6.5 percent 
market share.  Observers expect the wave of consolidations to 
continue for years to come, and some believe a major European firm 
will enter the market soon.  Small, independent drug stores and 
kiosks that are not computerized and not particularly concerned 
about customer service still remain, but we believe they will 
increasingly be swept aside by the bigger, savvier chains.  The 
industry is still evolving, and the jury is still out on the 
potential impact of changes in the drug store business on access to 
drugs and improved health and wellness for the average Russian. 
Even so, the rise of big drug store chains concerned about quality 
and their reputation holds some promise that Russians will 
increasingly have access to higher quality and more effective 
medicines.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------- 
Drug Store Market Sizzles 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Like the pharmaceuticals industry (Ref A), Russia's drug 
store sector is booming.  While Russian pharmacy sales figures are 
not publicly available, the Russian market analysis firm DSM Group 
estimates that retail sales at drug stores during the first half of 
2007 exceeded five billion dollars, a 23 percent increase over the 
same period in 2006.  Russia's biggest drug store chains have been 
expanding at a feverish pace, but the market still remains 
relatively unconcentrated, with the largest drug store chain only 
controlling an estimated 6.5 percent of overall sales.  Although 
Russian drug stores may once have been known for displaying products 
behind glass and Soviet-era customer service, the leading chains 
have adopted open, Western-style floor plans and carry more consumer 
products beyond basic medicines. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Big Chains on an Acquisition Tear 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Russia's largest drug store chain, "36.6" (the normal human 
body temperature in degrees Celsius), has rapidly expanded over the 
past year, mainly by acquiring over 350 existing drug stores from 
regional pharmacy chains.  Using innovative financial mechanisms to 
bankroll its acquisitions (Ref A), 36.6 now boasts 1,100 drug stores 
across 26 regions, outstripping its nearest rival, Rigla, which owns 
650 drug stores in 22 regions.  The other major players are the 
Moscow Oblast Pharmacy chain (517 stores), Raduga (455 stores), and 
Doctor Stoletov (420 stores).  36.6's retail sales growth has risen 
82.9 percent during the first nine months of 2007 compared to the 
same period in 2006.  Russia's biggest drug store chain has been 
rated the Best Consumer Sector Company in Russia for two years in a 
row by Global Finance Magazine.  The very biggest chains have a 
particularly strong position in Moscow.  In a recent survey of 
Moscow consumers, 55 percent said they routinely bought medicines at 
36.6, while 23 percent said they shopped at Rigla. 
 
¶4. (U) The rapid growth of 36.6 is being mirrored by other top 
drugstore chains.  Rigla became the second-largest pharmacy network 
in December 2006 after absorbing the Ozone drug store chain.  Dr. 
Stoletov became the fifth-largest druggist following the January 
2007 acquisition of the Efedra pharmacy chain in Saratov Oblast. 
Although other chains are smaller and less regionally diverse than 
36.6 (Dr. Stoletov only has stores in 10 regions, as opposed to 
36.6's coverage in 26 regions), they are also enjoying high sales 
growth.  Dr. Stoletov, for example, had a 92 percent increase in 
sales during the first half of 2007 compared to the same period in 
2006, according to market analysts. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Consumer Goods Come to Russian Drug Store Shelves 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5. (SBU) One pharmaceutical industry representative told us that the 
recent tremendous growth in drug sales and the concomitant strong 
growth in fast moving consumer goods (e.g., toiletries, soaps, 
 
MOSCOW 00005765  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
cosmetics, toothpaste, shaving needs, and detergents) are both 
persuasive signs that Russians in the coming years will spend lots 
of money on both over-the-counter and prescription drugs. 
Naturally, drug stores have benefited from these overall trends in 
consumer buying.  Pharmacies are realizing more profits from 
cosmetics and bathroom goods and expanding their marketing base 
beyond medicines.  Although still a far cry from the broad range of 
goods and services offered at dominant American chains like CVS and 
Walgreens, the biggest Russian chains carry household and bathroom 
items, and cosmetics and perfumes.  36.6, for instance, is the 
exclusive Russian distributor of FCUK (French Connection United 
Kingdom) cosmetics and UK-based Early Learning Centre toys.  The 
chain also produces its own private label bath products, including 
shampoo, facial care items, toothbrushes, and combs. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Will a Foreign Player Enter the Market? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Observers expect the wave of acquisitions among Russian 
drug store chains to continue over the next few years.  There was 
press speculation in the past few months that Rigla and Dr. Stoletov 
were engaged in serious merger discussions (their combination would 
create a network of drug stores almost as big as 36.6).  Many 
analysts have also been expecting that a major Western European drug 
store or pharmaceutical company would enter the market, probably 
through the acquisition of one of the big Russian chains.  Most of 
the speculation has centered on the German-based Celesio AG, which 
has openly expressed interest in acquiring Russian pharmacies, and 
UK-based Alliance Boots, which already owns a handful of Russian 
drug stores.  (NOTE: The Finnish-based Tamro Group already has a 
significant minority stake in Raduga, Russia's fourth largest 
druggist.  END NOTE.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Is There an Impact on Access to Drugs and on Wellness? 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) A senior health consultant at the Open Health Institute, 
one of Russia's leading health NGOs, told us it was a complex 
question whether the changes taking place in the pharmacy business 
are improving access to medicines or might ultimately lead to 
improvements in health.  He noted that big drug store chains tend to 
have higher quality control standards, as they are generally more 
concerned about maintaining their commercial reputation than smaller 
pharmacies.  Some big chains have tried to discourage consumers from 
shopping at smaller drug stores by implying that their medicines are 
safer and less likely to be counterfeited.  He cautioned, however, 
that there was no real evidence about whether smaller, independent 
drug stores served as the major outlets for the significant volume 
of counterfeit drug sales in Russia (Ref A).  Thus far, he had not 
seen any indication that competition among drug stores had lessened, 
or that big chains were colluding on prices or attempting to gouge 
consumers.  In his view, many big drug stores chains carry the same 
range of medicines as independent pharmacies, including offering 
strong antibiotics over the counter that would only be available 
with a prescription in the United States.  The big chains do, 
however, more actively sell dietary and nutritional supplements. 
 
¶8. (SBU) As some chains have expanded, they have shifted to 
appealing to a more well-off customer base, raising questions about 
whether drug store consolidation has had an impact on improved 
access to medicines for less well-off customers.  For example, 
Russia's fifth-largest druggist, Dr. Stoletov, started off as a more 
affordable pharmacy chain, but with its recent expansion, has 
shifted to selling more expensive drugs.  Most big chains also do 
not distribute medicines under the government's free drug benefits 
program for veterans, pensioners and the chronically ill, which is 
known as the Additional Drug Supply or DLO (Refs B, C). 
 
¶9. (SBU) COMMENT: The consolidations and acquisitions among Russia's 
drug stores are a sign of a modernizing industry that is doubly 
benefiting from the rapid growth in the overall pharmaceuticals 
market (Ref A) and in fast moving consumer goods, such as cosmetics, 
perfumes, and household and bathroom products.  As the big chains 
keep expanding, we expect that the days are numbered for smaller, 
independently-owned and non-computerized drugs stores and kiosks. 
Although the industry is still evolving and the jury is still out on 
the potential impact on access to drugs and improved health, the 
rise of big drug store chains concerned about quality and their 
reputation does hold some promise that Russians will increasingly 
have access to higher quality and more effective medicines. 
 
BURNS