07MOSCOW3316
ENVIRONMENTALISTS FRET OVER SOCHI OLYMPIAD
Mon Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO6168
RR RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD
DE RUEHMO #3316/01 1900240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090240Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1888
INFO RUEHZN/EST COLLECTIVE
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RUEHYG/AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG 2535
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 2235
RUEHLN/AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 4281UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 003316 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR OES/ENV, EUR/RUS and EUR/PGI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV PGOV RS
SUBJECT: ENVIRONMENTALISTS FRET OVER SOCHI OLYMPIAD 
 
REF: MOSCOW 1919 
 
MOSCOW 00003316  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  The selection of Sochi as the site of the 2014 Winter 
Olympic Games brought less joy to Russian environmentalists, who 
have long warned about the potential impact of large-scale 
construction in this region.  Environmental NGOs will monitor 
implementation of the Sochi 2014 Environmental Plan outlined in the 
Bid's Candidature File.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  Most of Russia is rejoicing over the successful Olympic bid to 
host the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in Sochi.  Located on the Black 
Sea, with the Western Caucasus Mountains as a backdrop, Sochi is a 
resort city known for its unique environmental splendor. 
Environmental concerns about the effect on the nearby national 
reserve (a UNESCO World Heritage Site), a national park, and the 
surrounding buffer zones have abounded since Sochi was short-listed 
for the games.  In the lead up to the OIC discussion, Greenpeace, 
World Wildlife Fund, and other NGOs had highlighted the potential 
environmental impact caused by the pending massive construction. 
Despite the current festivities in Sochi, some Russians were 
dismayed -- particularly environmentalists who worry the large scale 
construction of sports facilities in the mountains and along the 
Black Sea coast will cause severe damage to delicate ecosystems. 
 
¶3.  Prior to the official announcement, Greenpeace and other 
environmental watch-groups had expressed concerns over Sochi as an 
Olympic hopeful.  Environmental groups said they hoped to minimize 
the impact of the Games on the local flora and fauna.  Additionally, 
there were concerns over energy consumption, water use, waste 
treatment, and traffic emissions.  World Wildlife Fund (WWF) said it 
was worried about the future of one of the most valuable nature 
areas of the Sochi national park, the Grushevaya Polyana, the 
projected site of the bobsled and luge track routes and other sports 
facilities. Construction of these facilities will inevitably lead to 
forest logging and destruction of habitats of endangered species and 
unique flora and fauna of the national park, according to statements 
posted on the WWF website. 
 
¶4.  With the Olympic bid, the NGO community called for caution 
concerning the environment in the region.  Environmental NGOs also 
said they fear that facilities at the Olympic village will disrupt 
the traditional feeding and migration grounds of the brown bear and 
red deer, and could also cause the destruction of rare flowers and 
plants.  The World Wildlife Fund requested that new protected areas 
be created to compensate for the increasing human pressure on the 
unique region's nature landscapes. 
 
¶5.  According to the Sochi 2014 Environmental Plan outlined in the 
Bid's Candidature File, its three main action areas are 
inclusiveness, environmental consciousness, and economic viability. 
The Sochi Olympic Development Committee listed these conservation 
goals: 
      - construction of a thermal power station; 
- redevelopment of the surrounding area maintaining a balance 
between natural and urban landscape; 
- use of environmentally friendly and recycled          construction 
materials and renewable energy sources; 
- use of vegetation on walls, roofs, attics, and  balconies to 
improve air and water quality and reduce energy consumption; 
- upgrade and redesign of power substations and lines. 
 
¶6.  In addition to environmentally friendly construction procedures, 
there are plans to address the natural environment by: 
      - preserving the original land surface; 
      - creating and enhancing animal habitats; 
- rehabilitating the ecology in disturbed urban areas; 
- developing environmental assessments and zoning improvements; 
- holding public hearings to encourage transparency in development 
activities. 
 
Sochi is also planning on opening 20 natural gas stations to greatly 
reduce car emissions in the region. 
 
¶7.  In Sochi they celebrated with early morning fireworks when the 
IOC announcement was made at 5 a.m. local time.  Developing the 
region and upgrading Sochi to a world class resort is a federal 
priority.  The government had already planned to sink $12 billion 
into the region with $7 billion from the federal budget and an 
additional $5 billion from private sources.  Despite holding 293 
medals, Russia has never hosted the Winter Games and bringing the 
2014 Winter Olympics to Sochi is a great point of pride for 
President Putin.  A skier himself, and someone who stresses the 
importance of a healthy lifestyle, Putin clearly views the legacy of 
a permanent winter sports training center in the region as 
additional lustre. 
 
¶8.  With the Winter Olympics now a reality, Sochi officials will 
 
MOSCOW 00003316  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
begin to set their Environmental Plan in motion.  The host city will 
certainly benefit from increased employment opportunities, urban 
development and improved infrastructure and a high-value commercial 
real estate market.  Steady implementation of the environmental 
plan's milestones will be key to assuaging the fears of 
environmental groups. 
 
BURNS