07MUNICH196
CRISIS AT SIEMENS - JUST HOW BAD IS IT?
Tue Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Munich
VZCZCXRO3123
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ RUEHPOD
DE RUEHMZ #0196/01 0931440
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031440Z APR 07
FM AMCONSUL MUNICH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3882
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0023
RUEAWJB/DOJ WASHDC
RUCNMEU/EU INTEREST COLLECTIVE
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MUNICH 000196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR EUR/AGS, EUR/ERA, EB/IFD/OMA AND INR/I 
PASS TO USTR MOWREY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD PGOV EINV PREL EUN GM
SUBJECT:  CRISIS AT SIEMENS - JUST HOW BAD IS IT? 
 
REF: Berlin 46 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  Manufacturing giant Siemens, a household name in Germany and in 
much of the world, has become embroiled in a recent string of 
scandals ranging from "outsourced" job losses to accusations of 
bribery of customers and unions  that have tarnished the firm's 
reputation.  Even before the March 27 arrest of a senior executive, 
some began to speculate that at least some of the multiple 
investigations of the firm might ultimately lead to the office of 
CEO Klaus Kleinfeld, who has blamed the corruption charges on rogue 
employees.  Regardless of Kleinfeld's direct involvement or 
knowledge of any wrong-doing, he has his work cut out for him as he 
presides over a once-proud symbol of German technological might now 
badly in need of an ethical makeover. 
 
---------------------------- 
SIEMENS: THE "GE" OF GERMANY 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Munich-based Siemens, one of the world's largest electrical 
engineering and electronics companies, is effectively the "General 
Electric" of Germany, both in terms of its corporate profile, but 
also in terms of its iconic name, which appears on everything from 
light bulbs and dishwashers to laptop computers and train 
locomotives.  Founded 160 years ago, the company has approximately 
475,000 employees in over 190 countries, including over 66,000 in 
the U.S.  In fiscal 2006, Siemens had sales of Euro 87.33 billion 
(USD 116.6 billion) and net income of Euro 3.03 billion (USD 4.1 
billion).  Its U.S. sales amounted to roughly Euro 17.38 billion 
(USD 23.2 billion). 
 
------------------------------ 
BEN-Q - OUTSOURCING JOB LOSSES 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  Siemens current round of troubles began in September 2006, when 
Munich-based BenQ Mobile announced it would file for bankruptcy, 
with the potential loss of 3,000 jobs in Germany.  The German 
cell-phone handset unit of Taiwan-based BenQ had just a year earlier 
been "sold" by Siemens to BenQ for one Euro -- although Siemens 
sweetened the deal by paying BenQ Euro 413 million ($552 million) to 
take the money-losing division off its hands.  The widespread 
perception of the BenQ affair was that Siemens, under the direction 
of new cost-cutting CEO Klaus Kleinfeld, had effectively 
"outsourced" the shuttering of the handset division and firing of 
its workers to BenQ, in order to avoid the complications and 
negative publicity that would come to Siemens had it directly closed 
the division.  The criticism came nonetheless, but now with the 
added accusation that Siemens had paid the Taiwanese to do its dirty 
work. 
 
¶4.  Even Chancellor Merkel got into the act; during her address 
commemorating the 2006 Day of German Unity, she reminded Siemens of 
its special responsibility for the 3,000 BenQ staff who were about 
to lose their jobs.  She said:  "In this respect, a traditional 
[German] company must show responsibility for its former staff. 
This responsibility must be observed now.  By doing this, Siemens 
could strengthen confidence in the social market economy."  As a 
result of the heavy criticism leveled at the company, Siemens 
announced that it would set up a special fund with 35 million Euros 
($47 million) to assist workers impacted by the BenQ bankruptcy. 
 
---------------------------------- 
WE HAVE SLUSH FUNDS FOR TELECOM... 
---------------------------------- 
¶5.  Just as it appeared Siemens had mitigated the damage from BenQ, 
on November 15 some 200 police, attorneys, and tax authority 
investigators raided about 30 offices and homes of current and 
former Siemens employees, including the offices of management board 
members and CEO Kleinfeld, seizing 36,000 documents.  Police 
arrested half a dozen people -- including a former Siemens 
management-board member and a former chief financial officer of the 
telecom unit.  The investigation was initiated when banks in 
Austria, Switzerland and Italy detected a slush fund of Euro 20 to 
30 million ($27-40 million), which the banks suspected were used for 
money laundering.  Authorities suspect the money was used for paying 
bribes, via sham consulting contracts, to secure contracts related 
to the Olympic Games in Athens 2004 as well as for telecommunication 
projects in Saudi-Arabia, Kuwait, Egypt, Indonesia, Russia and 
Vietnam.  By December, Siemens disclosed to authorities that it had 
uncovered Euro 420 million ($545 million) in suspicious transactions 
stretching back more than seven years. 
 
MUNICH 00000196  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶6.  Not only did Siemens allegedly pay bribes, but it also 
apparently paid out additional money in some instances to cover up 
the bribes.  A former Siemens telecommunications equipment executive 
allegedly helped broker a $50 million settlement in 2004 with a 
Saudi consulting firm that had threatened to forward documents to 
U.S. authorities detailing bribes paid on Siemens' behalf, according 
to press accounts of former telecom unit finance chief Michael 
Kutschenreuter's statements to prosecutors.  Following his arrest in 
November, Kutschenreuter reportedly told prosecutors that top 
management -- including CEO Kleinfeld and predecessor Heinrich von 
Pierer -- were informed of the payment, which he described as "hush 
money." 
¶7.  Kutschenreuter also reportedly told prosecutors about an 
encryption code he alleged was widely used at Siemens to itemize 
bribe payments.  He said it was derived from the phrase "Make 
Profit," with the phrase's 10 letters corresponding to the numbers 
1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-0.  Allegedly the code was used to convey the 
amount of a bribe to be paid - for example, with A standing for 2 
and I for 9 and P for 5, a reference to "file this in the AIP file" 
meant a bribe was authorized at 2.95 percent of a contract's value. 
A spokesman for Siemens said it had no knowledge of a "Make Profit" 
encryption system.  German Authorities continue to investigate the 
bribery scandal at the telecom division.  Additionally, the U.S. 
Department of Justice is investigating "possible criminal violations 
of U.S. law by Siemens" in the matter, while the enforcement 
division of the Securities and Exchange Commission is conducting an 
"informal inquiry" into the allegations of wrongdoing. 
------------------------------------------- 
...AND SLUSH FUNDS FOR POWER GENERATION TOO 
------------------------------------------- 
¶8.  In a separate case involving bribery by Siemens power-generation 
unit, a former Siemens AG executive told a German court on March 13 
that he had authorized millions of dollars in bribes to win supply 
contracts with Italian utility Enel SpA, but claimed he didn't break 
any laws.  Andreas Kley, the former finance chief of Siemens's power 
generation equipment unit, and another former employee face charges 
they paid roughly Euro 6 million ($7.9 million) in bribes between 
1999 and 2002 to help a consortium led by Siemens win gas turbine 
supply contracts with Enel valued at Euro 450 million ($601 
million).  Siemens could be hit with a new round of fines if the 
court rules that illegal payments were made on its behalf. 
¶9.  Kley, who left Siemens in 2004, said Enel officials approached 
Siemens for bribes and that he agreed to make the payments from a 
special fund he controlled for "discretionary payments."  In the 
Enel case, the money allegedly was transferred through companies in 
Liechtenstein, Dubai and Abu Dhabi before being channeled into bank 
accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein.  Kley said the payments 
weren't illegal, because the bribed Enel officials didn't fall 
within the legal definition of civil servants.  Instead, he said, he 
regarded them as representatives of a private-sector company.  While 
Germany broadened its anticorruption laws in 2002, allowing 
prosecutors to charge people who bribe private-sector officials 
abroad, the law can't be applied to the Enel case, because it took 
place before the law was enacted. 
----------------------------- 
SLUSH FUNDS FOR BUYING UNIONS 
----------------------------- 
¶10.  At the same time Siemens was allegedly paying bribes to 
influence customers abroad, it is also alleged to have been secretly 
funding a Siemens-friendly union at home.  On March 27, following 
raids on several Siemens offices, German prosecutors arrested 
Johannes Feldmayer, a member of the Siemens management board and the 
company's second-highest-paid official after Kleinfeld.  Feldmayer 
is accused of transferring about Euro 34 million ($45.4 million), to 
Wilhelm Schelsky, recently jailed for tax-evasion. 
¶11.  Allegedly, Feldmayer approved the payments to a consulting firm 
run by Schelsky, which were then funneled to the Siemens-friendly 
union also headed by Schelsky, the Association of Independent 
Employees (AUB), as a counterweight to the powerful IG Metall union, 
which claimed that AUB sometimes blocked its positions in labor 
talks.  The IG Metall labor union announced April 2 that it would 
press charges against Siemens for breaking German law by trying to 
influence labor through bribes.  This action would be especially 
threatening for Siemens's management because IG Metall officials and 
its members hold nearly half the seats on the company's supervisory 
board (board of directors), which has the power to decide the fate 
of individual executives. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
CEO KLIENFELD: SIEMENS TO BE MODEL OF TRANSPARENCY 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶12.  In other separate, on-going investigations, U.S., French and 
German authorities are looking into whether Siemens officials bribed 
Saddam Hussein's regime to secure contracts under the UN's 
Oil-for-Food program.  Additionally, on January 24, the European 
 
MUNICH 00000196  003 OF 003 
 
 
Commission imposed a Euro 423 million ($565 million) penalty on 
Siemens for price fixing among providers of gas-insulated 
electric-power switchgear.  However, until the arrest of Feldmayer, 
the top officials of Siemens had remained relatively free of blame 
for the string of scandals at the company.  CEO Klaus Kleinfeld, who 
prosecutors have so far said is only a witness and not a suspect, 
has blamed the various corruption charges on "rogue" employees. 
 
¶13.  Ironically, the day before Feldmayer's arrest, Kleinfeld 
appeared at the "13th International Conference on Competition" in 
Munich, where he gave a speech to government regulators, including 
U.S. Federal Trade Commission Chairman Deborah Majoras.  In his 
remarks, Kleinfeld said that coming to the conference felt like 
"climbing into the lion's den" given the firm's recent negative 
publicity.  He reiterated to the audience that Siemens had a zero 
tolerance for illegal behavior and pointed to the company's efforts 
to deal with the scandals, including its cooperation with 
authorities, as well as its hiring its own auditors and 
investigators.  Furthermore, he predicted that Siemens would 
ultimately be admired for its efforts and would be seen as a 
benchmark for transparency. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶14.  While Siemens reputation in Germany has not sunk to the level 
of an Enron or Tyco yet, the damage cannot be understated, as the 
symbol of "Germany Inc." has now become fair game for editorial 
cartoonists and television comedians.  Siemens remains profitable 
and its stock price stable -- what's more difficult to gauge is the 
currency of the firm's "good name."  Even without further 
high-profile arrests, potential customers and shareholders have to 
view a potential relationship with Siemens somewhat more cautiously 
than before.  As for Kleinfeld himself -- he continues to maintain 
that he is both innocent and unaware of wrongdoing.  However, given 
the breadth of alleged corruption at Siemens, the CEO's claim of 
ignorance of a pervasive culture of corruption is almost as 
unsettling as the thought of his direct involvement in it. 
 
 
¶15.  This report has been coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
¶16.  Previous reporting from Munich is available on our SIPRNET 
website at www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/munich/ . 
 
GUY