07PRETORIA3319
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Wed Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO2144
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #3319/01 2621358
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191358Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1853
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 4837
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 9168
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 7438UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 003319 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, AUGUST 2007 
 
 
PRETORIA 00003319  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings newsletter, August 2007, Volume 2, 
Number 5, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
 
-- SASOL THE SINGLE LARGEST SOURCE OF GREEN HOUSE GASES IN THE 
WORLD 
-- RADIO-QUITE ZONE MAY CREATE COSTLY UNITENDED CONSEQUENCES 
-- SOUTH AFRICA WATER LOSS LEVES UNACCEPTABLE 
-- MBOWENI FAVORS SUGAR CANE FOR FUEL PRODUCTION 
-- BIOFUEL INDUSTRY HAS POTENTIAL TO PROVIDE ENEGRGY AND JOBS 
-- SOUTH AFRICA LAUNCHES ENVIRONMENTAL GOODS AND SERVICES FORUM 
-- SOUTH AFRICAN GOVERNMENT FOREST INDUSTRIALIZATION PROGRAM 
CRITICIZED 
-- BLAZING INFERNOS RAVAGE SOUTH AFRICA COUNTRYSIDE 
End Summary. 
 
SASOL: THE SINGLE LARGEST SOURCE OF GREEN HOUSE GASES IN THE WORLD 
¶2. (U) Officials of the Department of Environmental Affairs and 
Tourism (DEAT) and the South African Weather Services (SAWS) told a 
parliamentary portfolio committee that SASOL, the world's largest 
synthetic fuels facility, is the single largest source of green 
house gases (GHG) in the world.  DEAT Senior Policy Advisor on 
Climate Change Judy Beaumont also told the committee that South 
Africa has an extremely GHG-intensive economy because of its heavy 
reliance on coal burning for energy.  South Africa is the largest 
contributor of GHG emissions in Africa, ranked at 25th in the world 
and 11th among developing countries according to information sourced 
from the United Nations International Panel on Climate Change.  The 
data also reports that since 1981 South Africa has surpassed both 
the US and India in terms of carbon dioxide (CO2) produced per 
$1,000 of Gross Domestic Production (GDP). 
¶3. (U) African National Congress (ANC) Member of Parliament Aubrey 
Mokoena questioned South Africa's high emissions numbers and found 
it preposterous that South Africa produced more CO2 than the U.S., 
considering the relative sizes of their economies.  Committee 
Chairman Langa Zita acknowledged the high-level climate change 
meeting in Washington DC called by the U.S. government for October. 
Zita suggested that the U.S. might present new commitments to GHG 
reductions during this meeting.  The meeting will precede the 13th 
Conference of Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change scheduled for December 2007 in Bali. 
RADIO-QUITE ZONE MAY CREATE COSTLY UNITENDED CONSEQUENCES 
¶4. (U) The Department of Science and Technology (DST) parliamentary 
portfolio committee held discussions with interested stakeholders 
regarding the proposed Astronomy Geographic Advantage Bill, which 
would allow DST to create a radio-quiet zone around the proposed 
site for the $1 billion Square Kilometer Array (SKA) in the Northern 
Cape.  The radio-quiet zone would minimize or eradicate radio 
interference by aircraft radar, cell phone masts, radio frequency 
and television broadcasts, light pollution and human settlement. 
The National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) and Transnet have 
both expressed concerns about the draft bill, stating that it could 
have costly unintended consequences. 
¶5. (U) Transnet Chief Engineer for Tele-communications Danie Botha 
said his quasi-government entity could be required to replace radio 
equipment used on freight trains in the area with expensive 
alternative technologies.  He said this could cost them in excess of 
$26 million over the next eight years.  Transnet currently operates 
three key railway lines in the Northern Cape Province which generate 
over $143 million per year.  The NAB argued that broadcaster license 
conditions require that the broadcaster provide services to all 
South Africans.  NAB claims that minimizing broadcasts in the SKA 
area would violate those conditions.  The NAB also complained that 
the bill would give the DST Minister powers that had previously been 
granted to the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa 
(ICASA).  SA is competing with Australia to host the 
multi-nationally funded SKA telescope, which would be the largest 
and most powerful radio telescope in operation. 
 
 
SOUTH AFRICA WATER LOSS LEVES UNACCEPTABLE 
¶6. (U) Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) Director 
General Jabu Sindane told attendees to the inaugural Water 
Sustainability Conference in mid August, that water remains a scarce 
resource in South Africa.  He said although the country is not in 
danger of running short of water in the near future, the current 
water waste levels are unacceptable because "South Africa is a dry 
country."  The average rainfall in South Africa is only 450 
millimeters per year, far below the world average of 860 
millimeters.  Sindane noted that South Africa loses approximately 
$430 million a year due to water leaks and poorly operated waste 
water treatment facilities.  Irrigation accounts for sixty percent 
of all the water requirements in the country, while the remaining 
forty percent is shared among other sectors of the economy.  The 
 
PRETORIA 00003319  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
National Treasury allocated $700 million for bulk water services 
infrastructure in February this year.  The national government and 
local municipalities have also established 20 water management 
agencies throughout South Africa, and have launched campaigns to 
encourage consumers to use water sparingly and efficiently.  DWAF 
budgeted over $3 billion in the previous fiscal period to build 18 
new dams over the next 20 years.  The state-owned Trans-Caledon 
Tunnel Authority will manage the building of the dams and plans to 
obtain additional revenue from the sale of water. 
MBOWENI FAVORS SUGAR CANE FOR FUEL PRODUCTION 
¶7. (U) Addressing the parliamentary portfolio committee for finance 
in August, South African Reserve Bank (SARB) Governor Tito Mboweni 
urged maize farmers in the Free State not to shift to ethanol 
production because this could distort the domestic maize market and 
raise prices.  He suggested that farmers move to sugar cane rather 
than maize as their source crop for biofuel production.  Many Free 
State maize farmers have already sold their maize for up to ten 
years ahead on future markets.  Mboweni is concerned that farmers 
may not be able to sustain maize production for animal and human 
consumption, as well as for fuel production.  Mboweni said that 
South Africa should follow global alternative and renewable energy 
trends such as biofuel production, but must also act responsibly. 
He cited Brazil as an example to emulate, stating that the country 
had been producing bio-ethanol efficiently and sustainably from 
sugar cane and had used it to dilute gasoline for automobiles for 
decades. 
¶8. (U) Mboweni did not support the U.S. production system which 
emphasized maize as the source crop.  Mboweni remained skeptical 
that biofuel production would have a significant impact on the crude 
oil price, but did acknowledge that biofuel production is 
well-aligned with the South Africa government's Accelerated Shared 
Growth Initiative for South Africa (ASGI-SA).  The Department of 
Minerals and Energy (DME) supports the inclusion of maize, along 
with sugar cane, soya beans and sunflower seeds, as crop sources for 
bio-diesel production. 
BIOFUEL INDUSTRY HAS POTENTIAL TO PROVIDE ENEGRGY AND JOBS 
¶9. (U) Principle Energy Executive Director Paul Zorner said South 
Africa needs to look at agriculture as a source of food and energy, 
and that Sub-Saharan Africa has a huge potential to make the biofuel 
industry a great success.  He told delegates attending the opening 
of the 26th International Society of Sugar Cane Technologists that 
the global demand for energy and food will continue to grow, and 
that agriculture and technology could help South Africa meet the 
demand.  According Zorner, every 1 billion gallons of ethanol 
produced in South Africa creates 8,000 jobs, 1,500 of which could be 
permanent jobs.  Minister of Science and Technology Mosibudi Mangena 
has advised that the government is in the process of developing a 
national biofuel strategy, but he did not commit to any government 
subsidies for biofuels.  Mangena cautioned that subsidizing biofuels 
would trigger other sectors such as agriculture to demand 
subsidization as well. 
¶10. (U) The S&T Minister said that government has to conduct a 
delicate balancing act to develop the biofuel industry while not 
disrupting food production.  Mangena agreed with SARB Governor 
Mboweni that maize should not be considered a source crop for 
biofuel because there is already a maize shortage in the country. 
Mangena also noted that water would be a serious challenge for the 
biofuel industry since irrigation already accounts for the largest 
share of water consumption in the country.  Zorner commented that 
finance would be another key challenge facing the industry because 
the required equipment is expensive.  The biofuel industry remains 
on hold in South Africa pending the government's promulgation of 
implementing regulations. 
SOUTH AFRICA LAUNCHES ENVIRONMENTAL GOODS AND SERVICES FORUM 
¶11. (U) The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) launched the 
South African Environmental Goods and Services Forum (SAEGSF) in 
August.  DTI Chief Director for Technical Infrastructure Dr. Tshenge 
Demana said that it has become increasingly vital for countries to 
meet international environmental standards if they wish to trade 
internationally.  Demana underscored that South Africa needs to 
conform to international standards if it plans to be competitive in 
environmental goods.  DTI Director of Environment Dorah Nteo, stated 
that SAEGSF would serve as the voice for the business sector 
providing a platform for communication and marketing.  The 
international green industry is estimated to be worth $600 billion 
(R4.2 trillion) and continues to grow at 45 percent per year 
according to the DTI environmental directorate.  South African 
demand for green goods and services was estimated at t between R14.5 
billion ($2 billion) and R23.2 billion ($3 billion) three years ago. 
 The sector contributes about 1.6 percent of GDP, employs over 
500,000 people and is growing at an annual rate of 15 percent. 
SOUTH AFRICAN GOVERNMENT FOREST INDUSTRIALIZATION PROGRAM 
CRITICIZED 
¶12. (U) The South African government released in early August the 
National Industrial Policy Framework (NIDPF) targeting forestry, 
furniture, paper and pulp as the lead sector for development in the 
 
PRETORIA 00003319  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
next ten years.  South Africa plans to establish forest plantations 
in the provinces of Kwa-Zulu Natal (100,000 hectares) and the 
Eastern Cape (40,000 hectares).  The ultimate goal of the initiative 
is to create over 41,000 jobs in the plantations and about 2,000 
jobs in primary processing and downstream sectors.  An initial 
investment of about R1.5 billion ($0.2 billion) is required to 
establish the plantations, and a further "substantial" investment 
will subsequently be needed to create downstream processing 
operations according to the Department of Trade and Industry. 
¶13. (U) Environmental NGOs, including Timberwatch Coalition 
spokesman Wally Manne criticized the South African government 
afforestration plan.  Manne argued that the government's plan is not 
based on economic assessments, and does not consider the impact on 
poor rural communities.  Manne noted that although the government is 
promoting the plan as a way to encourage rural development, there 
have been no studies indicating any real benefits to rural people. 
Manne said that such initiatives often end up disenfranchising rural 
people and driving them off the land and out of the jobs they once 
held.  Independent environmental biodiversity assessment consultant 
Paul Desmet stated that because of the many untapped rivers in the 
Eastern Cape, the forest plan is viable in that province, but he 
would not say the same for the Kwa-Zulu Natal province, a 
water-stressed location.  Other critics of the NIDPF note that even 
though the government admits that South Africa will experience 
severe water shortages by 2020, the government continues to 
aggressively expand water intensive programs such as this forest 
plan, agro-processing and biofuels. 
BLAZING INFERNOS RAVAGE SOUTH AFRICA COUNTRYSIDE 
¶14. (U) Raging fires swept through Kwa-Zulu Natal (KZN) and 
Mpumalanga provinces in late July and early August, leaving behind 
destroyed properties, many people killed or severely injured, and 
thousands of wounded or dead animals.  The fires occurred at the 
height of the winter season when most grasslands and forests are 
very dry.  The fires were fanned by 90 kilometer per hour winds, 
which ripped the roofs off buildings.  At least 22 people were 
killed in the fires, including nine in KZN and thirteen in 
Mpumalanga.  A team of firefighters in Graskop, Mpumalanga lost five 
members in the fires and one firefighter drowned when attempting to 
escape the fires.  Five sawmills and an estimated 25,000 hectares of 
forest land were destroyed in the Graskop and Sabie forest 
plantations.  The Mpumalanga provincial government deployed all the 
firefighters at their disposal, and the South African Air Force sent 
out Oryx helicopters, which flew nearly 300 hours over the hotspots. 
 Sappi, a company that owns vast forest plantations in the region, 
deployed its team of 400 fire fighters. 
¶15. (U) Vic Jacobs of Electra Communications blamed the loss of life 
and property to slow action and indecisiveness on the part of the 
Graskop municipality and the national government.  He said although 
a communications network had been presented to the authorities two 
years ago, the disaster plan had yet to be implemented.  Elektra 
Communications has also developed an inter-linked network system 
which remote communities could use to send out alarm signals to a 
central point, but these too have not been installed.  Jacobs 
complained that South Africa has not learned from the fires and the 
floods which struck the area in 2000 and 2002.  He cautioned that 
businesses and tourists have been left without any contingency plans 
to deal with the emergencies, especially when disasters are coupled 
with power failures as happened in this instance.  Jacobs praised 
the response of the private companies Sappi and Mondi, both of which 
sent in firefighting teams.  The National Society for the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals also sent emergency teams to the area to help 
animals with severe burns. 
Bost