07PRETORIA2619
JMPD ACADEMY OPENING: A PARTNERSHIP PRODUCT
Thu Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXYZ0018
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSA #2619/01 2071435
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261435Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0948
INFO RUEAWJC/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDCUNCLAS PRETORIA 002619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/AAE:JLYLE;EBARCLAY 
AF/S:MTABLER-STONE; DS/T/ATA; DS/IP/AF 
JUSTICE FOR ICITAP:EBEINHART 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC EAID ELAB PREL PHUM SF
SUBJECT: JMPD ACADEMY OPENING: A PARTNERSHIP PRODUCT 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: In his speech for the official opening of the 
Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department's (JMPD) academy, the 
Chief of Police described it as a "product of our partnership" - a 
reference to the four-year partnership between the Johannesburg 
Municipality and the United States. The Chief then narrated a long 
list of the accomplishments over those years. Mr. Thomas Phakati, a 
member of the Mayoral Committee for Public Safety, and speaking on 
behalf of the Mayor of Johannesburg, highlighted the USG's 
assistance in sharing best practices for community policing. The 
Ambassador told the first graduates of the academy that the US is 
proud of their accomplishments as the best and the brightest. All 
the officials made it a point to thank the USG for its support and 
Phakati noted that with the upcoming World Cup games in 2010, JMPD 
will request further assistance to ensure its officers are prepared. 
 End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On July 17, the Ambassador participated in the official 
opening of the academy of the Johannesburg Metropolitan Police 
Department (JMPD). The US contributed $500,000 toward the cost of 
constructing the building.  In addition, through the US Department 
of Justice International Criminal Investigative Training Assistance 
Program (ICITAP), the US has provided funding for a senior police 
advisor since 2003, as well as for various training programs. 
 
¶3. (U) In the absence of the Mayor of Johannesburg, Mr. Thomas 
Phakati, a member of the Mayoral Committee for Public Safety, led 
the official opening of the new police academy. After thanking the 
USG for its assistance, Phakati told 206 graduating cadets that JMPD 
and the USG have agreed to share best practices through the 
provision of a technical advisor, training, and equipment. He 
highlighted the fact that a peaceful political environment is not 
possible if crime is rampant. JMPD, Phakati stressed, is interested 
in a well trained police force that ensures a universal sense of 
safety and security in South Africa. He cited President Mbeki's 
speech to the nation last February underlining the fact that crime 
could undermine South Africa's hard-earned democracy. Phakati also 
cited the recent ANC policy conference, which noted that police 
officers must be accountable to the communities they serve. 
 
¶4. (U) Phakati noted that the best place to produce police graduates 
equal to the task of adopting a policy of total opposition to crime 
is through JMPD's new academy. He urged the graduates to "go out and 
claim back our streets." In conclusion, Phakati, turning to the 
Ambassador, said that as the city of Johannesburg prepares for the 
2010 FIFA World Cup, they will approach the USG for assistance in 
dealing with such a major event and to train JMPD officers to deal 
with large crowds at similar sporting events. 
 
¶5. (U) Police Chief Chris Ngcobo said that when JMPD was launched in 
March 2001, they were aware that they were starting a local police 
department in one of South Africa's largest metropolitan areas. To 
ensure that a solid and sustainable foundation was laid, Chief 
Ngcobo approached then US Consul General of Johannesburg, Sue Ford 
Patrick, which led to the US decision to share best police 
practices, especially in community policing, with the JMPD. 
 
¶6. (U) Ngcobo then listed several areas of specific assistance that 
the US provided in this "great partnership" with the City of 
Johannesburg: 
 
-- Provision of a law enforcement technical advisor whose 
contribution the chief described as "valuable" and having had a 
"tremendous affect on JMPD's success." 
 
-- Supported training for 270 JMPD members at JMPD facilities. 
 
-- Executive management courses for some JMPD managers in Africa and 
in the United States. 
 
-- Visit of the deputy director to seven police departments in the 
US to study best practices in law enforcement, some of which are now 
being implemented in Johannesburg. 
 
-- Attendance by the Police Chief at the two-week "Executive 
Leadership" course at the FBI Academy, which he said was a "great 
learning experience." 
 
¶7. (U) Chief Ngcobo said that although the academy was officially 
opened on July 17, two basic recruit classes have already been 
completed. (Note: the Chief inducted 206 graduates during the 
opening ceremony. The other recruits must complete a six-month 
course in a SAPS training facility before they can receive their 
diplomas.) In addition, 52 recruits from neighboring municipalities 
were also trained at the academy. The Chief then noted that it is 
JMPD's intent to make the academy a regional training center that 
will include students from other African countries. Before 
administering the oath of office, the chief concluded his speech by 
thanking the "government and the people of the United States of 
America for their assistance in building this academy." 
 
¶8. (U) The Ambassador expressed pleasure that the Municipality of 
Johannesburg and the USG and people of the United States have 
collaborated successfully over the years to make a "difference in 
the lives of ordinary South Africans." The Ambassador noted that the 
US contributed about 3.5 million rands to the academy and an 
additional 8.4 million rands in training. The Ambassador highlighted 
that: 20 JMPD officers attended specialized courses in ILEA 
Gaborone, JMPD has established a social crime prevention unit to 
interact with students and communities on traffic safety and crime 
prevention information; a 20-officer bicycle unit is being formed to 
assist in patrolling certain areas; JMPD managers have visited US 
facilities and observed best practices. In addition, 270 officers 
were trained at the JMPD facility by US trainers. 
 
¶9. (U) The Ambassador singled out the contributions made by special 
police advisor Willie Pannell to the JMPD over the last three years, 
sharing his experiences of how the LAPD made Los Angeles a better 
place to live today. The Ambassador concluded his remarks by 
praising the JMPD graduates on their accomplishments and noting that 
their parents and the City of Johannesburg know that they will all 
do an outstanding job. 
 
¶10. (U) Comment: The City of Johannesburg's public acknowledgement 
of their fruitful partnership with the United States was sincere and 
reflects deep appreciation by these officials. There is no doubt 
that Chief Ngcobo is largely responsible for this, but we could not 
help noticing the impact SLA Pannell had on the leadership: they 
acknowledged his contribution as fundamental to their vision of 
establishing a "world class law enforcement agency." Given JMPD's 
interest in receiving additional USG training and the South African 
Police Service (SAPS) recent rejection of assistance, Post believes 
that it would be prudent to pursue ATA training for metropolitan 
police departments within Gauteng Province, which includes the JMPD, 
Tshwane, and Ekurhuleni departments.  At present, the JMPD actively 
 
SIPDIS 
assists the SAPS by providing officers to staff SAPS stations and 
joint patrols. The SAPS have also intimated that the metropolitan 
police forces will eventually be incorporated into the SAPS. In 
light of their expanding role, ATA training for the metropolitan 
police makes sense. 
 
BOST