07RIGA373
Latvian parliament approves Russian border treaty
Mon May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Riga
VZCZCXRO1172
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHRA #0373 1411039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211039Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY RIGA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4029
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS RIGA 000373 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PBTS PGOV RS LG
SUBJECT: Latvian parliament approves Russian border treaty 
 
Ref: Riga 193 and previous 
 
¶1. Summary: Latvia's Saeima (parliament) voted 70-25 on May 17 to 
ratify the Latvia-Russia Border Treaty signed by both prime 
ministers on March 27. Although the two main opponents of 
ratification of the treaty - the coalition party For Fatherland and 
Freedom/LNNK (TB/LNNK) and the opposition party New Era (JL) - 
argued for adoption of a number of amendments which would either 
freeze or delay ratification, lawmakers rejected all amendments and 
the law was adopted comparatively quickly and debates lacked true 
enthusiasm. President Vaira Vike-Freiberga welcomed the Saeima's 
decision and promised to sign the instrument of ratification 
quickly. Russian officials have signaled the possibility that the 
Duma could act by the end of June, although the Latvians are not 
getting their hopes up. End summary. 
 
¶2. In an almost two-hour debate, the Saeima adopted the Law on 
Ratification of the Latvia-Russia Border Treaty. Prime Minister 
Kalvitis (People's Party) and FM Pabriks (People's Party) took part 
in the debates. Both called on opponents to be "responsible 
politicians and keep up to date," stressing that by ratifying the 
treaty Latvia would fulfill its international commitments made when 
joining the EU and NATO (when Latvia said it had no outstanding 
territorial claims).  Under the treaty, Latvia effectively 
acknowledges the transfer of the Abrene region to Russia in Stalin's 
era. 
 
¶3. Opponents kept to their standard arguments.  The nationalist 
party in the coalition, TB/LNNK, repeated its objections that by 
ratifying the treaty Latvia denies the fact that it was forcibly 
occupied by the Soviet Union and consequently gives up any 
territorial claims towards Russia, as well as exempts Russia from 
taking any responsibilities for dealing with the "consequences" of 
the occupation (meaning potential reparations). 
 
¶4. Main opposition party, New Era (JL), continued to argue that the 
party does not oppose the treaty as such; however, the decision on 
ratification should be taken only after a national referendum 
because it modifies the country's border set forth in the 
constitution.  New Era, along with several MP from the coalition who 
oppose the treaty, filed suit in the Constitutional Court to contest 
the legitimacy of the border treaty.  They argue that the 
Constitution requires a referendum to change Latvia's borders.  The 
ruling of the Constitutional Court is expected in the fall. Both 
TB/LNNK and JK proposed amendments which would delay exchange of 
instruments of ratification until after the ruling of the 
Constitutional Court. All proposed amendments were rejected. 
 
¶5. As was the case when Saeima authorized the government to sign the 
treaty, the session was accompanied by public protests. More than 
100 people led by ultra nationalist group All for Latvia (Visu 
Latvijai!) gathered at the Saeima building to protest what they 
claim is the give away of Latvia's territory. 
 
¶6. Russian Ambassador to Latvia Viktor Kalyuzny has stated in a 
Latvian newspaper interview that Russia could complete ratification 
of the order treaty by the end of June. The Ambassador also 
indicated ratification is proceeding without any problems in Russia 
and that there are no grounds for concerns that Moscow is hampering 
the process. Also the Russian Duma's International Affairs Committee 
Deputy Chairman Leonid Slutski is quoted in Latvian press saying 
that he anticipates that President Putin will submit the bill for 
ratification of the border agreement before the end of the spring 
session. 
 
¶6. Comment: Latvia is getting closer to resolving its long-running 
border issue with Russia. Even if the ruling of the Constitutional 
Court is negative (which most legal experts suspect will not 
happen), if instruments of ratification have been exchanged, it 
seems the treaty will be in force. Nevertheless, a negative ruling 
of the CC would place Latvia in a very difficult situation as there 
would be a conflict between domestic and international law. The 
ruling coalition is taking a calculated risk here, betting both that 
the court will rule in its favor and that, if it does not, it can 
solve the resulting legal conundrum with minimal political fallout. 
While the Latvians are encouraged by Russian statements of quick 
action they know that Moscow's position can change quickly, as with 
Putin's strident criticism of Latvia at the EU-Russia summit in 
Samara. 
 
Waser