07TALLINN72
ESTONIA: FUROR OVER BRONZE SOLDIER DEBATE
Thu Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tallinn
VZCZCXRO5300
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHTL #0072/01 0321601
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011601Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY TALLINN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9484
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TALLINN 000072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL RS EN
SUBJECT: ESTONIA: FUROR OVER BRONZE SOLDIER DEBATE 
 
REF: (A) 06 TALLINN 533 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On January 10, the Riigikogu (Estonian 
parliament) approved a bill giving the GOE legal 
authority to relocate the graves of Soviet soldiers 
and the adjacent "Bronze soldier" statue from their 
current location in central Tallinn.  Prime Minister 
Andrus Ansip has stated that excavation of the graves 
could begin in May.  However, until March 
parliamentary elections determine the shape of the 
next government, it is unlikely any action will be 
taken.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) As previously reported (Ref A), ethnic and 
political tensions over the "Bronze soldier", the 
Soviet-era monument dedicated to the war dead of WWII, 
initially reignited in May 2006.  On the anniversary 
of the "End of the Great Patriotic War Day", counter- 
demonstrations resulted in scuffles between ethnic 
Russians and Estonians near the monument. 
Subsequently, the Ministry of Interior temporarily 
cordoned off the park in which the monument is located 
and banned demonstrations near the site.  The media 
coverage of these events was extensive, in part due to 
the highly prominent and visible location the Bronze 
Soldier in central Tallinn. 
 
¶3. (U) Political leaders immediately began to debate 
the necessity of moving the Bronze Soldier to a less 
visible location outside of the city -- giving the 
justification that it would lessen the ability of 
radical groups on both sides to disturb the public. 
Prime Minister Andrus Ansip voiced his support for 
moving the monument, but acknowledged that in the 
absence of national legislation regulating the 
protection of war graves, the GOE lacked authority to 
take any action.  The Tallinn city government convened 
a series of roundtable discussions that included 
Russian NGOs and local leaders, but could not reach a 
consensus. 
 
Where There is a Bill, There is a Way 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Members of the three-party ruling coalition 
split over the issue: Center and People's Union 
opposed moving the Bronze Soldier while the Reform 
Party strongly supported the idea.  In November, Vaino 
Lind, a Reform MP and the Chair of the Legal Affairs 
Committee, submitted the "War Graves Protection Bill" 
(WGP) to the parliament for consideration.  The 
parliament approved this legislation, jointly 
sponsored by the Reform Party, Social Democratic 
Party, Res Publica, and Pro Patria, on January 10, 
giving the GOE the legal authority to move war graves, 
markers, and monuments that are located in 
"unsuitable" areas.  According to the law, the 
Minister of Defense will establish an independent War 
Graves Committee made up of representatives from the 
Estonian Association for the Maintenance of War Graves 
and the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defense, 
Interior, Justice, and Culture.  This Committee will 
have one year to present a list of War Graves that are 
deemed to be in unsuitable locations.  The Ministry of 
Defense shall then decide, on the proposal of the 
Committee, which remains are to be reburied to which 
location.  Opponents of the WGP have criticized it for 
being inflammatory.  Supporters, however, emphasize 
that the WGP is in full compliance with the Geneva 
Convention, and includes provisions for the proper 
reburial of any disturbed remains. 
 
¶5. (U) Prime Minister Ansip has publicly expressed his 
desire for the excavation process to begin in May. 
However, it is unlikely the GOE will take any action 
until March parliamentary elections determine the 
shape of the next government.  In addition, any GOE 
effort to move the monument itself may face delays 
from legal challenges.  Elina Elkind, an Advisor at 
the Ministry of Justice, told us that there is some 
ambiguity in the language of the law which opponents 
could use to challenge the GOE's right to move the 
Bronze Soldier. 
 
¶7. (U) Another bill tangentially related to the WGP, 
the "Disallowed Construction Removal Bill" (DCR), has 
stalled in the Riigikogu.  The DCR would authorize the 
GOE to prohibit the construction of and allow the 
removal of any monument or structure that glorifies 
 
TALLINN 00000072  002 OF 002 
 
 
the occupation of Estonia and/or incites hatred or 
disturbs public order.  The DCR, which was also 
initially submitted in November, has been through only 
one of three readings in the parliament.  The same 
four parties sponsored the bill, but gave priority to 
passage of the WGP.  Raini Lind, the Director of the 
parliament's Legal Affairs Committee Secretariat, said 
that in her opinion the DCR will likely die in 
committee before the parliament's final session, 
February 22. 
 
Is it History or Politics? 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Comment:  Since re-independence the Bronze 
Soldier has become the litmus test of how ethnic 
Estonians and the Russian-speaking minority understand 
history differently.  The former sees the monument as 
a provocative reminder of Soviet occupation, whereas 
the latter reveres it as a memorial to those who lost 
their lives fighting fascism.  Unfortunately, the 
passage of the WGP bill so close to parliamentary 
elections, gives some credence to critics who say the 
sponsors of the bill are less interested in addressing 
history than in accumulating political capital. 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN