07TELAVIV917
SPECIAL ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Mar 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0019
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0917/01 0850610
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 260610Z MAR 07 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0197
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 1876
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8621
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 1805
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2685
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 1866
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9682
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2601
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9512
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 9988
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6603
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4000
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 8887
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3095
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5016
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6347
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000917 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: SPECIAL ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Secretary Rice to Israel, West Bank, March 25-27, 2007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media -- lead stories in all media, except Maariv -- reported on 
the first day Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's visit to Israel 
and the PA.  The media reported that Secretary Rice arrived in 
Israel on Sunday and met over dinner for three hours with PM Ehud 
Olmert at his home in Jerusalem. Earlier she visited Ramallah and 
met with PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas, whom she will meet 
again Monday morning in Jordan.   The Secretary is scheduled to meet 
Monday with Jordan's King Abdullah II in Amman this morning and 
return to Ramallah.  Later today, Secretary Rice will meet with 
Defense Minister Amir Peretz and FM Tzipi Livni. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Rice told reporters on Sunday that her 
earlier visit to the region, five weeks ago, and her tripartite 
meeting with Abbas and Olmert in Jerusalem took place with the Mecca 
agreement for the establishment of a Palestinian national unity 
government as the background.  Unlike that meeting, which Rice 
hinted had taken place because it had already been scheduled, this 
visit aims to jump-start a separate negotiation process. Ha'aretz 
quoted the Secretary as saying that that she sat for many hours with 
President Bush in order to formulate a diplomatic strategy, and that 
she does not exclude the possibility that a special envoy will be 
appointed for talks with the two sides. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that the US is planning to hold 
separate talks with Israel and the PA aimed at achieving an accord 
that will lead to the establishment of a Palestinian state. 
Ha'aretz quoted Rice as saying on Sunday night that the US will hold 
separate negotiations with the two sides, present questions and 
request clarifications regarding their positions, in an effort to 
reach an agreed-upon agenda for the renewal of peace talks. 
Ha'aretz wrote that Rice is planning to present the two sides with 
questions on two main issues: territory and security.   Ha'aretz 
quoted the Secretary as saying that it is possible to learn from the 
experience that has accumulated since the end of negotiations in 
2000, particularly with regard to security arrangements.  She 
pointed to the management of the border crossings at Karni and Rafah 
in the Gaza Strip as examples that should be studied closely.  The 
Secretary of State was also quoted as saying that she intends to 
 
SIPDIS 
request clarifications from Israel as to how it intends to implement 
the vision of a territorially contiguous Palestinian state in the 
West Bank. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Monday evening she intends to hold a press 
conference in Jerusalem, which will open with a short statement 
summarizing her visit.  Ha'aretz said that the Israeli political 
team held talks with Rice's aides Sunday in an effort to soften the 
statement.  Ha'aretz wrote that Israel would like to avoid 
formulations that will be binding in a final agreement or which deal 
with issues of serious dispute (most likely, Jerusalem and the 
refugees).  Yediot, which banners "American Pressure to Resume 
Negotiations," reported that the Secretary will present a series of 
measures to both sides in order to jump-start the diplomatic 
process.  Yediot wrote that she will demand of the Palestinians that 
the cease Qassam rocket fire and release abducted IDF Cpl. Gilad 
Shalit, and that she will require that Israel expand the cease-fire 
and strengthen Abbas.  All media reported that Olmert scolded Abbas 
for failing to keep his personal promise to him that Shalit would be 
released before the establishment of a Palestinian national unity 
government. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted senior Israeli officials saying on Sunday 
that Israel would "not dismiss" an Arab diplomatic initiative that 
talks about normalization of relations, Palestinian statehood within 
the pre-1967 lines and the right of refugee return as the opening of 
a negotiating process and not as a take-it-or-leave-it deal.  "We 
would not reject this out of hand," one official was quoted as 
saying.  "This would challenge Israel and cause a serious discussion 
here." 
 
Maariv and other media reported that Secretary Rice arrived in 
Israel with a new plan.  Maariv quoted a senior Western diplomat as 
saying that, based on her talks with UN Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon on Sunday and apparently with Olmert, Rice is interested in 
Israel not continuing direct talks with the Palestinians and 
focusing its efforts on the Saudi initiative.  On Sunday Maariv 
reported that Olmert has resolved to accept the Saudi initiative, 
provided the clause calling for the right of Palestinian refugees to 
return to lands within the State of Israel is stricken from the 
initiative.  Maariv quoted a high-ranking political source as 
saying: "The Prime Minister believes that the initiative contains 
positive elements alongside of which are issues that Israel 
perceives as non-starters, such as Resolution 194. 
 
 
 
Hatzofe reported that Abbas and Rice agreed that there will be no 
changes in the Saudi initiative.  Hatzofe quoted the Secretary as 
saying that the initiative is compatible with President Bush's 
vision. 
 
Yediot reported that Rice refuses to meet with the families of the 
abducted IDF soldiers. 
 
UN Secretary-General was quoted as saying last night in an interview 
with Ha'aretz that the international Quartet is planning to invite 
to its next meeting Israel, the Palestinians and the Arab Quartet, 
comprising Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan and the UAE.  The UN chief 
was quoted as saying that the issue was discussed in a meeting with 
Secretary Rice on Sunday, in which they exchanged their impressions 
 
SIPDIS 
of meetings held with leaders in the region.  Ban was quoted as 
saying that the meeting with Rice was good and expressed his hope 
the international community will be able to take full advantage of 
the diplomatic momentum that is currently being created.  Ha'aretz 
wrote that the UN Secretary-General, who will participate in the 
Arab League summit in Riyadh during the weekend, expressed his hope 
the Arab peace initiative will be authorized at the gathering and 
that the composition of the Palestinian unity government will serve 
as the basis for the renewal of the diplomatic process in the 
region.  Ban was also quoted as saying that he expects to meet 
Syrian president Bashar Assad in Riyadh and that the renewal of 
negotiations between Israel and Syria will be one of the subjects 
the two will discuss.  Over the weekend the media cited Ban's strong 
criticism of violations of the basic human rights of the 
Palestinians. He was referring to the separation fence and the road 
blocks that are disrupting routine life in the territories. 
Ha'aretz reported that on Sunday Ban told Abbas that the 
international community will judge the new PA government on its 
conduct on the ground. He was quoted as saying that fulfilling the 
three preconditions of the Quartet -- recognition of Israel, 
accepting earlier PLO-Israel accords, and relinquishing violence -- 
are in line with the interest of preserving world peace.  However, 
Ha'aretz said that Ban noted that he intends to emphasize to Olmert 
the need for Israel to comply with its obligations, including an end 
to the settlements and a removal of the illegal outposts. 
 
In its lead story on Sunday Yediot told about a new initiative to 
coordinate a public Israeli-Saudi summit meeting. The initiative, 
which is described as a joint American-EU initiative and whose 
existence was confirmed recently by EU foreign policy director 
Javier Solana, is to arrange for Israeli and Saudi officials to meet 
publicly for the first time either in late April or early May. 
According to the report, Solana took it upon himself to persuade the 
Saudis to hold the meeting, while Condoleezza Rice is supposed to 
cajole Israel into confirming its attendance.  The envisioned 
Israeli-Saudi summit is also supposed to include representatives 
from the Quartet, Egypt, Jordan and the PA 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Palestinian Information Minister Mustafa 
Barghouti told the newspaper: "Whoever boycotts [the new Palestinian 
government] also boycotts the entire Palestinian people." 
Hatzofe reported on the birth of a "Palestinian Peace Now" in 
Ramallah.  The new movement -- "Wasatiyeh" ("Moderation") -- 
reportedly rejects the right of return and is opposed terror. 
 
In its lead story, Maariv reported that violent clashes might erupt 
between security forces and 5,000 right-wing demonstrators, who are 
expected to march today to the West Bank settlement of Homesh, which 
was evacuated in the summer of 2005 during the disengagement. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Sunday IDF OC Central Command Yair Naveh 
canceled a ban prohibiting Israelis from taking Palestinian 
passengers in their vehicles within the West Bank. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Gen. Pietro Pistolese, commander of the 
Border Assistance Mission, as saying that it Israel coninues to 
close the Rafah border terminal, the EU will need to reconsider 
extending its observer team's presence in the Gaza  Strip. 
 
Ha'aretz said that the Gaza Strip has become a "Palestinian 
Somalia." 
 
Leading media reported that over the weekend former PM Ehud Barak 
hinted that he is more interested in regaining the premiership than 
in accepting the post of defense minister if he is elected Labor 
Party chairman.  All media quoted Olmert as saying on Sunday that he 
will fight with all his might to get Vice PM Shimon Peres elected 
president of Israel.  The media reported that Labor Party Knesset 
Member Ami Ayalon is calling on his party to support Peres, instead 
of its official candidate Colette Avital.  On Sunday Maariv had 
cited claims by high-ranking Kadima officials that Peres's chances 
of being elected president are weak in the wake of the report about 
his testimony before the Winograd Committee, during which he said 
that he would not have gone to war in Lebanon.  They were quoted as 
saying that Peres's statements greatly annoyed the high-ranking 
faction members, especially Olmert. 
Ha'aretz Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner reported that the 
Agahozo Shalom Youth Village in Rwanda will "bring US donors, 
Ethiopian immigrants, and an operation to rescue Rwandan orphans 
under the Israel flag."  Ha'aretz quoted James Wolfensohn, former 
World Bank president and previously a US special envoy in Gaza as 
saying: "The Jewish community cannot ignore what is happening in the 
rest of the world." 
 
----------------------------------- 
Secretary Rice to Israel, West Bank, March 25-27, 2007: 
 
SIPDIS 
----------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "If the 
US, Europe, and the UN want the Arab states to more boldly lead the 
Palestinians toward moderation, they need to undermine radical Arab 
positions that are obstructing peace by openly rejecting such 
positions themselves." 
 
 
Very liberal columnist Gideon Levy wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Whom does the boycott -- which is pushing 
Hamas into the arms of Iran -- serve?  Not Israel and not the 
chances for peace." 
 
Liberal contributor Rami Livni wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "The refugees are the heart of the conflict and the core of 
the Palestinian national ethos." 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in Maariv: "The Saudi 
initiative is worthy.  But the question of what the Arabs' intention 
is with respect to the refugees remains unanswered.  The only chance 
for progress along the Saudi track is if the refugee issue is fully 
and completely neutralized." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I. "Reinforce Positive Developments" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (3/26): 
"Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's meetings today with UN 
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and with US Secretary of State 
 
SIPDIS 
Condoleezza Rice occur against the background of two important 
developments: a new UN Security Council resolution on Iran and a new 
US push for constructive action by the Arab states on a Mideast 
peace process.  These two advances are intimately related and should 
be encouraged.... [A] major positive development is that Rice has 
added a critical new plank to American diplomacy.  In a press 
roundtable on Friday before leaving for this region, she said: 'It 
is absolutely the case that I see the Israeli-Palestinian issue as 
having to be augmented by... and, in fact, you could even say, it's 
embedded in a broader Arab-Israeli reconciliation. ...what I believe 
is very important is that all parties in the international 
community, and that includes the Arab states, should recognize in 
order to get to... a Palestinian state and an end to the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, you need the energy and the help of 
moving forward on the Arab-Israeli side not at the end of the 
process but earlier in the process.'  It is blazingly clear, in a 
context where Israel has amply demonstrated its desire for a 
two-state solution and the Palestinians are too weak and radicalized 
to accept the state they have supposedly been fighting for, that the 
Arab states need to do their part.... Not surprisingly, the Arab 
states are resisting such pressure and are so far rejecting the 
ideas of modifying the 2002 Beirut initiative (the Saudi plan) and 
of taking steps toward normalizing relations with Israel now.  The 
US, however, should not be dissuaded, because this is the only 
approach that has a chance of producing real movement toward 
peace.... If the US, Europe, and the UN want the Arab states to more 
boldly lead the Palestinians toward moderation, they need to 
undermine radical Arab positions that are obstructing peace by 
openly rejecting such positions themselves." 
 
II.  "A Dangerous Masked Ball" 
 
Very liberal columnist Gideon Levy wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (3/26): "The rules of decorum are binding: 
Welcome -- to the US Secretary of State and United Nations 
Secretary-General, who have come here, and to the German Chancellor, 
 
SIPDIS 
who is due next week.  But the rules of logic are no less binding, 
and we must ask: So, why have you come?  All three have declared 
that they are coming here to further a solution.  But this whole 
show, we must tell them, is no more than a ridiculous masked ball: 
In their pointless and fruitless visits, they only perpetuate and 
entrench the conflict that most threatens world peace.  The fact 
that all three boycott the elected Palestinian Prime Minister 
predetermines that there is no chance for progress.  This blind trio 
is looking in the wrong place. If they really wished to contribute, 
they would have to do two things: meet with Ismail Haniyeh and 
pressure him to recognize Israel, and meet with Ehud Olmert and 
pressure him to put an end to the occupation.  Without these two 
elements -- nothing will move forward.... Israel should be the main 
interested party in ending the boycott. If it truly wished for 
peace, it should have welcomed the establishment of a unity 
government, and it should encourage world leaders to meet with its 
leadership.  Whom does the boycott -- which is pushing Hamas into 
the arms of Iran -- serve?  Not Israel and not the chances for 
peace." 
 
III.  "To Understand the Tragedy" 
 
Liberal contributor Rami Livni wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (3/25): "Despite what might appear as a changed tone towards 
the Saudi initiative, Israel is liable once again to miss an 
opportunity for peace because of an ossified preconception and an 
historic miscomprehension.  The positive statements made by Prime 
Minister Olmert notwithstanding, Israel has rejected negotiations on 
the basis of the Saudi initiative as long as it contains any 
reference to the issue of the refugees.  This is the case even 
though the wording of the initiative stipulates that any solution to 
the refugee problem will have to be agreed to by Israel and the 
Palestinians, to wit, it grants Israel veto power over the nature of 
the arrangement on this issue.  Despite Israel's experience in 
managing the conflict and negotiations, it still suffers from myopia 
and misunderstands the roots of the Palestinian problem.... The 
issue of the refugees is not an appendix to the Palestinian 
problem.... The refugees are the heart of the conflict and the core 
of the Palestinian national ethos.... Israel, which is strong and 
confident in its identity, can allow itself to recognize the story 
of Palestinian refugeeism as part of the story of this land.  The 
Palestinians, for their part, are going to have to accept that the 
results of the march of history cannot be reversed.  It is on the 
basis of this mutual understanding that a solution is going to have 
to be found.  It is certainly going to be complicated, but there are 
some people who believe that the fact of recognition will neutralize 
a significant part of the charge in the question of Palestinian 
refugees, and might pave the way to creative agreements." 
 
IV.  "The Illusion, the Conceit, and the Fraud" 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in Maariv (3/25): "The 
illusion, the conceit and the fraud are the formative elements of 
the refugee issue.  The illusion that there is a right of return. 
The conceit that Israel is to blame for the creation of the Arab 
worldQs problems in general and the refugees in particular, and the 
fraud that has turned the Palestinian refugees into the heart of the 
conflict.... Most of the Israeli Left is proof that the illusion, 
the conceit and the fraud do not belong solely to the Palestinians. 
They have infiltrated the world at large.... Yes, Arab aggression 
created the refugee problem.  And similar problems in various focal 
points of conflict created 38 million people who were forced to 
undergo the unpleasant experience of population swaps.  That 
happened in recent decades in Cyprus and in the former Yugoslavia. 
And look, in no case was the 'refugee problem' blow to such 
monstrous proportions as it was in the Palestinian case.  Nearly all 
of the tens of millions of refugees stopped being refugees long ago. 
 And only the Palestinians have been left as an open wound, and they 
provide a livelihood today for dozens of non-profit organizations, 
journalists and researchers, all of whom inflate the problem.... The 
Saudi initiative is worthy.  But the question of what the Arabs' 
intention is with respect to the refugees remains unanswered.  The 
only chance for progress along the Saudi track is if the refugee 
issue is fully and completely neutralized.  Because repeating a 
conceit, even a hundred times, does not make it a fact.  There are 
more than enough people who prefer the illusion, the conceit and the 
fraud.  They only perpetuate the problem.  It isnQt Israeli 
blindness.  Not at all.  It is Palestinian fraud, which has been 
given too much support in the media and the academic world.  But, 
actually, there is blindness on the Israeli side as well." 
 
JONES