07TELAVIV3429
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #3429/01 3371351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031351Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4427
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3091
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9759
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3249
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3865
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3112
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1206
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3837
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0698
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1168
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7740
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5199
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0118
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4254
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6193
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8528
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 003429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Russian Parliamentary Elections 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Major media (banners in Ha'aretz and the Jerusalem Post) reported 
that on Sunday Labor Party Chairman and Defense Minister Ehud Barak 
proposed at the weekly cabinet meeting compensation for settlers 
living east of the separation barrier if they voluntarily leave 
their homes. Ha'aretz quoted officials in Barak's office as saying 
that the move was the beginning of a long process.  Sources in the 
Prime Minister's Office, however, were quoted as saying that there 
is no plan to discuss the proposal in the near future.  Also citing 
the proposed plan, Maariv quoted the Yesha Council of Jewish 
Settlements in the Territories as saying that it will not sell its 
loyalty to the Land of Israel in exchange for money. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Sunday the cabinet approved the statement 
read by President Bush at the Annapolis conference.  While the Shas 
ministers voted against the statement, Yisrael Beiteinu leader 
Avigdor Lieberman left before the vote was taken.  The Jerusalem 
Post reported that PM Ehud Olmert and FM Tzipi Livni told the 
cabinet that there was no Israeli commitment to a timetable.  On 
Sunday Ha'aretz reported that the U.S. has withdrawn a UN Security 
Council draft resolution endorsing the Israeli-Palestinian Annapolis 
joint declaration following Israeli objections.  The move came just 
a few hours before the Security Council was to vote on the 
resolution.  Riyad Mansour, Permanent Observer for Palestine to the 
UN, also objected to the U.S. resolution, on the grounds that some 
of its articles did not fully express the PA's position.  Over the 
weekend the media reported that during his visit to Arab countries, 
PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas took pride in the achievements 
that were made in the course of the Annapolis conference, but that 
he continued to reject Israel's "red lines," including its demand to 
be recognized as a Jewish state. 
 
Major media reported that Israel released 429 Palestinian prisoners 
today.  Major media reported that the Knesset's Interior Committee 
visited jailed Fatah leader Marwan Barghouti.   Media quoted him as 
saying that most of the released prisoners would have been freed in 
a matter of months.  Media reported that Barghouti told Knesset 
Member Moshe Gafni (United Torah Judaism) that the end of the 
conflict is at hand, and that a courageous leader is needed to sign 
an agreement.  Barghouti reportedly added that if a permanent-status 
agreement is reached, the Gazans, too, will accept a solution of two 
states for two peoples.  Yediot quoted former Labor Party leader 
Amir Peretz, who also visited Barghouti in prison, as saying that 
Israel should talk to Hamas and release Barghouti. 
 
Leading media reported that the IDF has arrested two Palestinians 
for the murder of settler Ido Zoldan ten days ago in the West Bank. 
Israel Radio reported that a third Palestinian was arrested by PA 
forces.  All three are members of the Palestinian security forces. 
The media also reported that a dozen of Palestinians were killed in 
clashes with the IDF over the weekend.  Major media reported that 20 
mortar shells have been fired at Israel from the Gaza Strip in the 
last 24 hours.  Leading media reported that the defense 
establishment is considering the installation of underground sensors 
along the Gaza border fence to thwart the increasing number of 
attempts by Palestinian terrorists to infiltrate into Israel.  On 
Sunday Yediot reported that Israel has stepped up its use of 
technological and special intelligence means at its sea and airports 
as well as at the land border crossings to expose any attempt to 
smuggle radioactive substances into Israel. 
 
On Sunday The Jerusalem Post reported that the U.S. has not publicly 
clarified its position on construction in major settlement blocs 
despite promises to monitor and judge the legitimacy of such 
activity following last week's Annapolis conference. 
 
Leading media reported that on Friday the High Court of Justice 
ruled that cutbacks in fuel supplies to the Gaza Strip can continue, 
but electricity cuts must be delayed. 
 
On Sunday Maariv quoted a senior associate of PM Olmert as saying 
that he is not expected to approve a wide-scale military operation 
in Gaza until after the publication of the final Winograd Commission 
report.  Today Maariv reported that an internal paper written by 
Foreign Ministry officials concludes that Israeli restrictions along 
with the fighting by moderate forces in the PA, is having a 
detrimental effect on the Hamas government.  According to the 
Foreign Ministry paper, "As time passes and with sustained pressure 
on Gaza, it may be assumed that the Hamas leadership will begin to 
realize that a new division of governmental powers is necessary." 
The paper includes a comprehensive analysis of the damage to the 
Palestinian economy in the wake of IsraelQs restrictions, and 
according to the bottom line, if the sanctions continue, this will 
lead to HamasQs descent from power in favor of Fatah. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Sunday Israel approved the departure from 
Gaza of 199 Palestinians residing, working, or studying in Arab 
countries. 
 
Maariv cited the admission of senior GOI sources that Russia's 
efforts facilitated Deputy Syrian FM Faisal Mekdad's participation 
in Annapolis   Maariv reported that in the next few weeks Israel and 
the U.S. will discuss with Russia the follow-up to Annapolis, which 
is expected to be a conference in Moscow.  Maariv reported that 
whereas Moscow is interested in holding a separate session dealing 
with Israel-Syrian issues, Jerusalem prefers a broader  "regional 
peace in the Middle East" context.  Labor MK Danny Yatom told Israel 
Radio on Saturday that Israel should drop its preconditions and 
immediately resume peace with Syria. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that on Sunday PM Olmert and FM Livni 
met with visiting South Korean FM Son Ming-soon.  Livni was quoted 
as saying that the "international community is concentrating efforts 
to sever commercial and financial relations with Iran, to increase 
pressure on that country, and we must not allow Iran to evade these 
significant actions by presenting Asia alternatives.  When Europe 
takes action against Iran, Iran turns to Asia.  It is extremely 
important for Asian countries to avoid the creation of alternative 
relations with Iran, especially at this crucial point."  The 
newspaper said that Olmert stressed the importance of economic 
sanctions against Iran but did not raise the North Korean-Syrian 
connection.  The Jerusalem Post reported that the Foreign Ministry 
issued a statement alluding to North Korea's nuclear program and the 
proliferation of elements of that program in countries in the Middle 
East.  On Sunday Ha'aretz cited a new study stating that Israel and 
the U.S. should begin an intensive dialogue on ways to deal with 
Iran's nuclear plans and should study ways to attack Iran's nuclear 
facilities.  Chuck Freilich, a former deputy head of the U.S. 
National Security Council, authored the report, "Speaking about the 
Unspeakable." 
 
On Sunday Maariv reported on the standing security preparedness of 
embassies located in Tel Aviv, in particular the American Embassy. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that on Sunday allies of Labor leader 
Ehud Barak presented a plan to the party's house committee according 
to which every Labor Party chairman would be guaranteed four years 
in office. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Elbit System Ltd., Israel's biggest 
nongovernmental defense company, as saying it won a contract to 
supply the U.S. Navy with fuel tanks for planes.  The company was 
quoted as saying that the initial contract is valued at $2.4 
million, and that the total value is estimated at approximately $60 
million. 
 
Maariv reported that his week India will test-fire an antimissile 
defense system or long-range tracking radar (LRTR) whose command and 
control network was made in Israel. 
 
Leading media reported that Meretz MK Haim Oron is expected to 
compete for his party's leadership.  Avshalom Vilan is the only 
Meretz MK who will not run in the party's primary in March. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Now, the Defense Minister also has something 
to offer to the peace camp." 
 
Columnist and former IDF Intelligence chief Shlomo Gazit wrote in 
the popular, pluralist Maariv: "It is inconceivable that an Israeli 
government adopt and implement a total building freeze in the 
settlements so long as there is neither agreement nor any guarantee 
that one will be achieved." 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "The important thing is 
for the Bush administration not to believe its own propaganda." 
Maj. Gen. (ret.) Giora Eiland, former director of Israel's National 
Security Council, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "Israel and this hostile entity [the Hamas government in 
the Gaza Strip] can regulate their relations." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Barak Coos Like Dove" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (12/3): "Defense Minister Ehud Barak came back 
from the Annapolis conference and discovered that Prime Minister 
Ehud Olmert had taken his place as the head of Israel's peace camp 
while he was busy expressing his doubts and reservations about the 
renewal of talks with the Palestinians.... But Barak knows how to 
learn quickly, and during Sunday's cabinet meeting he announced his 
support for the 'evacuation-compensation' package for those settlers 
who willingly leave their homes in the West Bank, and seek new lives 
inside the Green Line.... This is not a new idea, and Barak's 
leading supporters on the diplomatic front were actually his 
political rivals: Haim Ramon, Amir Peretz and Ami Ayalon.  The 
responses he enjoyed were positive, and they also came from the 
senior ranks of the U.S. administration.  Barak's albeit belated 
decision favors a very logical political reality: If the state would 
like to signal its intention to pack up the settlements, but is 
concerned about a possible clash with the right involving force, 
this is a way of mitigating the problem by paying compensation to 
all those who are willing to leave of their own accord.... Now, the 
Defense Minister also has something to offer to the peace camp." 
 
II.  "Annapolis Has a Chance" 
 
Columnist and former IDF Intelligence chief Shlomo Gazit wrote in 
the popular, pluralist Maariv (12/3): "Every day that passes without 
an agreement is a day on which new facts are created in a settlement 
or an outpost.  It is a day in which another nail is hammered into 
the coffin of the two-state idea.  On the other hand, it is 
inconceivable that an Israeli government adopt and implement a total 
building freeze in the settlements so long as there is neither 
agreement nor any guarantee that one will be achieved.  The solution 
which I offer is to embark on secret negotiations and to reach 
agreement on permanent borders.  And from that moment on, the 
Israeli government will enforce a strict policy according to which 
construction will be permitted only in territory west of the agreed 
border.  On the other side the freeze will be absolute, all the 
outposts will be removed, the location of the separation fence will 
be adjusted (if this be necessary), and a generous law will be 
enacted for the compensation of every settler who finds himself on 
the wrong side of the new line and wishes to leave." 
 
III.  "Annapolis: One Cheer, One Yawn, One Cynical Shrug" 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (12/3): "Peace Brokers 
believe their effectiveness requires a dishonesty that ensures their 
own failure.  They pretend intransigence, terrorism, and incitement 
comes from both parties.... Israel can talk about all the 
concessions it would make if it really had a sincere, determined 
partner ready to reciprocate, knowing that this scenario will not 
happen.  The important thing is for the Bush administration not to 
believe its own propaganda.  If it makes this mistake, and tries to 
pressure Israel and appease the Arab side into a negotiated 
settlement -- which will not materialize in the end -- that would 
make things worse.  But I don't think that is going to happen to any 
considerable extent either.  What is needed might best be called 
constructive cynicism." 
 
IV.  "Talk to Hamas" 
 
Maj. Gen. (ret.) Giora Eiland, former director of Israel's National 
Security Council, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (12/2): "Israel and this hostile entity [the Hamas 
government in the Gaza Strip] can regulate their relations.  This 
regulation will involve a mutual end to hostilities, supervision 
over Philadelphi Road and a prisoner exchange.  As long as those 
understandings are honored, Israel will lift the economic siege from 
Gaza.  The chances of reaching such a regulation of relations 
depends on the alternative that Hamas sees.  If Hamas, as a 
political entity, fails to stop the rocket fire at Israel, it will 
then be correct to use full force against its 'state.'  This will 
include a complete cut of the supply of electricity, fuel and gas, 
the destruction of government institutions, the targeted killing of 
leaders and so forth.  When Hamas sees that it has two alternatives: 
de facto recognition of its government in tandem with lifted 
military and economic pressure, as opposed to an alternative of 
destroyed infrastructure, attacks on the leadership and a real 
economic crisis, it is safe to assume that it will make the 'right' 
decision.  The Gaza Strip is, de facto, more of a state than 
anything else.  It is not occupied territory, it is not territory 
under international auspices and it is not part of another state. 
We ought to capitalize on this situation..... The continued pursuit 
of current Israeli policy will lead sooner or later to a large-scale 
military operation to conquer Gaza.  It is better to create 
effective deterrence than to launch an operation of that sort. 
Effective deterrence can be obtained only if you have a counterpart 
who bears responsibility and has what to lose.  And what about the 
legitimacy of Hamas's rule in Gaza?  That is an internal Palestinian 
affair, and we mustn't meddle." 
 
------------------------------------ 
¶2.  Russian Parliamentary Elections: 
------------------------------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "You 
cannot be both inside and outside, benefiting from membership in the 
West while aiding the West's sworn enemies." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Membership Carries Responsibilities" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (12/3): 
"The results of Sunday's parliamentary voting in Russia were hardly 
surprising, because rigged elections are never surprising.... It is 
no coincidence that the steady loss of freedom in Russia has also 
been accompanied by an increasingly anti-Western foreign policy.... 
Russia's official stance ... is to block tough economic sanctions 
and strongly oppose military action, while providing Iran with 
nuclear fuel and air defenses.  Though Putin claims to be opposed to 
letting Iran obtain the bomb, it is hard to see how he could be more 
central to ensuring precisely such an outcome.... If Putin does not 
obviously to be in the West's most elite club [the G-8] from either 
a GOP or democratic perspective, and is actively opposing the West's 
premier security interests, why should Russia be included?.... The 
idea that including Russia in the West's political-economic system 
would accelerate positive reform seems to have been premature.  The 
West needs to send a clear message to Russia: We want you to be part 
of us, but you cannot be both inside and outside, benefiting from 
membership in the West while aiding the West's sworn enemies: 
'Membership has its privileges,' as the American Express slogan 
goes, but it also has responsibilities." 
 
MORENO