07TELAVIV1335
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1335/01 1271003
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071003Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0949
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2114
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8850
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2084
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2917
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2112
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9980
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2854
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9750
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0226
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6832
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4235
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9136
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3327
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5254
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6748
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001335 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  PM Olmert's Performance 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  France: Presidential Election 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The media reported on a Qassam rocket attack on Sunday afternoon 
that wounded two people at a gas station near Sderot.   The media 
cited Islamic Jihad's claim of responsibility for the attack. 
Major media (lead story in The Jerusalem Post) reported that on 
Sunday Israeli defense officials vowed a tough response to the 
rocket attack.   The Jerusalem Post quoted defense officials as 
saying that the GOI would not launch a ground operation inside the 
Gaza Strip in response to the attack, but that it would order the 
IDF to step up pinpointed strikes on terrorists and infrastructure 
involved in the production and operation of Qassam rockets.  The 
media reported that, earlier in the day, a security guard was 
seriously wounded after Palestinian terrorists gunned him down at 
the joint Israeli-Palestinian tank farm where he was employed in the 
West Bank.  Leading electronic media reported that early this 
morning a Qassam rocket hit a house in the center of Sderot, 
narrowly missing a day-care center.  There were no physical injuries 
in the incident.  Ha'aretz reported that on Saturday security forces 
loyal to PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas uncovered a tunnel 
used by smugglers near Rafah and sealed it with cement.  Ha'aretz 
noted that the operation was well received by the relevant US 
agencies, which consider this an expression of the security efforts 
the Palestinians are making to counter this ongoing problem. 
 
On Sunday The Jerusalem Post reported that PM Ehud Olmert will 
convene top security officials this week to discuss a US plan that 
includes a timeline for steps designed to ease Palestinian movement 
and get the Palestinians to assert greater security control in Gaza, 
even though Hamas leader Khaled Mashal rejected the plan on Friday. 
However, on Sunday Yediot quoted Israeli security establishment 
officials as saying: "As a plan, the American proposal [for leniency 
at crossing points in the territories and the improvement of 
security] is a good one, but it is not appropriate for the 
conditions of the security situation in the territories." On Sunday 
Maariv reported that Israeli security officials have accused Defense 
Minister Amir Peretz, and particularly one of his advisers, of being 
responsible for the American "benchmarks plan," which includes 
demands for significant relief measures for the Palestinian 
population.  On Sunday Ha'aretz wrote that the PA has reacted 
favorably to the plan. 
 
Major media (banner in Ha'aretz) reported that on Sunday former PM 
Ehud Barak, a leading contender for the Labor Party leadership, told 
his associates that in light of the Winograd report on the Second 
Lebanon War, he does not believe he could sit in a government headed 
by Olmert.  Ha'aretz said that if Barak, whom Olmert was reportedly 
considering naming defense minister in replacement of Amir Peretz, 
announces this officially in the coming days, it could seriously 
impair Olmert's chances of survival.  Ha'aretz reported that, 
despite the expected vote of the Labor Party against supporting two 
no-confidence motions on the government's alleged failings that will 
cone before the Knesset plenum today -- guaranteeing that the 
government will survive them by a large margin -- some Labor Knesset 
will vote in favor of the motions.  On Sunday Ha'aretz reported that 
Vice PM recently told Kadima Knesset members that would not back any 
plots to oust Olmert from office but that he does not rule out being 
prime minister himself.  Leading media reported that on Sunday Labor 
MK Ophir Pines and Motti Ashkenazi, the man who led the protest 
against the failures of the Yom Kippur War, pitched a protest tent 
in front of Olmert's official residence, demanding that Olmert show 
responsibility and resign. 
 
Leading media cited a statement issued by Olmert's bureau following 
a meeting on Sunday between Olmert and FM Tzipi Livni that the two 
"agreed to continue working together as part of a government headed 
by Ehud Olmert.  The two discussed political subjects at hand and 
agreed to work to address these issues."  The meeting followed a 
spat between the two in the wake of the publication of the Winograd 
report. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that sources in the Foreign Ministry told the 
newspaper that FM Livni is currently conducting staff work to 
prepare for the possibility of a renewed peace process with Syria. 
According to Ha'aretz, no conclusions have yet been presented to PM 
Olmert, as the project is not finished.  However, the daily quoted a 
Foreign Ministry source as saying: "If the PM decides that he wants 
to hear it, we have a prepared plan -- from the operational aspect 
as well."  The project has included a series of discussions between 
Livni and senior ministry staffers with the goal of mapping Israel's 
vital interests in any such talks.  The participating staffers are 
the same ones who formulated Israel's diplomatic exit strategy for 
the Second Lebanon War.  Yediot reported that Syria is speeding up 
its preparations for a war.  The newspaper cited Damascus's belief 
that Israel is gearing for a war in the summer.  Yediot quoted 
Western intelligence sources as sayng that recent Syrian weapons 
acquisitions have mostly been financed by Iran. 
 
On Sunday Ha'aretz quoted Hizbullah Deputy Secretary-General Naim 
Qassem as saying in an interview with Al Aljazeera-TV as saying that 
his organization denies paying off or receiving intelligence reports 
from former MK Azmi Bishara during the Second Lebanon War. 
 
On Sunday Yediot reported that Jordan's King, Abdullah II, intends 
to surprise 50 Israeli public figures who were invited to dine with 
him in Amman at the table of former PM Abd el-Salam Majalli. 
According to Yediot, Abdullah intends to explain to the guests from 
Israel why they must not miss the opportunities to come to a 
permanent arrangement with the Palestinians, and why Israel should 
not fear an independent Palestinian state or the Arab peace 
initiative 
 
All media reported on the election of conservative Nicolas Sarkozy 
to the presidency of France.  The media cited the satisfaction of 
official Israel over the results of the elections.  Israel Radio 
reported that Olmert congratulated Sarkozy, voicing his hope that 
that his presidency would spell fruitful French-Israeli cooperation. 
 The radio reported that opposition leader Binyamin Netanyahu 
praised Sarkozy -- including in an article in Yediot: "Sarkozy, My 
Friend."  Israel Radio also reported that the American Jewish 
Committee applauded Sarkozy's victory. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that PA security officials accused 
supporters of Al-Qaida in the Gaza Strip of carrying out Sunday's 
attack on an UNRWA-run school in Rafah in which one person was 
killed and six others were wounded. 
 
Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post reported that in a joint report 
published on Sunday, two Israeli human rights groups -- B'Tselem and 
HaMoked - Center for the Defense of the Individual -- accuse the 
Shin Bet of continuing to use "irregular" interrogation techniques 
involving physical measures and torture against Palestinian 
prisoners.  The organizations write that, in spite of High Court of 
Justice rulings barring such practices, the Shin Bet continues to 
use torture. 
Ha'aretz and Yediot reported that, for the first time in UN history, 
the organization has chosen an Israeli official to head one of its 
committees.  Rony Adam, head of the Foreign Ministry's UN 
department, was chosen to head UN the Committee for Program and 
Coordination, which is entrusted with coordinating the actions of 
all the different branches of the organization.  Adam was 
unanimously elected to the post after presiding as the committee's 
deputy director.  The committee comprises 33 countries, some of 
which have no diplomatic relations with Israel, such as Iran, Cuba 
and Indonesia. 
 
Yediot reported that on Sunday over 100,000 people marched up 
Manhattan's Fifth Avenue on Sunday in the Salute to Israel Parade. 
New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg led off the parade accompanied 
by Jerusalem Mayor Uri Lupoliansky and Jerusalem Affairs Minister 
Jacob Edery.  Yediot reported that a group of IDF solders also 
marched in the parade. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that, in an initiative of the Labor-affiliated 
youth movement Hanoar Haoved Vehalomed ("Working and Studying 
Youth") -- the largest youth movement in Israel, Socialist youth 
movements from 47 countries will in the coming months send a joint 
delegation to camps harboring Darfur refugees in Chad. 
 
Leading media reported that the International Committee of the Red 
Cross informed Egypt that there was no sign in its documents that 
Egyptian prisoners of war had been executed in the wars of 1956 and 
¶1967. 
 
Maariv reported that a finger-printing process will bring an end to 
the era of the black stamp that used to mark the rejection of 
visa-granting by the US authorities.  Maariv noted that 14,000 
Israelis are refused US visas ever year.  According to Maariv, 
countries such as Australia that used to reject visa requests by 
applicants who had been turned down by the US will not automatically 
refuse them. 
 
---------------------------- 
¶1.  PM Olmert's Performance: 
---------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "Kadima, and 
the coalition, can survive the ouster of Olmert.  The condition for 
this is that Labor say 'no' loudly and clearly to the Prime Minister 
and to his collaborators within the party." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Saying 'No' to Olmert" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (5/7): "In the 
Prime Minister's efforts to survive, he is clinging to two 
arguments: The essence of the first is: 'The one who did the damage 
will remain to repair it.'  Taken simply, this means that [Amir] 
Peretz must also remain in the Defense Ministry and even [Dan] 
Halutz should be brought back as chief of staff.  The second 
argument is that Olmert is the barrier preventing the return of 
Benjamin Netanyahu to the Prime Minister's Office, which is the 
expected result, say the polls, if the Knesset is dispersed and 
elections are held in the near future.  But the Labor Party is 
capable of pressuring the divided and hesitant Kadima Knesset 
members into getting rid of Olmert and picking another candidate 
from their ranks to take his place.... Kadima, and the coalition, 
can survive the ouster of Olmert.  The condition for this is that 
Labor say 'no' loudly and clearly to the Prime Minister and to his 
collaborators within the party." 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "We can ... regret the fact that Israel is so 
high on the American agenda.... Only Iraq and Iran ... were 
mentioned substantially more than Israel [in a survey of American 
elites].  It is not certain that Israel wants to be included in this 
group." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "The 
only 'deal' that will work [in the Middle East] is one where the 
jihadis have given up their bid to terrorize and dominate the West. 
We are not there yet, and premature engagement will not bring us 
closer to that day." 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in The 
Jerusalem Post: "How can the US expect Europeans to hold the line 
when it does not do so?" 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Small, Vulnerable, and Endangered" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/7): "Last week the [Washington-based] 
Israel Project published a survey about the views of American 
'elites' on issues related to Israel..  Fifty percent consider Iran 
a serious threat to the US.  Sixty-three percent have a warm 
attitude toward Israel.  Over 80 percent believe that it is one of 
America's most important allies.... Eighty percent of those who 
replied to the ... survey believe that 'Israel is a small and 
vulnerable country,' and we can only guess that the war in Lebanon 
last summer did not help the country's strong image.  This is 
beneficial in the short term:  The candidates are rallying and 
promising that they will not allow Israel to be harmed, competing 
with one another by offering demonstrations of affection and 
boasting of a perfect voting record.  But for the long term this is 
a worrisome trend:  Already now the US administration seems to 
believe that Israel does not have the ability to adopt a policy that 
is different from its dictates.  We can be impressed by the replies 
of the candidates, the wall-to-wall support for Israel, but we can 
also regret the fact that Israel is so high on the American 
agenda.... Only Iraq and Iran -- the current, urgently problematic 
state and the one that threatens the future -- were mentioned 
substantially more than Israel.  It is not certain that Israel wants 
to be included in this group, even if it is clear that its name was 
always mentioned positively and the others always negatively, since 
this is the group that is described in big letters by the label: 
"Caution -- dangerous area!"  Therefore, we would be happier to be 
forgotten a little." 
 
II.  "Bad Behavior" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/7): 
"The issue ... is not so much the specific items in this latest US 
wish list [known as the 'benchmarks document'], which is reminiscent 
of numerous failed plans built along the same model.  The issue is 
the model itself, and why it is being returned to, now of all times, 
when the US seems to be confused over how to pursue the overall 
struggle against the jihadi axis, of which the Palestinian situation 
is one small part.... Would someone explain how pressing Israel to 
let down its security guard will make Abbas more likely to take on 
Hamas, or Hamas more likely to abandon terrorism?  A similar 
question can be asked regarding the US State Department's evident 
desire to engage with Syria and perhaps Iran as well.  Here too, the 
policy is contradictory. Is the US pursuing a policy of isolating 
and confronting rogue regimes and terrorist organizations to force 
change, or does the US believe that asking them nicely (or 
pressuring their victims) will work better?.... No one believes that 
Iran, Syria, Hamas, or Hizbullah is ready to capitulate.  On the 
contrary, nations that flirt with engaging them send a signal that 
it is the West that is ready to cut a deal.  Yet the only 'deal' 
that will work is one where the jihadis have given up their bid to 
terrorize and dominate the West.  We are not there yet, and 
premature engagement will not bring us closer to that day." 
 
III.  "Bipartisan Betrayal" 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in The 
Jerusalem Post (5/7): "The Pelosi visit convinced the Syrian regime 
and people that President Bashar Assad is on the right track and 
need make no concessions regarding his adventurous policy..... Yet 
this is no partisan issue.  The idea of engaging Syria was launched 
by a Republican, James Baker, in the Iraq study group report.  Now 
it is being taken up by his protege Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice, who met recently with the Syrian Foreign Minister at a 
conference on Iraq.  She similarly undermined the US-initiated 
boycott of the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority by meeting that 
government's (non-Hamas) Finance Minister who is trying to raise 
funds to finance the Hamas regime.   In practical terms, these 
meetings don't amount to much.  But in impact they are a disaster. 
How can the US expect Europeans to hold the line when it does not do 
so? What is the message sent to the brave Lebanese government and 
those who risk their lives by opposing Hizbullah's efforts to 
dominate the country and by maintaining Lebanon's independence from 
Syria and Iran?  Answer: Give up.  You can expect no Western help. 
Or, in William Shakespeare's phrase, 'Despair and die.'  This does 
not mean that the old strategy of democracy promotion was right. 
Realpolitik is necessary.  The West needs to engage less radical 
Arab states as allies in the battle against the 
Iran-Syria-Hizbullah-Hamas alliance.  Still, that does not mean it 
is right to abandon the liberal dissidents to appease the less 
extremist regimes and, at the same time, undermine these governments 
in order to suck up to the radicals." 
 
---------------------------------- 
¶3.  France: Presidential Election: 
---------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Paris correspondent Or Heller wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "For the first time in the history of the Fifth Republic, 
the Elysee Palace has been taken by a distinctly pro-Israel 
president." 
 
Former Israeli ambassador to France Avi Pazner wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "Most French Jews expect 
Sarkozy to adopt a more balanced policy in the Middle East.... Most 
Jews of France have a warm feeling toward the US and they believe 
there will be a change for the better in France's attitude in this 
respect as well." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "French Revolution" 
 
Paris correspondent Or Heller wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv 
(5/7): "Even the French Left admitted last night that a new era had 
begun in France.... Israel should also change its way of thinking: 
For the first time in the history of the Fifth Republic, the Elysee 
Palace has been taken by a distinctly pro-Israel president.  Forget 
about Chirac, with friends like Saddam Hussein and Yasser Arafat. 
Sarkozy prefers Netanyahu and even George Bush.  He is a sharp 
critic of the Palestinians and of the inability of the PA to prevent 
terror attacks.  He supported the disengagement plan and called to 
establish a Palestinian state alongside Israel.  He opposes the 
Iranian nuclear program and intends to lead Europe against any 
compromise with Ahmadinejad.  For the first time in the history of 
the French republic, Sarkozy will be an honest broker between Israel 
 
and the Arab world.   And this is already a small French 
revolution." 
 
II.  "Expect More Balance From France" 
 
Former Israeli ambassador to France Avi Pazner wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (5/7): "The great majority 
of French Jews gave their vote to Sarkozy. Although a sizable 
minority (mostly among the dwindling Ashkenazi community) voted for 
the Left.... Sarkozy is ... perceived by the Jewish community as 
being more sympathetic toward Israel and its problems that outgoing 
President Jacques Chirac, who has been a strong defender of the 
French Jewish community.  Most French Jews expect Sarkozy to adopt a 
more balanced policy in the Middle East, in line with countries like 
Great Britain and Germany.  Most Jews of France have a warm feeling 
toward the US and they believe there will be a change for the better 
in France's attitude in this respect as well.  It is no wonder then 
that that the initial reactions in Israel and among French Jews to 
Sarkozy's victory were mostly positive." 
 
JONES