07TELAVIV1283
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue May 01 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1283/01 1211019
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011019Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0835
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2057
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8796
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2019
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2863
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2054
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9919
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2798
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9696
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0172
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6778
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4181
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9077
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3273
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5197
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6669
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001283 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Winograd Probe Into 2nd Lebanon War 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media led, and extensively reported and commented on the 
findings of the interim report of the Winograd Commission probing 
the Second Lebanon War.  Yediot bannered a comment by associates of 
PM Ehud Olmert likening the report's conclusions to a gun directed 
at Olmert's temple.  All media reported that PM Ehud Olmert vowed on 
Monday night that he would not resign, despite the publication of 
the report, which the accused him of "severe failures" in handling 
the conflict.  "It would not be correct to resign," he said in a 
brief televised statement from his office, "and I have no intention 
of resigning."  Instead, Olmert said, he would work to implement the 
report's conclusions.  He called a special cabinet session for 
Wednesday to begin the work, at which he plans to announce the 
creation of a special task to oversee the report's implementation, 
including both government officials and external experts.  Media 
quoted Defense Minister Amir Peretz as saying that he would not quit 
his post despite the report's findings.  Ha'aretz noted that FM 
Tzipi Livni and Vice PM Shimon Peres emerged unscathed from the 
report.  The newspaper said that Livni kept her distance from 
Olmert.  Maariv called Livni the "big winner." 
 
All media reported that the Winograd Commission concluded that the 
decision to go to war was not based on a detailed, comprehensive, 
and authorized military plan, or on a clear analysis of the Lebanese 
situation.  The media said that the government did not consider the 
whole range of options, that support for the operation was gained in 
part through ambiguity, that some of the declared goals were not 
clear and could not be achieved, and that the primary responsibility 
for those serious failings rests with Olmert, Defense Minister 
Peretz, and former IDF chief of staff Dan Halutz. 
 
Israel Radio reported that senior IDF officers protested against an 
announcement sent by Halutz from Harvard University and about the 
fact that he did not bother to be in Israel for the publication of 
the Winograd report.  The radio and other media reported that Halutz 
stated that he had assumed responsibility for his failings when he 
resigned. 
 
In what it said was an expression of support for PM Olmert, Israel 
Radio quoted White House Press Secretary Tony Snow as saying on 
Monday: "Obviously, [President Bush] works very closely with Prime 
Minister Olmert, and thinks that he's essential in working toward a 
two-state solution.  The President remains committed to it.  We are 
not going to comment on, obviously, internal investigations within 
the Israeli government."  However, The Jerusalem Post quoted 
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs David Welch as 
saying on Monday, during an Anti-Defamation League conference in 
Washington: "You have political situations on each side that make it 
harder for the US leadership to move forward."  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that Under Secretary for Political Affairs at the State 
Department Nicholas Burns later told the newspaper that the US was 
determined to press ahead with Israeli-Palestinian peace efforts. 
Burns declined to comment on how the political climate in Israel 
affects Olmert's ability to deliver on any agreements, saying that 
he did not want to appear to be meddling in internal Israeli 
affairs. 
 
Leading media quoted a Hizbullah official as saying that the report 
confirms that Israel was in a state of confusion during the Second 
Lebanon War. 
 
Yediot reported that on Monday a "senior Arab figure involved in the 
peace efforts in the region" commented on the conclusions of the 
Winograd report.  He was quoted as saying that Olmert does not 
fulfill his promises anyway and that the Arabs will not be sorry if 
he goes home.  The Arab figure was quoted as saying that, following 
the commission's findings, Olmert can be expected to create a media 
spin around the peace moves, but that he will very soon find out 
that he does not have a partner among the Arabs. 
 
This morning the electronic media reported that, following the 
publication of the Winograd Report, Labor Party Secretary-General 
Eitan Cabel announced his decision to resign from the government, 
called on PM Olmert to act in kind, and on former PM Ehud Barak not 
to enter the government.  The electronic media reported that this 
morning Labor Party leadership contender MK Ami Ayalon called on 
Olmert to resign and advocated the creation of a "national 
rehabilitation government." 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that on Monday Damascus-based Hamas 
leader Khaled Mashal threatened to kidnap more Israeli soldiers to 
obtain the release of Palestinians imprisoned in Israel.  Mashal was 
quoted as saying that a third Intifada might erupt if the condition 
of the Palestinians does not improve and if the siege on the PA 
continues. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the first-ever "radiation drill" in 
an Israeli hospital will be held on Tuesday at Rambam Medical Center 
in Haifa. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that, with funding from the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, Israel, Jordan, and the PA are now working together 
to wage a biological war against the Mediterranean fruit fly. 
 
The media reported that oligarch Arkady Gaidamak's advisers have 
announced that he plans to run for mayor in next year's municipal 
election in Jerusalem. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that, despite widespread, often angry 
reports to the contrary, a controversial documentary to be directed 
by anti-Zionist Israel director Eyal Sivan marking Israel's 60th 
Independence Day next year has not been granted taxpayer money. 
 
Yediot and Maariv reported that in the first half of 2008 
Africa-Israel Investments, a large real estate company controlled by 
Israeli billionaire Lev Leviev, will be traded on the New York Stock 
Exchange.  Major media reported that the company will purchase the 
New York Times building for USD 525 million, renovate it for USD 170 
million, and extract high rental fees from it.  The Jerusalem Post 
noted that the New York Times offices are expected to move into a 
new 52-story office tower on Eighth Avenue. 
 
A Channel 2-TV poll taken after the Winograd report was released 
found that 65 percent of Israelis believe Olmert should quit and 75 
percent that Peretz should resign.  Only 14 percent said Olmert 
should remain in office and 10 percent that Peretz should stay. 
Fifty-three percent said Israel should go to elections.   In a 
separate question on who they would vote for, the poll found that 26 
percent of Israelis believe that Likud Chairman Binyamin Netanyahu 
should be prime minister, followed by FM Tzipi Livni (9 percent), 
former prime minister Ehud Barak (6 percent), Labor MK Ami Ayalon (5 
percent), Vice PM Shimon Peres (4 percent), Yisrael Beiteinu leader 
Avigdor Lieberman (3 percent), billionaire Arkady Gaidamak (2 
percent), and Peretz (1 percent).  Olmert received zero percent in 
the poll.   Channel 10-TV and Israel Radio published similar 
surveys. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Winograd Probe Into 2nd Lebanon War: 
------------------------------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote on page one of the circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "The bottom line is that Ehud Olmert 
needs to go.... The full report is a courageous, ambitious, 
far-reaching attempt to change [Israel's] political culture." 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "If this 
government does not step down now, disgust and despair will mount." 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote on 
page one of Ha'aretz: "Can this government ... lead the nation in 
the next war ... and win?  The conclusion drawn from the inquiry's 
report is a clear no, and therefore this government must step down 
in one way or another." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "Winograd is bringing a big hose and in 
one fell swoop, is washing off the dust that covered the Israeli 
government." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "What is 
critical here is that Israel -- with Hizbullah and Palestinian 
extremists a constant threat, and their inspiration, Iran, marching 
toward nuclear capability -- be governed by a leadership of 
competence." 
 
Veteran journalist Yosef (Tommy) Lapid, Chairman of the Yad Vashem 
Council, and former justice minister wrote in Maariv: 
"Responsibility for the army's lack of preparedness ... falls on the 
shoulders of the Sharon-Mofaz-Ya'alon troika, not on Olmert and 
Peretz." 
 
Columnist and former Meretz Party Chairman Yossi Sarid wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Throw out Ehud Olmert and Amir 
Peretz and save Israel  -- that's the battle cry now, that's the 
urgent mission of every citizen." 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick 
wrote in The Jerusalem Post: "If the Winograd report is to have any 
positive impact at all, it should be in beginning, not blocking the 
necessary public debate into the real sources of the failures last 
summer, and into the strategic failures of the Oslo process, and the 
withdrawals from Lebanon and Gaza.  All of these call out for our 
attention and correction." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "He Needs to Go" 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote on page one of the circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (5/1): "The bottom line is that Ehud 
Olmert needs to go.   Not because of the failings of the war, but 
because if after a report like that, from a commission like that, a 
commission whose members he chose and whose letter of appointment he 
wrote, Olmert continues to serve as prime minister, there will 
probably never be any personal accountability here.  Israel will 
join the third world festival.  With that having been said, he can 
still survive politically.  Not because the war was a success but 
because the alternatives, even by the commission's standards, aren't 
any better. Neither Bibi [Binyamin Netanyahu], Tzipi [Livni], nor 
even Ehud Barak.... The full report is a courageous, ambitious, 
far-reaching attempt to change the political culture.  [The 
commission] wishes for a different leadership, a compact government, 
whose ministers are experienced in the areas over which they are 
responsible; a government which seeks the help of experts from 
various and conflicting schools of thought; one which holds in-depth 
and broad-based debates about the issues it votes on; a government 
whose debates are kept secret and are not leaked.  There are no such 
governments.  Nor were there ever.  The model that the members of 
the Winograd Commission envision exists only in the world of Plato, 
and not in a political environment in which elections are held -- in 
any event, not in Israel.  That does not change the fact that Olmert 
made a grave mistake when he chose to appoint Amir Peretz as defense 
minister, and Peretz erred when he pounced on the job.... Last 
night, two hours after the report was published, the President of 
the United States issued a statement in support of Olmert.  Olmert 
was pleased: it was a point of light in a black day. I suggested to 
him that as a sign of gratitude he propose to Bush to ask the 
Winograd Commission to come and investigate the war in Iraq." 
 
II.  "Immediate Resignation" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (5/1): "The 
Winograd Report contains not even one lenient word to which the 
Prime Minister could cling in order to extend his term.  The members 
of the commission he appointed closed all the cracks and left no 
escape from responsibility -- if not now, then in two months, when 
 
the final report is written.... If the Prime and Defense Ministers 
do not resign following the Winograd findings, their imperviousness 
will be additional proof that they were not worthy of their posts 
from the outset.  Any attempt to share the failure with previous 
prime ministers will not succeed.... No harsher report than that of 
the Winograd Committee on the Second Lebanon War could have been 
written, even if a state commission of inquiry had been established. 
 The statements made on Monday, in precise and unequivocal language, 
are painful testimony to the culture of charlatanic, belligerent, 
and irresponsible government, whose existence the public has sensed 
for a long time.  If this government does not step down now, disgust 
and despair will mount." 
 
III.  "Unfit to Run the Next War" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote on 
page one of Ha'aretz (5/1): "The key question arising from the 
Winograd Commission's partial report is not the level of personal 
responsibility for the failed management of the war.  That is a 
question that relates in principle to the past.  The more important 
question is the one that relates to the future: Can this government 
headed by Ehud Olmert lead the nation in the next war -- which 
according to intelligence estimates could take place -- and win? 
The conclusion drawn from the inquiry's report is a clear no, and 
therefore this government must step down in one way or another. 
This is not a conclusion drawn by the Winograd Commission.  It is a 
question that is beyond the mandate given to the commission, but it 
must be at the top of the Israeli public's priorities.  Many 
politicians are not dealing with this because they see the Winograd 
Commission's report as part of an election campaign in which they 
must utilize the situation to help their party.... The Winograd 
Commission pointed to the fact that an incorrect evaluation of 
Israel's strength had developed, along with a lacking evaluation of 
our enemies' learning ability.  This is not necessarily an 
intelligence mistake; it is due to deep social processes the 
commission believes Israel is undergoing, including even changes in 
the national ethos." 
 
IV.  "Brotherhood of the Gallows" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv (5/1): "Ehud Olmert's people know the 
truth.  It is bitter.  The prime minister cannot remain in his 
position after such a report.  The prime minister must go home. 
OlmertQs people told him so on Monday....  Olmert's announcement on 
Monday that he is not prepared to resign is, in light of the 
 
situation, playing against time.   In Israel, dying is a lengthy, 
ugly process.... Winograd is bringing a big hose and in one fell 
swoop, is washing off the dust that covered the Israeli 
government.... This is the time to work on corrections, on 
substantial changes in how the Jewish state is managed. To create an 
internal structure for decision making.... It is not easy to see the 
dancing on the blood that began on Monday on Hizbullah's Al-Manar 
[television] station.  These hysteric shouts of victory are hard to 
take and elicits sad thoughts about our excessive self-flagellation, 
about our need to convince the entire Arab world and, in general, 
that we lost this war.  So a bit of proportion is in order: 
Hizbullah, the big victor in this war, is now fighting to 'go to the 
open areas south of the Litani River,' after  controlling and lying 
around right up to the fence of the northern border.  It lost its 
strategic missiles, as well as 800 of its fighters.  Iran is 
seething at Nasrallah, who is still hiding in his bunker.  All this 
does not sweeten our bitter pill, but we should not forget.  And it 
is possible also to be proud that the Jewish state established an 
investigative committee.  We established it not because we lost.  We 
established it because we did not win." 
 
 
 
 
¶V.  "A Failed Leadership" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/1): 
"With all due respect to the Prime Minister, and notwithstanding the 
personal focus of much of the reporting surrounding today's Winograd 
Commission interim report, the political career of Ehud Olmert is 
not the most pressing issue on the national agenda.... Olmert has 
rightly asserted from many platforms that his decision to launch an 
immediate military response to the bombardment of northern Israel 
and the kidnapping within our sovereign borders of two soldiers in 
July was overwhelmingly supported by his cabinet, opposition 
politicians and the public.  The failure of the subsequent, 
belatedly named Second Lebanon War to defang the Hizbullah threat 
and reassert Israel's vital deterrent capability can by no means be 
laid solely at the then-new prime minister's door, as the Winograd 
interim report has made clear.  A good part of it stems from 
miscalculations and errors in the years preceding the outbreak of 
the conflict, and must be ascribed to military officers and 
politicians who no longer hold central positions of power.... What 
is critical here is that Israel -- with Hizbullah and Palestinian 
extremists a constant threat, and their inspiration, Iran, marching 
toward nuclear capability -- be governed by a leadership of 
competence.  In that context, today's Winograd report casts the 
current leadership -- and that extends to the entire government, 
which 'failed in its political function' -- in a dismal light.  The 
parliamentary process can force through the necessary change, and 
individual politicians must look to the national interest.  If they 
do not do so of their own volition, the public should seek to force 
their hand.  And if the public fails to do so, it has no one to 
blame but itself." 
 
VI.  "Minority View" 
 
Veteran journalist Yosef (Tommy) Lapid, Chairman of the Yad Vashem 
Council, and former justice minister wrote in Maariv (5/1): "My 
reservations [about the findings of the Winograd Commission] could 
be defined as a minority view: Everybody agrees that the army was 
not prepared for that war.  The defense budget was cut every year, 
the regular army mostly policed the territories.  Reservists did not 
train, equipment was missing.  The Katyusha rocket threat.... 
Responsibility for the army's lack of preparedness ... falls on the 
shoulders of the Sharon-Mofaz-Ya'alon troika, not on Olmert and 
Peretz.  The conclusion of the Winograd Commission that the 
political echelon did not grant enough consideration to the results 
of its decisions is a wishful afterthought.... [The commission] has 
ceased to be a commission of inquiry and is turning into a committee 
of historians.... What would have happened if the two politicians 
who recently entered their positions [Olmert and Peretz] had pushed 
the chief of staff -- against his opinion -- into a ground operation 
and it had turned out that the army was not prepared and that the 
number of casualties was a few times [that of the actual one]? 
Would the megalomania of Olmert and Peretz not have been blamed for 
the catastrophe that would have befallen Israel?.... The failure in 
the Second Lebanon War should be place at the politicians' doorstep. 
 This is something we do not like to admit." 
 
VII.  "Throw Them Out of Office" 
 
Columnist and former Meretz Party Chairman Yossi Sarid wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/1): "Throw out Ehud Olmert and 
Amir Peretz and save Israel  -- that's the battle cry now, that's 
the urgent mission of every citizen.   It is time for a national 
emergency operation in which all those involved will be thrown onto 
the ash heap of history.  This nation has a large garbage bin, but 
it also has a large human stockpile from which new, clean people can 
be brought.  The blundering duo, Olmert and Peretz, were not alone 
in overseeing the calamity.  The entire cabinet of wretched 
creatures lent their deceitful hands to crafting this threat to our 
existence.... There is only one way to bring about a new arrangement 
from the foundation to the rafters -- by holding general elections. 
Not swapping posts from defense minister to finance minister, not 
musical chairs, not even waiting around inexplicably for the final 
report, as though there is anything left to wait for.  There is 
nothing left to say now except goodbye.  Just go home." 
 
VIII.  "What Commissions Cannot Do" 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick 
wrote in The Jerusalem Post (5/1): "The grandest of all Israeli 
failures was the Rabin-Peres government's decision to recognize the 
PLO and give it arms, land and legitimacy, ushering in the most 
deadly period of terrorism in Israel's history.  This decision, 
[like other ones], has never been scrutinized by a commission. 
But, truly, the great pity is not that no commissions were formed to 
investigate these failures, as the Winograd Commission was formed to 
investigate the Second Lebanon War.  The great pity is that Israeli 
society has yet to find the means to conduct a true public debate of 
our failures that could enable learning and corrective action.  If 
the Winograd report is to have any positive impact at all, it should 
be in beginning, not blocking the necessary public debate into the 
real sources of the failures last summer, and into the strategic 
failures of the Oslo process, and the withdrawals from Lebanon and 
Gaza.  All of these call out for our attention and correction." 
 
JONES