07TELAVIV1514
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1514/01 1411043
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211043Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1226
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2197
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8929
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2181
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2998
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2201
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0079
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2946
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9833
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0308
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6911
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4316
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9219
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3406
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5341
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6883
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The media reported that last night the Israel Air Force bombed the 
house of Hamas parliamentarian Khalil al-Haya in Gaza.  He was 
slightly injured in the attack, but eight others including seven 
members of his family were killed, and 13 people were wounded. 
Shortly after the attack, the IAF struck a suspected rocket 
manufacturing facility, killing a ninth man. Palestinian sources 
said the facility was a stone mason's workshop.  In total, 13 
Palestinians were killed in Gaza Sunday by the IDF, and more than 15 
rockets were launched from Gaza at Sderot and the western Negev. 
The media reported that on Saturday 10 Palestinians were killed in 
IAF strikes.  On Sunday the security cabinet authorized the IDF to 
intensify air attacks on the Gaza Strip and targeted assassinations 
of senior Hamas activists.  Ha'aretz quoted GOI sources in Jerusalem 
as saying that the cabinet decision called for assassinations of 
leaders of the military wing of Hamas, not the political wing.  The 
sources were quoted as saying that al-Haya's name had not been 
mentioned in the meeting.  The Jerusalem Post reported that on 
Sunday Hamas political leaders in the Gaza Strip involved in 
terrorism became targets after the security cabinet granted the IDF 
a green light to strike at terror chiefs.  Ha'aretz cited the belief 
of sources in the IDF that the steps taken so far will not deter 
Hamas and that the organization will continue to launch rockets at 
Sderot.  Leading media reported that Strategic Affairs Minister 
Avigdor Lieberman told his cabinet colleagues that the decision to 
target Hamas terrorists was an important first step toward 
eradicating Hamas.  Israel Radio reported that PA Chairman 
[President] Mahmoud Abbas and Palestinian PM Ismail Haniyeh have 
urged the international community to help put an end to Israel's 
military strikes. 
 
On Sunday Ha'aretz reported that the Foreign Ministry is putting 
together a plan to station an international force on the Philadelphi 
route in Rafah to stop weapons smuggling from Sinai to the Gaza 
Strip.  Israel believes that such smuggling is strengthening Hamas 
in Gaza, and stopping it will be the key to improving security.  On 
Sunday The Jerusalem Post quoted senior GOI officials as saying on 
Saturday that the cabinet might support Fatah to keep Hamas from 
taking compete control of the Gaza Strip. 
 
On Sunday Ha'aretz reported that the US is pressing Israel to help 
bolster security forces in the Gaza Strip that are loyal to Abbas. 
Ha'aretz said that Maj. Gen. Keith Dayton, the US security 
coordinator, recently discussed the function of the pro-Abbas 
Presidential Guard and National Security forces with senior Israeli 
officials.  According to Ha'aretz, the Americans believe that 
strengthening Abbas loyalists and deploying them in friction points 
along the north of the strip and the Philadelphi route in Rafah will 
eventually improve the security situation.  Yediot reported that 
Israel declined Hamas's offer to exchange Palestinian prisoners for 
many Israeli-Arab security detainees.  The newspaper quoted Israeli 
security sources as saying that Hamas wants to show solidarity with 
Israeli Arabs and to drive a wedge between them and Israel.  Yediot 
dubbed the proposed deal an intervention in Israel's domestic 
affairs. 
 
 
In its lead story (bylined by Zeev Schiff), Ha'aretz reported that 
Washington has given Israel the green light to accept Syrian 
President Bashar Assad's call for peace talks, in a change of 
position accompanied by several preconditions.  According to 
Ha'aretz, the Bush administration has given Israel permission to 
discuss the future of the Golan Heights, security arrangements, and 
Israeli-Syrian peace accords if it agrees to talks with Syria. 
However, Washington has reportedly stipulated that Israel must not 
agree to any negotiations, even indirectly, on the United States' 
positions, or on the future of Lebanon.  Furthermore, Israel must 
not make promises to Syria regarding US policy.  Washington will 
deal directly with Syria on these matters.  Lebanon would also not 
be discussed in negotiations between Syria and Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Vice PM Shimon Peres as saying on Sunday, during a 
panel debate on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict at the World 
Economic Forum in Jordan, that Israel will present a 
counter-proposal to the Arab League's peace initiative.  He was 
quoted as saying that Israel's formal proposal would take into 
account the details of the Arab plan, which calls for a full Israeli 
withdrawal from territory captured in the 1967 Six-Day War in return 
for normalization with the Arab world.  Peres was quoted as saying 
that the proposal would also outline Israel's opposing position. 
Ha'aretz quoted Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa as saying 
that the league would be interested in such a proposal. 
 
On Sunday The Jerusalem Post reported that Muhammad Larijani, an 
Iranian politician and scientists whose brother Ali is his country's 
top nuclear envoy, told the newspaper in Jordan on Friday that 
Tehran was not bent on wiping Israel out and that his President has 
been misunderstood and misreported when purportedly expressing this 
genocidal ambition.  The Jerusalem Post quoted a high-ranking IDF 
officer as saying over the weekend that Israel still maintained its 
assessment that Tehran would have a nuclear bomb only by the end of 
the decade. 
 
Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post reported that the Shin Bet considers 
itself authorized to use surveillance techniques that violate 
privacy, such as wiretaps, when activity that "sabotages the state's 
Jewish character" is carried out, even if this activity is not 
illegal.  The security service made this assertion in a letter sent 
on Sunday by its head, Yuval Diskin, to the Association for Civil 
Rights in Israel and Adalah - the Legal Center for Arab Minority 
Rights in Israel.  The letter, sent in response to a query from 
those organizations, was approved by Attorney General Menachem 
Mazuz. 
 
Leading media reported that today EU foreign policy chief Javier 
Solana will meet with FM Tzipi Livni in Sderot. 
 
On Sunday Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that the US has decided to 
transfer to Israel USD 205 million for the development of an 
anti-missile system.  Some of that aid, approximately USD 25 
million, will be allocated to pay for continued improvements of the 
Arrow missile system, and another USD 40 million will be allocated 
for the development of the Stunner weapons system that is geared to 
intercept tactical rockets.  The decision was approved on Saturday 
by the US Congress at the request of the US administration.  Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe wrote that Malam, a subsidiary of Israel Aerospace 
Industries, is involved in improving the Arrow missile so that it is 
better suited to intercept the advanced systems in place on Iranian 
Shihab 3 and other ballistic missiles. 
 
Media reported that on Saturday five Palestinians were killed in 
Hamas-Fatah clashes. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the US Department of Commerce has 
imposed a civil penalty on Delaware Cooper US, Inc., for violating 
legal restrictions against complying with the Arab boycott. 
 
 
 
Yediot reported that key Labor Party leadership contender MK Ami 
Ayalon is mulling his party's ongoing participation in the 
government, as he would supervise it from the outside.  Ayalon had 
declared that he would not sit in an Olmert government. 
 
On Sunday Yediot and The Jerusalem Post reported that leading 
Israeli and Palestinian businessmen met in Jordan on Friday to 
launch the "Israeli-Palestinian Business Council," which they say 
aims to bolster "reason and dialogue" and "economic revitalization" 
and to press politicians to end the conflict. 
 
Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post repotted that later this week (on 
Thursday, according to The Jerusalem Post) PM Ehud Olmert will hold 
his first meeting with a task force on implementing the Winograd 
Commission's structural recommendations.  The panel, whose member 
come from both within and outside the government, will be chaired by 
Amnon LIpkin-Shahak, a former minister and IDF chief of staff. 
Yediot cited Lipkin-Shahak's admission that he has not read the 
entire Winograd report. 
 
Ha'aretz wrote that the fear of being murdered has become the 
primary preoccupation of journalists in the Gaza Strip, replacing 
their concern that they may be kidnapped. 
 
Israel Radio reported that senior New York Times columnist Thomas 
Friedman has recommended that the US negotiate with Hamas. 
 
The Jerusalem Post cited the human rights group Gisha, the Legal 
Center for Freedom of Movement, as saying on Sunday that academics 
and university should protest the GOI's restrictions on Palestinian 
university students while Israel fights a proposed academic boycott 
by British universities. 
 
Leading media reported that on Sunday around 50 people were killed a 
Palestinian refugee camp in northern Lebanon in clashes between the 
Lebanese Army and a Palestinian organization. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that in two weeks the UN Economic Commission for 
Europe (UNECE) will meet for the first time in Israel.  The topic of 
the conference to be held in Tel Aviv from June 5-8 is: "Knowledge 
Sharing and Capacity Building on Promoting Successful Public-Private 
Partnerships in the UNECE Region."  Senior officials and ministers 
will attend from the US, Russia, Ukraine, Czech Republic, Germany 
and France; as well as senior bankers and executives.  This is the 
first time that the UN body has chosen to meet in Israel to advance 
economic issues, according to attorney Yehuda Raveh, one of the 
coordinators of the meeting.  Among the topics to be discussed are 
large infrastructure projects built as public-private partnerships 
(PPP).  Israel is now planning and building USD 7 billion of such 
infrastructure projects, with another USD 7 billion expected soon. 
Such investments reached USD 100 billion in Eastern Europe in the 
past seven years. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a new subcommittee of the Knesset's 
Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee has been tasked with 
confronting the civilian issued faced by Israeli residents of the 
West Bank. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Israeli 8th to 11th graders of the 
ORT educational network have created a Web site with the purpose of 
educating students around the globe on news and life in Israel -- 
"Eye 2 Israel" (www.israel1.org). 
 
On Sunday Yediot reported that the Housing and Construction Ministry 
is giving a special "gift" to the community of Black Hebrews in 
Israel: a new and permanent housing community that will be comprised 
of 282 housing units in the Mamshit area of Dimona. 
 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "At the end of the day, only the IDF will 
have to enter, go from house to house and disarm Hamas." 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Gewirtz commented in the lead editorial of 
the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "A dilly-dallying 
government is better than a race in hell." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "Egypt 
is rightly anxious about the establishment of an Iranian outpost on 
Cairo's doorstep in Gaza.  But it has contributed mightily to that 
concern itself by failing to stop the arms flow." 
 
Former Ambassador to the US, former Minister of Foreign Affairs, and 
former Minister of Defense Moshe Arens wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The government's inaction is an exact 
repetition of the mistakes of the Second Lebanon War.... This is 
war, and you cannot fight a war based on dogmatic slogans." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "It evidently makes no difference which 
party is in power, as long as the army serves the settlers rather 
than the state." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Our Mission" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv (5/21): "There is no magic solution and no 
instant formula.  In the end, in two months, two years or seven 
years, or after the next Qassam rocket that falls into a 
kindergarten, we, and only we, will have to do the hard work.... The 
Egyptians are burying their heads in the sand, the Jordanians are 
praying, and at the end of the day, only the IDF will have to enter, 
go from house to house and disarm Hamas.   Irrespective of Right or 
Left, without a great deal of options and with a large number of 
casualties, this will be a purely Israeli mission.   It is possible 
that it will be followed by a commission of inquiry, for that is the 
way we are, but there is no commission that can solve this problem 
without facing it head on, the way things used to be done.  There is 
no other way." 
 
II.  "Time For Realism" 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Gewirtz commented in the lead editorial of 
the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (5/21): "We have 
forgotten about the increase in terror that actually took place when 
the IDF was fully active in Gaza; we have forgotten the goals of the 
fighting that were declared after the abduction of Gilad Shalit; we 
have forgotten that Qassam rockets have continued to fall.... In the 
current shameful situation, and considering the disgraceful 
condition of our leader, it would be better for the Prime Minister 
and his colleague to proclaim that Israel does not possess a 
realistic solution that is preferable to those that were declared 
'un-implementable' at the end of the previous fighting.  A 
dilly-dallying government is better than a race in hell." 
 
 
 
III.  "No More Arms to Gaza" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/21): 
"Bitter experience has ... proved that Fatah cannot be relied upon 
to keep Hamas at bay -- just as the Egyptians have proved their 
incapability or disinclination to foil the massive gunrunning into 
Gaza on which Hamas thrives.  If Egypt now bewails Hamas's growing 
power, it has only itself to blame.  It allowed the Rafah border to 
become Hamas's military lifeline.  For Egypt to now seek to 
reinforce Fatah through the same conduit is to compound the problem, 
not solve it.  Egypt is rightly anxious about the establishment of 
an Iranian outpost on Cairo's doorstep in Gaza.  But it has 
contributed mightily to that concern itself by failing to stop the 
arms flow.  What Israel needs to do now is look after its own 
interests.... Hamas must be confronted wisely and effectively.  Its 
armed men and those who encourage and dispatch them must be given no 
rest.  When the extremists are confronted, the moderates will be 
strengthened." 
 
IV.  "Forgot Everything, Learned Nothing" 
 
Former Ambassador to the US, former Minister of Foreign Affairs, and 
former Minister of Defense Moshe Arens wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/21): "First, priority must be given to the 
protection of Israel's civilian population; that comes before 
anything else.  That is the mission of the IDF.  Second, the battle 
must be taken into enemy territory.  In this case it means the army 
taking over a strip of 5 to 8 kilometers in the northern Gaza 
Strip.... The government's inaction is an exact repetition of the 
mistakes of the Second Lebanon War.  Not understanding that the only 
way to suppress the launching of short-range rockets is for ground 
forces to reach the launching sites, the Galilee was exposed to 
Hizbullah rockets for over five weeks, and the war was lost.  Now 
the same mistake is being repeated.  Nothing has been learned. 
Then, because our ministers' minds were being obfuscated by the 
stupid slogan that 'We shall not again get stuck in the Lebanese 
quagmire,' and now, the slogan is 'We shall not return to Gaza.' 
This is war, and you cannot fight a war based on dogmatic slogans." 
 
¶V.  "A Kind of Military Coup" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (5/21): "While [Israeli cabinet] ministers 
speak about a two-state solution, a kind of military coup is taking 
place in the West Bank, in which the IDF is turning the area into 
the state of the settlers.  While the Palestinian population is 
being suffocated, the settlements are flourishing.... One shocking 
example of this democratic crisis is the army's disregard of court 
decisions regarding the route of the separation fence.... In light 
of all this, Amir Peretz's talk about dismantling West Bank 
settlement outposts, like Ehud Olmert and Tzipi Livni's promises to 
reach a new agreement on dividing the land between Israel and 
Palestine, sounds emptier than ever.  It evidently makes no 
difference which party is in power, as long as the army serves the 
settlers rather than the state." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "It is not too 
late to stop [Iran's nuclear program], with the help of effective 
and painful sanctions.  But these must be imposed swiftly and 
firmly.  Time is of the essence." 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Painful Sanctions For Iran" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (5/20): 
"Through [the continuation of its nuclear program,] Iran is defying 
the international community and transmitting a clear message: We are 
determined to continue developing our nuclear program and are 
thumbing our nose at the world.... It seems the world no longer 
perceives the demand for sanctions as Israeli paranoia, or another 
manipulation by U.S. President George W. Bush's administration.... 
Even world leaders, including Russian President Vladimir Putin, seem 
to recognize the obligation incumbent on them to prevent Iran from 
obtaining nuclear weapons.  It is not too late to stop it, with the 
help of effective and painful sanctions.  But these must be imposed 
swiftly and firmly.  Time is of the essence." 
 
JONES