07TUNIS471
EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM REQUEST
Tue Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0471 1070718
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 170718Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3017
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 1346UNCLAS TUNIS 000471 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OES/STC (HART), NEA/MAG (HARRIS), NEA/PPD (FERNANDEZ, AGNEW) 
AMMAN FOR ESTH (WHITTLESEY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPL SENV KSCA KPAO TS
SUBJECT: EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM REQUEST 
 
REF: A. STATE 30914 
 
     ¶B. TUNIS 453 
 
¶1. Embassy Tunis requests an Embassy Science Fellow from the 
National Science Foundation (NSF) in the field of 
engineering.  The Science Fellow would identify potential 
partnerships between Tunisian and US educational and research 
institutions and participate in Embassy public outreach 
activities.  The placement of a fellow would help to 
strengthen activities and collaboration under the bilateral 
Science and Technology Cooperation Agreement signed in 2004. 
 
¶2. The Government of Tunisia has expressed great enthusiasm 
for increasing educational and research partnerships and 
exchanges with the United States.  By creating such 
partnerships, this project will have a lasting impact not 
only on collaborative research, but will also foster mutual 
understanding.  Both the Minister of Higher Education, 
Research and Training and the Minister of Industry have 
recently emphasized that Tunisia's future economic success 
will depend on embracing technological advances and 
developing science and technology (Ref B).  Tunisian 
institutions have focused particularly on engineering, 
especially in power and communications technology.  Tunisia 
views itself as a leader in science and technology in Africa 
and is eager to play an international role.  In June, Tunisia 
will host a World Federation of Engineering Organization 
conference for women in engineering. 
 
¶3. Post requests an NSF fellow with expertise in engineering, 
preferably power or environmental.  The NSF has previously 
funded several successful collaborations between US and 
Tunisian universities and there is great potential for future 
cooperation.  A Science Fellow from the NSF would work 
closely with the Ministry of Higher Education and 
institutions like the Cite des Sciences (Science City) to 
identify potential research and educational partnerships with 
US partner institutions.  The Cite des Sciences hosts 
exhibitions and lectures and serves as a resource for 
Tunisian schools and universities.  In the field of 
engineering, currently the Ecole Polytechnique, Tunisia's 
premier engineering university, is the only Tunisian 
institution to have partnerships with US universities.  Ecole 
Polytechnique has partnerships with Virginia Tech and the 
University of Houston that involve student exchanges, joint 
research, and faculty workshops and seminars.  The Cite des 
Sciences is a publicly-funded institute that aims to 
familiarize the Tunisian population with science and 
technology, making it a natural partner for the NSF. 
 
¶4. While in Tunisia, the Science Fellow will visit 
educational and research institutions throughout the country 
and will also have the opportunity to participate in Embassy 
public diplomacy efforts.  US speakers with a scientific 
background have been enthusiastically received by the 
Tunisian public.  The Fellow may also give lectures and 
conduct workshops at the universities and institutions he/she 
visits. 
 
¶5. French or Arabic language skills are preferable to 
facilitate outreach activities such as seminars and 
interviews, but are not required.  English is increasingly 
being used as the language of instruction in engineering. 
The Embassy will provide housing and work space for the 
Fellow.  The Public Affairs Section will provide logistical 
support.  Post requests a timeframe of two months between 
November and February to coincide with the school year.  As 
the assignment will be less than 60 days, the Fellow will not 
require a medical clearance.  A security clearance is not 
required. 
 
¶6. Embassy POC: Economic/ESTH Officer Victoria Taylor, Tel: 
216-71-107-431, Fax: 216-71-107-090, E-mail: 
TaylorVJ@state.gov. 
GODEC