07USUNNEWYORK410
UNSC: U/SYG HOLMES ON HUMANITARIAN SITUATION IN
Thu May 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO5512
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHROV
RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0410/01 1441436
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241436Z MAY 07
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1949
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 1315
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA PRIORITY 0277
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 0607
RUEHRO/USMISSION UN ROME PRIORITY
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 2702
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000410 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR IO, PRM AND AF; USAID FOR DCHA AND AFR; GENEVA 
FOR RMA; ROME FOR RNEWBERG; NSC FOR PMARCAHM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PHUM PREF SO UG
SUBJECT: UNSC: U/SYG HOLMES ON HUMANITARIAN SITUATION IN 
SOMALIA AND UGANDA 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) On May 21 John Holmes, UN Under Secretary General 
(U/SYG) for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief 
Coordinator, briefed an open session of the Security Council 
following his recent mission to Somalia and Uganda.  Holmes 
expressed concern over the humanitarian situation in Somalia, 
where recent violence in Mogadishu has exacerbated precarious 
conditions and created significant additional displacement. 
On Uganda Holmes expressed cautious optimism at resumed 
negotiations with the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and 
limited progress in addressing the large-scale displacement 
in northern Uganda.  Council members expressed no dissension 
regarding the worrying humanitarian conditions in Somalia, 
with many pressing for increased access for relief agencies 
and further reconciliation efforts to solidify the current 
fragile stability.  Council members also expressed support 
for the ongoing negotiations between the Government of Uganda 
and the LRA, but recognized that significant humanitarian 
needs still exist. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On May 22, U/SYG Holmes briefed the New York 
Humanitarian Liaison Working Group (HLWG) on the same topics, 
reiterating much the same message but providing additional, 
more frank impressions to the closed group.  Holmes was 
generally pessimistic about the situation in Somalia, 
including the Transitional Federal Government's (TFG) lack of 
openness to a more inclusive political dialogue.  On Uganda, 
Holmes reported to the HLWG that while he currently sees an 
opportunity to resolve one of the worst humanitarian 
situations in Africa, outstanding International Criminal 
Court (ICC) warrants for LRA leaders represent a significant 
obstacle. 
 
------- 
Somalia 
------- 
 
¶3.  (U) Holmes described his Somalia mission as an 
opportunity to assess the humanitarian situation first-hand 
and to discuss with authorities key issues including access, 
the protection of civilians, and the security of humanitarian 
operations.  Due to long-standing security restrictions, his 
visit was the fist high-level UN presence in Somalia since 
the early 1990s.  Holmes had intended to spend two days in 
Somalia, visiting both Mogadishu and Jowhar, but roadside 
bombs along his planned route prompted UN security to cut 
short his visit in Mogadishu and cancel travel to Jowhar. 
Homes stressed in his statement to the UNSC and to the HLWG 
that he does not believe the attacks were directed at him, 
but rather meant as a general message of continuing defiance 
by elements opposed to the TFG. 
 
¶4.  (U) While some of the nearly 400,000 people displaced by 
the late April fighting in Mogadishu have returned, Holmes 
emphasized that the vast majority has not moved back to the 
city.  Factors inhibiting large-scale return include 
continued fear of violence, warnings by the TFG to internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) not to return to public buildings in 
Mogadishu, and the fact that many homes were destroyed. 
Holmes stated that many of those displaced by the recent 
fighting continue to live in the open and some have resorted 
to renting space under trees for shelter. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In the Security Council Holmes noted some progress 
in the last few weeks on humanitarian access, due in part to 
increased cooperation from TFG authorities.  However, Holmes 
stressed, current levels of assistance cannot meet the needs, 
pockets of south and central Somalia remain inaccessible, and 
obstacles to humanitarian access continue.  Holmes reported 
that during his visit he urged TFG President Yusuf and Prime 
Minister Gedhi to facilitate relief efforts, including by 
establishing better liaison mechanisms with the humanitarian 
community.  Holmes also urged TFG authorities to apply more 
control over armed groups manning checkpoints, many of whom 
extort payment for passage, and to minimize visa and customs 
requirements for humanitarian agencies.  Holmes reported to 
the HLWG that he does not feel his appeals to the TFG 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000410  002 OF 003 
 
 
received much attention and that the TFG displayed a 
troubling level of suspicion regarding the role of 
international humanitarian actors. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Holmes reiterated concern about "severe breaches of 
International Humanitarian Law" during the recent fighting, 
citing the indiscriminate use of force in civilian areas.  He 
also noted concern over reported human rights abuses, 
including abductions, arbitrary detention, deportation, and 
unlawful killings.  Holmes reported that President Yusuf 
rejected any allegations of TFG involvement in such activity, 
but that Yusuf did accept a proposed visit to Somalia by the 
Office of the High Commission for Human Rights (OHCHR).  In 
the HLWG, Holmes questioned whether the TFG knew what they 
had agreed to, but he stressed the importance of holding the 
TFG to its commitment. 
 
¶7.  (U) Holmes concluded his discussion on Somalia in the 
Security Council by reiterating the UN's deep concern for the 
humanitarian situation, and he called on the international 
community to remain focused and engaged.  Holmes described 
increased relief efforts by UNICEF and the UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as a ten million 
dollar contribution from the UN's Central Emergency Response 
Fund (CERF).  He called on donors to increase their response, 
including through additional support to NGOs working in 
Somalia. 
 
------ 
Uganda 
------ 
 
¶8.  (U) Holmes presented a more encouraging picture on 
Uganda, describing an opportunity to resolve the 
long-standing crisis through support to the Juba process, 
continuing humanitarian aid, and assistance for the 
transition from relief to recovery.  Holmes reported that the 
humanitarian situation in the conflict-affected districts of 
northern Uganda is improving, in line with increased security 
due to the current ceasefire.  Up to three quarters of the 
IDPs in some areas have returned home.  However, 1.6 million 
people remain in camps and in the Acholi area only one per 
cent have permanently returned to their places of origin. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Holmes characterized current needs in Uganda as a 
"triple challenge":  humanitarian assistance to those still 
displaced; continuing assistance to those beginning to move 
home; and basic support leading to longer-term development 
for those who return.  This shifting situation requires a 
flexible and well coordinated approach, Holmes stressed, and 
he discussed this challenge with President Museveni.  Holmes 
referenced the Government of Uganda's "Peace, Recovery and 
Development Plan," developed in cooperation with the World 
Bank, and noted that it needs to be implemented in parallel 
with continuing humanitarian relief efforts.  To the HLWG, 
Holmes noted that President Museveni was skeptical of the 
Juba process and seemed to feel that the LRA threat had 
largely passed. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) At IDP settlements in Kitgum District, Holmes 
heard directly from IDPs that they would not feel safe enough 
to return home until a final agreement with the LRA was 
reached.  He therefore called for full international support 
for the Juba talks, noting that the "stakes are high" for 
both northern Uganda and southern Sudan.  Without providing 
additional detail, Holmes declared to the Security Council 
that the current ICC warrants will have to proceed "in a way 
that satisfies the requirements of both peace and justice." 
In his meeting with the HLWG, Holmes elaborated, stating that 
he believes LRA leader Kony "will not fall for sequencing" a 
peace agreement and further ICC action, and that Kony will 
demand that all ICC warrants be dropped as a prerequisite to 
any final deal. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Holmes also raised GOU disarmament efforts that 
have exacerbated tensions in the northeastern area of 
Karamoja, citing allegations of excessive force and human 
rights violations.  He encouraged the GOU to take cautions 
from a recent OHCHR report seriously and to step up 
development efforts in parallel to the disarmament process. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000410  003 OF 003 
 
 
Holmes reported to the HLWG that President Museveni did not 
welcome Holmes' raising this issue, but that other levels of 
the GOU were receptive to the idea that development must 
accompany disarmament efforts. 
 
------------- 
UNSC Reaction 
------------- 
 
¶12.  (U) Ambassador Wolff delivered the U.S. intervention, 
calling for greater humanitarian access in Somalia, a 
comprehensive reconciliation process, and contingency 
planning for a possible UN peacekeeping mission.  Ambassador 
Wolff condemned recent attacks on AMISOM in Mogadishu and 
called on Somalis and regional stakeholders to prevent 
further extremist violence.  The U.S. statement commended the 
efforts of Special Envoy Chissano in restarting the Juba 
talks and called for strong UN leadership in ensuring 
continued coordination of humanitarian response activities in 
northern Uganda.  The complete statement can be found at the 
USUN website: www.un.int/usa. 
 
¶13.  (U) Security Council members stressed the need for broad 
political dialogue in Somalia and expressed support for a 
reconciliation congress.  Many members called on the TFG to 
facilitate access for humanitarian workers, and condemned the 
recent attack on Ugandan peacekeepers.  A number of 
interventions also welcomed a visit to Somalia by HCHR 
Arbour.  Council members commended the extended ceasefire 
between the GOU and the LRA, and expressed overall optimism 
for the resumed negotiations in Juba.  Many, including Qatar, 
expressed general support for Security Council briefings by 
the Under Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs.  (Note: 
 In the past, South Africa and others have objected to this 
agenda topic, fearing that its undefined scope could open 
discussion to a range of countries and situations.  End 
note.) 
 
¶14.  (U) Seeming slightly surprised, U/SYG Holmes summarized 
Security Council feedback to his presentation as unanimous 
regarding the situation in Somalia and next steps:  agreement 
on the size and severity of the crisis, support for ongoing 
humanitarian efforts, the need to increase AMISOM capacity, 
an urgent need for broader political dialogue, and support 
for the visit of the OHCHR.  He reiterated his call on the 
TFG to facilitate the delivery of assistance, specifically 
mentioning the Merka airstrip that remains closed to relief 
flights. 
 
¶15.  (U) Holmes praised the cooperation of the GOU in 
addressing the shift in some areas from emergency relief to 
longer-term development, and appealed to the international 
community to remain supportive and engaged in Uganda.  Asked 
in the HLWG about the status of the Humanitarian Coordinator 
(HC) for Uganda (following the GOU's recent rejection of the 
last UN-appointed HC), Holmes answered that he had raised the 
issue with the GOU on his visit and that he has ideas on how 
to proceed, but that he needs to have additional internal 
discussions before reporting back to the HLWG. 
KHALILZAD