08ANKARA2013
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5732
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2013/01 3251403
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201403Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8069
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9324
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5051
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3415
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6990
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6843
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3415
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
U.S.-Iraq-Turkey Trilateral Meeting in Baghdad 
The U.S., Turkey, and Iraq agreed in Baghdad to form a joint 
committee to block the activities and cut logistical support lines 
for the PKK in northern Iraq.  Most media outlets cover the 
developments from yesterday's trilateral meeting in Baghdad in a 
positive manner, though the nationalist media remains skeptical of 
the Kurdish Regional Governments' (KRG) intentions regarding the PKK 
and highlight their skepticism by criticizing the inclusion of an 
attendee who allegedly had past links to the PKK.  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports in, "A Trilateral Committee Is Established in Order to 
Block PKK Activities on the Border," that President Gul welcomed the 
news and told journalists, "A withdrawal of U.S. forces from Iraq 
will not affect the steps forward we have taken with Iraq."  In 
addition, Zaman notes, "Ankara is preparing to host Iraqi FM Hosyar 
Zebari in December."  Liberal Radikal draws positive attention to 
the fact that "the Kurdish Regional Administration has joined 
official talks aimed at blocking the activities of the PKK in 
northern Iraq." Mainstream Aksam reports, "The committee will hold 
monthly meetings," and "this marks a turning point in ties between 
northern Iraq and Turkey."  Nevertheless, Aksam notes that, despite 
the fact there was an official statement from the Iraqi Foreign 
Ministry regarding the meetings, "no MOU emerged from this six-hour 
meeting" because "towards the end of the meeting, one of the KRG 
officials demanded that Turkey withdraw all of its troops from 
northern Iraq." 
 
Meanwhile, leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet notes that one participant 
in the meeting, Karim Sinjari, was once declared persona non grata 
in Turkey.  Sinjari is KRG President Massoud Barzani's former 
intelligence chief, and Turkey objected to Sinjari's alleged former 
ties to the PKK.  Cumhuriyet's headline reads, "Sinjari, Persona Non 
Grata, Attends the Trilateral Meetings," while 
conservative-nationalist Turkiye carries the headline, "Shame! 
Interior Minister Atalay Sat at the Table with Sinjari." 
 
Turkey's Political and Business Leaders Discuss Global Financial 
Crisis 
Media outlets report that at a meeting of Foreign Capital 
Association (YASED) yesterday, Prime Minister Erdogan warned banks 
against early termination of credit deals with clients are having 
trouble making their payments.  Erdogan stressed that nobody should 
be allowed to manipulate the economic crisis in order to make extra 
profits.  Before the YASED gathering, Prime Minister Erdogan 
announced at a meeting of his ruling party board that Turkey and the 
IMF were close to sealing an agreement.  The PM said he expects the 
IMF to lend Turkey between USD 20-40 billion. 
 
Meanwhile, Deputy PM Nazim Ekren, State Minister Mehmet Simsek, 
Industry Minister Zafer Caglayan as well as market representatives 
from around Turkey came together yesterday at the fifth meeting of 
Turkish Trade and Industry Council to discuss remedies in the face 
of the global financial crisis.  Ekren said his government's program 
for 2009 contains all the necessary measures to cope with the 
crisis.  The Turkish Union of Chambers (TOBB) chairman Rifat 
Hisarciklioglu asked the government to inject money to the markets. 
"The crisis has turned from the financial sector to real sector, and 
from developed countries to developing ones.  A storm is looming 
step by step," emphasized Hisarciklioglu.  He also asked the 
government to revise its 2009 budget as well as its midterm economic 
program, stressing Turkey needed a new growth strategy.  "The crisis 
will continue at least for another 1.5 years," Hisarciklioglu said. 
 
 
On the other hand, business world representatives met yesterday with 
Industry Minister Zafer Caglayan in Istanbul.  Turkey's leading 
business group Koc conglomerate's honorary chairman Rahmi Koc 
underlined Turkish markets' need for fresh money, and called on the 
government to help by injecting funds.  Koc stressed Turkey 
 
ANKARA 00002013  002 OF 004 
 
 
desperately needed foreign capital, and urged the government to do 
all it could to lure foreign investors into the country. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Economic Crisis Effecting Turkey 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Turkish politics is 
going through a significant change and the formation of new 
political alliances is ahead.  The prime minister has lost his image 
as someone to be trusted.  He stumbles through both the economic 
crisis and the Kurdish issue.  First he criticized the IMF for 
imposing its conditions on Turkey's economic policy, but shortly 
thereafter he decided to reach an agreement with the IMF.  Also, he 
does not have any problem getting closer to Iraqi KRG President 
Massoud Barzani yet at the same time he acts like a hawk towards the 
Kurds in his own country." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan: "Turkey's biggest problem 
during the economic crisis process will definitely be its irritable 
Prime Minister.  It is obvious that PM Erdogan is not aware the 
seriousness of the economic crisis.  In his return from the G-20 
meeting, everyone expected some concrete explanations from him but 
all he said was "this government is not going to fill anyone's empty 
coffers."  No one is asking the government to fill up their coffers. 
 The business world is seeking immediate measures, and the business 
world is more concerned about the PM's rhetoric rather than the 
economic crisis." 
 
Mustafa Balbay in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "The 2001 economic 
crisis struck the public sector and the public banks; today the 
private sector is affected the most.  This economic crisis could 
bring irreversible losses, such as Vestel.  Vestel, a Turkish 
television and computer technologies producer, has shut down its 
laptop production unit.  Vestel was the only Turkish laptop 
producer.  The last crisis led to panic among Vestel's stockholders, 
leaving Vestel with no option other than to shrink its operations. 
Today, creating a brand value has become more important than 
creating industrial facilities.  France has launched an aid package 
to protect its brands whereas our government cannot even stand to 
hear complaints from anyone." 
 
U.S. Expected to Transfer Troops from Iraq to Afghanistan 
Mainstream Hurriyet and Milliyet report the U.S. army will initiate 
a withdrawal from Iraq after the Obama administration takes charge. 
Forces that are withdrawn from Iraq are expected to be moved to 
Afghanistan.  In, "The Pentagon's Plan via Turkey" by Hurriyet and 
"U.S. Forces May Be Moved to Afghanistan" by Milliyet, both papers 
indicate Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen 
said Turkey and Jordan will be used as transit routes for the 
withdrawal of U.S. troops, and based on instructions from President 
Bush and plans by President-elect Obama, the Pentagon has made 
preparations to proceed with the plan.  Hurriyet also noted that 
Admiral Mullen earlier criticized Barack Obama's plans to withdraw 
from Iraq. 
 
A Major and Two Soldiers Killed in Clashes with the PKK 
All papers:  A gendarmerie major is killed and five soldiers injured 
in a clash between security forces and PKK terrorists in the eastern 
province of Agri yesterday.  Two more soldiers lost their lives in a 
separate clash at the Lice district of Diyarbakir and four others 
were injured. 
 
Guler: Iran Energy Deal Will Not Create Tensions with the U.S. 
Conservative-nationalist Turkiye quotes the Turkish Energy Minister 
Guler in the front page headline, "Our Energy Deal with Iran Will 
Not Trigger Fresh Tensions with the U.S."  Mainstream Sabah reports 
Guler told journalists, "Turkish officials are explaining our needs 
for natural gas to American officials," while liberal Radikal notes, 
"MOE officials are also highlighting the fact that this cooperation 
will provide Europe with much-needed natural gas," and "there are 
hopes that the Obama administration will understand."  Guler also 
 
ANKARA 00002013  003 OF 004 
 
 
noted Iran was speeding up the construction of a separate natural 
gas pipeline along its border with Turkey. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report that on Wednesday, Turkish Petroleum Corp. 
(TPAO) signed a "Joint Operations Agreement" with ExxonMobil for the 
exploration and development of oil and natural gas in Black Sea. 
TPAO thinks the Black Sea may hold 10 billion barrels of oil, which 
would make Turkey energy independent for fifty years.  Production is 
expected to begin by 2015. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Democracy-Political Parties 
 
Mumtazer Turkone in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "The MHP's 'Alevi 
opening' is important, and the Alevis must respond to Devlet 
Bahceli's remarks that the MHP is ready to contribute to a 
resolution of the problems of Alevi citizens.  Also, the MHP must 
give its grassroots the message that Kurds must be approached with 
empathy.  It's inevitable that the leader of the ruling AKP will 
also be part of this approach.  The CHP must convince its voters 
that the headscarf is not a threat against the regime.  In Turkey, 
democracy is mobilizing the political parties towards pulling 
together and resolving problems." 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Elect Obama/Africa; Iran's nuclear 
power 
 
Akif Emre wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "It is quite 
possible that the U.S. is going to open a new front in the war on 
terror in Africa, which will eventually make Obama like Bush.  Given 
the region's oil reserves, Africa has become a center for global 
competition, particularly between China and America, and the new 
Obama administration seems ready to move forward toward gaining full 
control of Africa.  It is not just a coincidence to see an armed 
insurgency in oil-rich areas of Sudan.  Sudan was made for military 
intervention." 
 
Kadri Gursel wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "When I criticize the 
PM's support of Iran, the Islamist media angrily questions me 
saying, "If Iran's nuclear weapons are considered a threat, why 
aren't Israel's nuclear weapons considered a threat?"  My answer is 
"If Iran owns nuclear weapons within 3-5 years, it will become a 
super power and will push Turkey into a marginal and ineffective 
position in the region.  Despite its nuclear power, Israel never had 
such affects on Turkey.  Moreover, following Iran's nuclear power, 
if Turkey starts seeking the same kind of power then Turkey will be 
considered as a threat in the region and our relationship with the 
West will be damaged tragically.  Your ideological obsessions 
definitely blinded you and that is why you are getting ready to 
welcome the first Islamic nuclear power without thinking of the 
negative impact it will have on Turkey.  And that is why I am 
calling you all 'the Iranians among us.'" 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition MHP lawmaker and former ambassador Gunduz Aktan died of 
cancer in Ankara. 
 
- The Education Ministry recruits imams to give compulsory religious 
education to elementary school students in Izmir. 
 
- On November 23, the pro-Kurdish DTP will launch a tour of 
provinces in eastern Turkey. 
 
International News 
 
- The Turkey-EU joint consultative committee meetings in Paris has 
called on EU term president France to open new negotiating chapters 
 
ANKARA 00002013  004 OF 004 
 
 
with Turkey without delay. 
 
- A French parliamentary committee unanimously agrees not to endorse 
parliament's prior recognition of genocide claims. 
 
- Al-Qaeda's number two in command Ayman Zawahiri warns Barack 
Obama, calling the U.S. President-elect a "house negro," against 
sending more troops to Afghanistan. 
 
SILLIMAN