08ANKARA170
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3177
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0170/01 0301351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301351Z JAN 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5071
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8648
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3811
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2653
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6388
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6214
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2795
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000170 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 30, 2008 
 
 
ANKARA 00000170  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey in Heated Debates over Headscarf Freedom 
All papers report the ruling AKP and opposition far right MHP have 
agreed on rules that will govern headscarf wearing at universities. 
The easing of the headscarf ban will apply only to universities, and 
female university students wearing the headscarf must tie it beneath 
their chin.  The AKP-MHP proposal for amending articles 10 and 42 of 
the constitution and article 17 of the High Education Board (YOK) 
Law was signed by 348 lawmakers and was submitted Tuesday to the 
parliament for approval.    Papers debate about exactly what kind of 
head covering will be allowed under the government's reform plans. 
Veils will not be allowed in universities, and the details would be 
outlined in a new regulation, say papers. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan told his party group Tuesday that with the 
headscarf reforms, his government is solely concerned with ending 
the victimization of girl students in universities and guaranteed 
that headscarf reforms would be limited to universities alone. 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said the headscarf was a 
'uniform' imported from fundamentalist regimes outside Turkey, and 
blamed the AKP and MHP for trying to change the state regime. 
Baykal stressed headscarf reforms contradict article 2 of the 
Constitution, the provision establishing the secularist nature of 
the state.  Under the front page headline, "We Don't Need Their 
Judgment," Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports MHP leader Devlet 
Bahceli said his party made a deal with the AKP to end the 40-year 
old headscarf ban, and rejected warnings issued by Baykal, TUSIAD, 
and retired justices and prosecutors.  The MHP added that the new 
regulation should contain detailed instructions about how scarves 
should be tied so as to prevent abuse for political goals.  Deputy 
Prime Minister Cemil Cicek said the new regulation would allow the 
traditional folk headscarf.  Cicek noted the expression "higher 
education" has been added to constitutional reforms to restrict the 
reforms to universities. 
 
Mainstream Sabah says that in 1989, the Constitutional Court 
annulled a proposed regulation to lift the ban on headscarves.  In 
"Turkey Debates Headscarf," mainstream Vatan emphasizes that some 
groups in Turkey welcome the decision to lift headscarf restrictions 
in universities, while others believe the adjustments in 
universities are just "a beginning."  Mainstream Aksam points to 
"widespread fears" that "girls who do not cover their heads will be 
pressured to do so, especially in the conservative eastern parts of 
the country."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says the AKP-MHP move 
for lifting the ban is met with concern in the West.  "For the time 
being, the target is universities, and in time, them headscarf will 
spread to secondary schools," says Cumhuriyet.  Liberal Radikal's 
front-page features a reproduction of the "Scream" painting by 
Edward Munch (see below); but the painting is modified so the 
subject is wearing a red headscarf.  Superimposed on the picture is 
the headline, "Republic of Fear: Some are afraid the veil is coming 
while others are concerned their necks will be exposed." 
 
 
 
Islamist-oriented Zaman claims, on the other hand, intellectuals, 
politicians, and the NGO representatives welcome the formula 
proposed by the AKP and MHP as "very positive."   The paper lauds 
the politicians for meeting the demands of the majority. 
 
Meanwhile, the Turkish General Staff (TGS) Yasar Buyukanit told the 
press Wednesday morning during a live broadcast joint news 
conference with visiting Macedonian defense minister that everybody 
in Turkey knew the military's opinion on the headscarf question. 
Buyukanit declined further elaboration. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turban Debate 
Ismet Berkan commented in liberal Radikal (1/30):  "While the turban 
issue is being debated, we've all forgotten that we were talking 
 
ANKARA 00000170  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
about the universities.  In the universities, science should come 
ahead of the dress code.  We all considered the universities as 
state offices, business places or even military barracks and created 
this huge problem.  Today, we cannot resolve this issue without 
damaging the principle of secularism.  Our secularists preferred to 
be aggressive rather than being wise on the issue.  They should 
clearly see that religious issues cannot be framed by laws.  Now, 
the latest solution will be debated for days, many protests will be 
arranged, remarks will be delivered and as a country, we will waste 
our energy for nothing.  Perhaps, in the end, the Constitutional 
Court will abolish the Constitutional amendment.  Or, because of the 
clear political will, the result will not change, and the turban ban 
will be lifted.  Most likely, this change will be implemented at the 
expense of damaging secularism.  Secularism will be damaged because 
Turkey will be remembered as a country that changed the constitution 
in order to bring freedom to a religious issue.  I believe that 
article 24 of the Constitution already encompasses this freedom. 
Unfortunately, the secularists managed to turn secularism into a 
dogmatic religion and now, because of those secular dogmas, we've 
reached a point where we've actually damaged secularism." 
 
Prosecutor Asks for 10 Year Prison Term for Demirtas 
All papers report the Diyarbakir prosecutor seeks a ten-year prison 
sentence in two separate cases against the pro-Kurdish DTP leader 
Nurettin Demirtas for making PKK propaganda in speeches in 
Diyarbakir and Brussels.  Demirtas is in prison for allegedly 
obtaining a falsified medical report to avoid military service, 
which is compulsory in Turkey. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report that in a report submitted to a Diyarbakir 
court in connection with a Roj TV trial, Danish Media Secretariat 
says the pro-Kurdish television's broadcasts do not violate Danish 
laws.  The court case was launched against 56 DTP mayors across 
southeast Turkey for asking in a letter to PM Rasmussen not to take 
Roj TV broadcasts off the air. 
 
Turkey-Iraq Speed Up Military Cooperation 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports that during a 'surprise' 
visit to Baghdad on January 15, the deputy chief of the Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) General Ergin Saygun discussed with his Iraqi 
counterpart General Nasier Abadi and US General Petraeus 
intelligence sharing and operational cooperation between the two 
countries as well as providing training in Turkey for the Iraqi 
military personnel.  Turkey and Iraq have sped up cooperation 
efforts following Turkey's military operations against PKK targets 
in northern Iraq.  Abadi is expected to visit Turkey once General 
Saygun returns home from his talks in the US, according to 
Cumhuriyet. 
 
Barak to Visit Turkey Mid-February 
Liberal Radikal reports the Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak will 
pay a visit to Turkey on February 12-13 for talks with the Chief of 
the Turkish General Staff (TGS) General Yasar Buyukanit, Prime 
Minister Erdogan, and President Abdullah Gul.  The visit aims at 
expanding cooperation between the two countries. 
 
Israeli Ambassador to Turkey, Gabby Levy, told Radikal the visit was 
very important in demonstrating the strength of Turkey-Israel 
cooperation.  Levy said Israel understands the reaction of Erdogan 
when the PM denounced last week's Israeli military operations in 
Gaza.  Levy noted Turkey and Israel will explore possibilities for 
using new technologies like nanotechnology in the fight against 
terror. 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Bush's State of the Union Address 
 
Gungor Uras wrote in mainstream Milliyet (1/30):  "President Bush 
delivered his last State of the Union speech yesterday.  Although it 
was expected that he would focus on the economy, Bush focused more 
on the war and the Middle East.  The most important part of the 
 
ANKARA 00000170  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
speech for Turkey was the part about the US' Middle East policies 
and Bush's determination that the US continue the war and maintain a 
military presence in the Gulf.  Bush said, "Everyone should know 
this: the US will continue fighting against the ones threatening our 
military.  The US will protect its vital interests in the Gulf and 
will continue to support its allies."  The lesson we should take 
from these remarks is: President Bush openly stressed that the US 
will remain in the Middle East permanently and will use political 
and military power there.  Turkey should consider this fact when it 
establishes relations with the Muslim and Arab world in the region 
and should avoid any political and economic act in the region that 
would clash with US interests.  It is obvious that the US 
Administration is not taking the economic crisis seriously and 
political and military issues have a higher importance." 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The ruling AKP has denounced US Democrat presidential candidates 
Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama for their pledges to recognize 
Armenian genocide claims. 
 
- One more suspect has been arrested in Istanbul in connection with 
the 'Ergenekon' operation, increasing the number arrests for ties 
with the criminal network to 29. 
 
- The Economist expects Turkish inflation to drop to 8.1 percent in 
¶2008. 
 
International News 
 
- In his final State of the Union address, President Bush said the 
situation in Iraq was improving but that the fight was far from 
over.  He also vowed to confront Iran where necessary and do 
everything to reach a Middle East peace deal. 
 
- 11 parliamentarians of the main French center-right political 
party, the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP,) adopted a statement 
on preventing Turkey's membership in the EU. 
 
- On Tuesday, the US House of Representatives approved an economic 
stimulus package worth an estimated USD 150 billion. 
 
MCELDOWNEY