08ANKARA879
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7333
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0879/01 1281205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071205Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6200
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8870
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4195
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2912
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6591
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6420
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2996
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000879 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, MAY 7, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey-EU Troika Meeting 
All papers report that Turkey-EU Troika meeting was held yesterday 
in Ankara. The two major issues covered in the press are the EU's 
anxieties concerning the AKP's closure case and the EU's criticisms 
against the police's response to May Day demonstrations. Yesterday, 
CNN Turk reported, "French State Secretary for European affairs, 
Jean-Pierre Jouyet, who is in Ankara for Turkey-EU Troika meeting, 
gave Turkey guarantees that his country will not block Turkey's EU 
entry talks when it undertakes rotating EU term presidency." 
Mainstream Sabah reports that Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel of 
Slovenia, who currently holds the EU presidency said, "Turkey will 
become a member of the EU sooner or later," while EU Commissioner 
for Enlargement Olli Rehn said "a political party should only be 
closed down if it supports violence, racism and terrorism. There 
isn't such threat from the AKP."  Rehn also emphasized, "Turkey is a 
candidate for EU membership therefore the EU could not remain 
indifferent to AKP closure case.  The problem should be resolved 
based on EU values, the Venice Criteria standards and the European 
Human Rights Agreement."   Islamist-oriented Zaman writes in "The EU 
Stresses Reforms," that EU officials noted, "The judiciary must be 
reformed, the closure case is creating anxieties in the EU, and 
political dialogue is necessary."  In addition, the paper writes, 
"Olli Rehn emphasized that further reforms were needed and EU 
reforms would serve as the recipe to overcome the ongoing problems 
of the candidate country."  Leftist Taraf writes, "The Troika Is Not 
Neutral," as the EU officials insisted, "Because Turkey is an EU 
candidate, the EU cannot remain neutral on the AKP closure case." 
Conservative-nationalist Turkiye also notes, "The EU Expresses 
Concern about the Closure Case."  Conservative-nationalist Bugun 
reports, "The EU Troika Warns the Closure Case Could Damage Ties 
between Turkey and the EU."  Mainstream Sabah notes, "EU officials 
communicated that international law was above the Turkish 
constitution." 
 
Meanwhile, concerning May Day, Sabah reports EU Commissioner Olli 
Rehn said "It is regrettable that police used disproportionate force 
on May 1st.  The standards of both the European Union and 
International Labor Organization should be upheld."  Hurriyet says 
Rehn asked for an investigation to be launched regarding the 
police's disproportionate use of force on May 1st. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes, "The Troika Criticizes 
Turkey," as "the delegation drew attention to the police brutality 
on May 1st." Mainstream Milliyet writes, "Europe Voices Reactions to 
Police Brutality on May 1."  Liberal Radikal notes, "The government 
was criticized for ignoring the disproportionate use of violence by 
the police on May 1." 
 
Details of AKP Defense against Closure Made Public 
Sabah, Yeni Safak, Radikal, Turkiye, Milliyet, Vatan, Zaman and 
others:  Papers report that AKP Central Executive Board leaked their 
98-page closure defense that was submitted to the Constitutional 
Court.  All papers note the defense said, "The indictment was not 
based on rationalism and objectivity; it was based on politics." 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that the AKP's preliminary defense 
emphasizes, "The AKP has not become a center for anti-secular 
activities and the chief prosecutor has a defect in perceiving this. 
 The indictment was prepared for political purposes."  Mainstream 
Sabah reports that the defense stressed, "Neither history nor the 
people will not forgive this case." 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: AKP Closure Case 
 
"Sticking To Stubbornness" 
Okay Gonensin wrote in mainstream Vatan (5/7): "The Prime Minister 
persistently defends the police's excessive use of violence during 
May Day.  It is an interesting psychology to defend police brutality 
that is clearly documented by photographs and video footage.  Rulers 
of a country cannot rule effectively when they do not feel sorry 
 
ANKARA 00000879  002 OF 003 
 
 
about police brutality against peaceful demonstrators and do not 
feel guilty about being the only country in the world to respond to 
May Day celebrations with police brutality.   The May Day incident 
illustrates the ruling AKP's understanding of democracy and human 
rights.  AKP values are limited to the party's own world.  Freedom 
applies when it comes to women wearing the headscarf and when it 
comes to the AKP closure case.  However, when it comes to article 
301 or the closure of the DTP, freedom is not relevant.  Those who 
only want freedom only for themselves should revise their attitude 
because democracy is for everybody." 
 
"Those Who Are Mistaken" 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak (5/7): "I strongly 
believe that the closure case against the AKP has no legal basis and 
has nothing to do with the law.  Therefore, it makes no sense to act 
as if there is a problem to solve.  In Turkey, there are many who 
cannot properly deal with the closure case.  On the other hand, 
foreigners make more healthy remarks than some here in Turkey.  For 
instance, EU officials such as Javier Solana, Olli Rehn and Joost 
Lagendjik have made some very healthy observations regarding the AKP 
closure case.  The Bush administration communicated a meaningless 
perspective by emphasizing democracy and secularism.  However there 
are some in the U.S., like the Washington Post, who analyzed the 
situation correctly.  Why does America pretend there is a problem in 
Turkey, and why do Americans officials make statements that balance 
rhetoric?  More importantly, why are Turkey's opinion-makers 
treating this issue as if there is an actual legal case here and as 
if a political party violated the law?   Those who act like this are 
all mistaken." 
 
Burma's Junta Denies Visas to Relief Teams 
All news outlets report on the devastation following the cyclone 
that hit Burma earlier this week.  Mainstream Sabah reports, "The 
Cyclone Dismantles Society at Its Roots, while the Junta Acts 
according To Its Own Whims."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes 
in "The Disaster Places the Junta in The Cross Hairs," that, "The 
military junta in Myanmar was successful in squashing the public's 
democratic demonstrations, but they are not successful in providing 
sufficient humanitarian assistance after the cyclone." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes in "The Junta Is Yet another 
Disaster," that "Myanmar's military government is not giving visas 
to those who want to help."  Mainstream Vatan notes, "While there is 
anxiety that the number of dead could climb to 100,000, the 
government denies visas to teams of aid workers and accuses them of 
espionage."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye notes "The junta 
conditionally accepts international aid," as, "The world is 
mobilized to assist the victims of the cyclone, but the junta is not 
granting visas."  Mainstream Milliyet carries the banner headline, 
"The Junta's Reaction to the Cyclone Is Unreliable." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman, in "Once the Golden Country, Now the 
Poorest in Asia," notes, "Myanmar's junta only agreed to allow 
international aid to the cyclone victims because of discussions with 
the U.N."  Leftist Taraf calls the junta's approach to international 
assistance, "The Calamity of the Century." 
 
Turkey Takes Nuclear Measures against Iran 
Radikal, Yeni Safak, Cumhuriyet:  Following the visits of U.S. Vice 
President Dick Cheney and U.S. Ambassador to the International 
Atomic Energy Agency Gregory Schulte, the Turkish government has 
changed its attitude and has stopped insisting that Iran is 
developing nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.  Papers report that 
the Turkish government is working to control the export of materials 
that could be used for the production of weapons for mass 
destruction. 
 
PM Erdogan Defends Police Behavior During May Day 
Sabah, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Hurriyet, Star, Radikal, Yeni Safak and 
others:  Papers report that PM Erdogan defended the police against 
criticism for their disproportionate use of force during the May 1st 
demonstrations.  In addition, all papers note he accused the labor 
 
ANKARA 00000879  003 OF 003 
 
 
unions of exploitation.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet quotes PM 
Erdogan as saying "Who are the police?  Are these not our sons who 
are in charge of securing the lives of the people of this country? 
What is the reason for this enmity against the police?"  The paper 
adds that CHP leader Deniz Baykal announced the CHP will submit to 
the parliament a censure motion against Erdogan regarding police's 
disproportionate use of force during incidents on May 1st. 
 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
MHP leader Bahceli told the press, "The government applies 
Copenhagen Criteria for supporters of terror but applies brutal AKP 
criteria for workers." 
 
Diyarbakir Mayor Osman Baydemir was acquitted on charges of 
propaganda when he delivered a speech in front of a poster of jailed 
PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan at a meeting in London. 
 
Interior Minister Besir Atalay stated, "The government rejected 
labor union demands for staging May Day demonstrations because of 
tips that indicated a possible terrorist attack." 
 
 
International News 
 
A volcano eruption in southern Chile caused authorities to order 
massive emergency evacuations. 
 
At least 22,000 people have died in Burma after the devastating 
cyclone. 
 
The U.S. and Russia signed an agreement in Moscow on cooperation in 
the nuclear energy industry. 
 
Russia's troop deployment into the breakaway Georgian region of 
Abkhazia has caused Georgia State Minister Temur Iakobashvilli to 
say the situation is "very close" to war. 
 
Greek Cypriot Presidential Commissioner George Iacovou and Turkey 
Cypriot Presidential Advisor Ozdil Nami met yesterday to review the 
progress of the technical committees' work to tackle problems on the 
divided island. 
 
WILSON