08ANKARA1532
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7979
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1532/01 2381422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251422Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7244
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9110
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4642
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3175
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6812
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6653
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3223
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
U.S. Ships Deliver Aid to Georgia and Stir up Black Sea Politics 
Media largely reports on Turkey's approval of and the subsequent 
passage of Georgia-bound U.S. military ships through the Bosporus. 
Now, the focus is on concern that the U.S. ships could encounter 
Russian ships.  Mainstream Milliyet carries the front-page headline, 
"The U.S. is Being Watched by Russia in Batumi."  Meanwhile, the 
paper also reports twenty-five protestors gathered at Dolmabahce 
Square on the Bosporus with signs reading 'Yankee Go Home' to 
protest the passage of U.S. warships into the Black Sea.  Liberal 
Radikal also notes concern about a potential standoff between 
Russian and U.S. interests in Georgia in the article, "Russia is in 
Poti and the U.S. is in Batumi..."  Islamist-oriented Zaman notes, 
"American Warships are within 80 Km of Russian Ships," in the Black 
Sea.  Ali Aslan of Zaman writes, "Ankara's suspicions are raised by 
U.S. efforts to circumvent the Montreux Treaty by sending two giant 
hospital ships," and these efforts contribute to "fear that the U.S. 
seeks to weaken the Montreux Treaty."  Mainstream Sabah reports, 
"After passing through our straits, the USS McFaul 74 arrived at 
Batumi port, 120 km from Abkhazia's capital Sohumi," which has 
created "anxiety and tension between the Russians and the 
Americans."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "Russia is 
Uncomfortable with the U.S. in Batumi."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
columnist Fatih Cekirge writes, "Turkey is alarmed by the war in 
Georgia and is afraid of a possible plan to deploy NATO forces in 
the Black Sea."  In addition Cekirge notes, "even if NATO members 
Romania and Bulgaria push for a revision of the Montreux Agreement, 
Turkey will resist such pressures." 
 
Russia's "Withdrawal Game." (Vatan)   Russia's continued presence in 
Georgia is covered by focusing on the stories of Russian troops in 
Poti and the landmine explosion that struck a train carrying petrol 
from Azerbaijan.  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "In Poti, Georgian 
protestors demonstrated against Russian 'peace keepers.'"  The paper 
also reports approximately 100 people gathered outside the Russian 
consulate in Istanbul to protest Russia's attempts "to take over 
energy routes and parts of Georgia."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "A 
suspicious explosion destroyed a train carrying fuel from Azerbaijan 
after it passed through Gori."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
reports, "Russian troops are reportedly in Poti and are stopping 
traffic and patrolling the streets."  Mainstream Vatan carries the 
headline, "Russia's Withdrawal Game," and notes, "Despite the 
ceasefire agreement, Russia enrages the West by not withdrawing from 
Georgia," and, "Georgian officials hold Russian troops responsible 
for the land mine that destroyed a train carrying petrol from 
Azerbaijan." 
 
In a related story, yesterday's edition of mainstream Aksam reports, 
"Moscow and Tbilisi have withdrawn their support for the Caucasus 
initiative," which was proposed by PM Erdogan.  Aksam reports the 
Georgian Ambassador to Turkey Grigol Mgaloblishvili said, "We cannot 
sit at the table when the Russians continue to occupy our country." 
In return, Aksam reports, Moscow "will not join the platform as long 
as President Saakashvili remains in office." 
 
Editorial Opinion on Turkey/Caucasus/Armenia: 
 
Fatih Cekirge wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "There is a growing 
concern that the U.S. will push for the revision of the Montreaux 
Treaty.  Experts note that the current regime for the Straits does 
not address U.S. interests in the Black Sea.  Major energy routes 
pass through the Black Sea, and the US will eventually want its 
warships, including aircraft carriers, to pass through the Bosporus 
and into the Black Sea.  The status of the Montreaux Treaty will 
likely come up at the next NATO meeting.  However, circles in Ankara 
circles are diligently strategizing so as to prevent the Montreaux 
Treaty from being diluted." 
 
Soner Cagaptay wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "The Russian 
 
ANKARA 00001532  002 OF 004 
 
 
occupation of Georgia will cause long-lasting and negative impacts 
against Turkey's interest in the region, namely from the East-West 
energy corridor to Karabakh.  Russia will retain its powerful role 
as long as oil and gas prices remain high. For instance, Turkey's 
Karabakh policy is based on Azerbaijan's claim to this territory; 
however, Russia's actions in Georgia prove Russia is the strongest 
obstacle to this goal.  Based on the current developments and the 
aftermath of war, Turkey must revise and reshape its policy 
regarding the Black Sea, Russia, Central Asia and the Caucasus." 
 
Erol Manisali wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet:  "Turkey and 
Russia share the same interests in not having the U.S. fleet in the 
Black Sea.  65% of Turkey's energy resources are tied to Russia. 
Thus, if Turkey allows U.S. fleets into the Black Sea, bilateral 
between Turkey and Russia will be strained.  Turkey and Russia have 
similar interests regarding natural gas, Armenia, the status of the 
Bosporus straits, The U.S.'s Greater Middle East/Kurdistan projects 
and the U.S. and EU vision of spreading Capitalism and Christianity 
throughout the world.  However, it would not be a mistake to assume 
that Russia will also align its interests with those of Iran." 
 
Sukru Kucuksahin spoke with CHP Leader Deniz Baykal and wrote in 
mainstream Hurriyet: "Opposition party CHP Leader Baykal is not 
happy with recent foreign policy developments.  Baykal bitterly 
criticized the AKP government's foreign policy approach.  Baykal 
noted, 'During Ahmadinejad's visit, the Iranian leader ignored the 
sensitivities of his host, Turkey, by making funny remarks about the 
United States.  Moreover, President Gul sat right next to him as he 
made these remarks.  All we as Turks got out of this visit was an 
insult, nothing else.'  With regard to Armenia-Turkey relations, 
Baykal believes that the government decided to make concessions to 
Yerevan; therefore PM Erdogan went to Azerbaijan to persuade Baku to 
do the same.  As desired by the US and the Western world, Turkey 
will warm up to Armenia by ignoring genocide claims and the Armenian 
occupation of Karabakh.  That said, Baykal also claims that Gul will 
go to Yerevan for the Turkey-Armenia soccer match; this will mark 
the beginning of Turkey's concession process." 
 
 
PM Erdogan's Spat with Environmentalists 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal:  On the third day of his visit to the 
Black Sea town of Rize, PM Erdogan continued to criticize 
environmentalists who openly oppose the government's efforts to 
develop Rize.  Erdogan accused the environmentalists in Rize of 
"targeting the AKP government" with their protests.  In addition, 
Erdogan noted, "My government and I are the real environmentalists 
and we are working very hard to improve the environment." 
Mainstream Hurriyet and liberal Radikal report that 33 
environmentalists, including 30 foreign activists, were detained in 
Sinop while protesting outside the Sinop governor's office.  The 
governor closed their "Ecological Utopia Camp," which mainstream 
Hurriyet notes "is the first camp of its kind to be shut down out of 
all Ecological Utopia Camps worldwide since they were first 
established 19 years ago." 
 
"Biden Trouble" (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that "experts tied to Turkey in 
Washington are worried about Joe Biden as VP."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman notes Turkey is already experiencing a difficult time in its 
relations with Armenia, but if Obama and Biden come to power, "the 
crisis could deepen," as Biden is "tied to the Armenian lobby." 
Mainstream Sabah carries the headline, "Obama's Zionist Vice 
President," and notes a prior quotation from Biden to an Israeli 
television station in 2007 when he said, "I am a Zionist.  The 
U.S.'s greatest power in the Middle East is Israel." Far right 
Ortadogu reports in "A Sixty-five-year-old Shrewd Politician," that 
Biden "is considered to be against Turkey."  The Sunday edition of 
Radikal reports, "For many years Biden has supported Armenian 
genocide claims, and in Turkish disputes with Greece and Southern 
Cyprus he has always sided with the Greek and the Greek Cypriots," 
 
ANKARA 00001532  003 OF 004 
 
 
despite Biden being described as "well-acquainted with Turkey." 
 
 
Editorial Opinion on the U.S. Election Campaign: 
Omer Taspinar observed in mainstream Sabah:  "Unlike Senator John 
McCain, Senator Joseph Biden is not a neo-con.  Biden is at least as 
strong and experienced as McCain regarding Iraq, Iran, North Korea, 
Pakistan, and Russia.  Again unlike McCain, Biden believes that it 
is very important to act in concert and compliance with the 
international community.  As a result, Biden appears to be the right 
man for Senator Obama's rather challenging election campaign." 
 
Semih Idiz commented in mainstream Milliyet:  "Ankara was not 
pleased with Barack Obama's VP choice.  Joe Biden is well known in 
Turkey because he does not support Turkey's interests regarding 
regional issues, including Armenian genocide claims.  However, some 
circles in Turkey believe that Biden could be trained by the facts. 
Since Obama's election campaign is based on the U.S. withdrawal from 
Iraq, Biden cannot ignore Turkey's role in a withdrawal.  However, 
if Biden refuses to change his stance against Turkey, Turkey will 
take the opportunity to show Washington that Turkey does not need 
economic and social support from the U.S.  Actually, many people in 
Turkey have been waiting for such an opportunity for some time." 
 
Olli Rehn Calls for Compromise in Turkey 
EU Commissioner for Enlargement Olli Rehn, in an article for 
mainstream Milliyet, urged Turkey to review its EU reform process. 
Rehn said that "repeated crises have exhausted Turkey's energy for 
reforms."  In addition, Rehn noted, "The closure case against the 
ruling AKP revealed Turkey's urgent need for judicial and 
constitutional reforms." 
 
Hackers Hacked 
Mainstream Hurriyet carried a front-page story on Saturday detailing 
a joint U.S.-Turkey law enforcement operation against an 
international chain of computer hackers. The Turkish National Police 
stated the suspects were captured after a comprehensive operation 
conducted in cooperation and coordination with the FBI.  The hackers 
stole an estimated $200 million by hacking into thousands of bank 
accounts in the United States and Europe.  40 people were detained 
in 12 provinces, including Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir.  The gang is 
reported to have been in operation since 2005. 
 
Alevis/Compulsory Religious Education 
Milliyet, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet and Radikal report Alevi protestors 
spoke to the press and then staged a sit-in for half an hour in 
Taksim Square in order to protest mandatory education classes in 
public schools.  The protestors promised to engage in such 
demonstrations every Sunday "until the AKP government obeys local 
and international court rulings regarding religious freedom."  The 
Danistay (Turkey's High Court of Administrative Affairs) and the 
European Court of Human Rights ruled against the government's 
imposition of mandatory religious classes in public schools. 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
33 environmentalists taken into custody in Sinop were released. 
 
PKK terrorists attacked a gendarme check point in Siirt; no 
casualties were reported. 
 
Lightening ignited a forest fire in Mugla, which burnt 150 hectares 
of forest. 
 
Two bombs planted beside the highway near Bolu were neutralized by 
the security forces. 
 
ANKARA 00001532  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
International News 
 
The White House expressed regret for any civilian deaths during 
U.S.-led military operations in Afghanistan. 
 
A plane crashed 10 minutes after taking off from Bishkek airport, 
killing 70 people. 
 
Russia withdrew tanks, artillery and hundreds of troops from their 
most advanced positions in Georgia, but left check-points in Poti 
and South Ossetia. 
 
SILLIMAN