08ANKARA543
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0514
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0543/01 0801444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201444Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5651
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8763
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4025
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2793
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6486
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6323
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2901
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MARCH 20, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
AKP Working on Constitutional Changes to Avert Closure Suit 
All papers cover the ruling AKP's efforts for to avert the closure 
case against their party. The Council of Europe's 'Venice Model' 
regarding the banning of political parties engaging in violence and 
racism may be used as a way to end the turmoil.  The first 
implementation of the 'Venice Criteria' was to block the extreme 
right politician Jorg Haider in Austria.  Under the headline, "The 
DTP Will Be Sacrificed," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says the AKP 
would try to convince the right wing nationalist opposition MHP that 
the pro-Kurdish DTP, facing a closure case, would be included in 
this model.  Mainstream Sabah expects the AKP and MHP delegations 
will meet and discuss the amendments this week.  Liberal Radikal 
says the AKP is also considering the Brussels model, which requires 
permission from the parliament in order to file suits to disband 
political parties, and the Japanese model, in which the 
Constitutional Court decides to close down a political party, but 
the ruling is subject to approval from parliament. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak expects a meeting today where the AKP 
will try to work out a compromise with the MHP based on the Japanese 
model.  If the two parties fail to agree, the AKP will submit their 
suggestions to a referendum.  Mainstream Milliyet quotes legal 
experts as warning that constitutional amendments might trigger new 
legal actions against the AKP.  The paper notes that the 
Constitutional Court's ruling over the headscarf reforms will signal 
the direction the court may take regarding the outcome of the case 
against AKP. 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said the campaign to damage the 
judiciary has failed, and now the AKP is working on constitutional 
reforms to block the closure suit.  Baykal said the CHP would apply 
to the Constitutional Court for annulment of the reforms based on 
constitutional article 138, which states "No questions shall be 
asked, debates held, or statements made in the Legislative Assembly 
relating to the exercise of judicial power concerning a case under 
trial." 
 
Editorial Commentary on AKP Closure Case 
 
"Building A Future" 
Soli Ozel wrote in mainstream Sabah (3/20): "Turkey has to find 
solutions to its problems within a democratic and legal structure. 
The most important topics to address are the role of religion in 
politics and the Kurdish issue.  Otherwise, domestic conflict may 
become inevitable.  The ruling party promised to build a positive 
future for Turkey in five years, but it can barely stick to its own 
democracy project.  The language of politics cannot be built upon 
the rhetoric of 'being a victim' or 'being subjected to unfairness.' 
The language of democracy is secular in nature.  Rulers should 
understand the importance of this, and should not ignore the 
verdicts of the European Court of Human Rights.  If the Constitution 
Court denies the AKP closure case, it will save Turkey from chaos. 
Yet the ruling AKP should engage in efforts toward a contemporary 
legal system and toward democracy according to EU standards." 
 
"Who is Objective and Impartial?" 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak (3/20): "Certain 
media figures are using the same tactic as they did earlier on 
February 28, 1997 [when the National Security Council issued a 
warning against the religious fundamentalist threat].  Meanwhile, 
these figures accuse pro-AKP media for not being objective and 
impartial.  The February 28 process was like a stage play, written 
by the military and played by media figures.  They disseminated 
baseless fears regarding anti-secular activities and Islamic 
fundamentalism.  The case against the AKP is not an attempt to 
prevent extremism, but to destroy the democratic steps taken by the 
AKP.  Anyone who believes in democracy is aware of this.  But there 
are certain newspapers who are under the same boss and do everything 
they can to distort the facts through their papers and TV channels. 
 
ANKARA 00000543  002 OF 003 
 
 
There is another group who is fighting for democracy.  The former 
group should not even talk about objectivity and impartiality." 
 
Nevruz Celebrations 
Sabah, Milliyet, Post, Radikal, Zaman and others:  Islamist oriented 
Zaman reports that "Nevruz" is "the world's oldest festival" and 
that Diyarbakir governor Huseyin Avni Mutlu said he is exerting 
efforts to celebrate Nevruz in peace because, "positive images from 
our province willd boost morale throughout the entire country." 
Zaman reports that prior to Nevruz celebrations, security forces 
were put on alert in the East and South-east provinces, including 
Diyarbakir, Batman and Van.  Mainstream Sabah quotes DTP deputy 
chairman Emine Ayna at Nevruz celebrations in Kars saying, "Turkey 
should start a dialogue with the PKK so that the issue would be 
over." 
 
Turkey Gives Green Light to Troops to Afghanistan 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Zaman, Vatan, Cumhuriyet and others: 
Mainstream Hurriyet and Milliyet report that Foreign Minister Ali 
Babacan and his Afghan counterpart Rangin Spanta held a joint press 
conference in Ankara yesterday following to their meeting.  Babacan 
said, "Turkey has responsibilities regarding NATO membership and in 
the fight against international terrorism.  We will make a decision 
on our military assistance to Afghanistan within next few days, 
after establishing a balance between the terrorism issue in 
Afghanistan and our own terror problem."  Hurriyet says that FM 
Babacan signaled that Turkey might send combat troops to 
Afghanistan, while the General Staff is not positive about the idea. 
 Mainstream Milliyet carries the front-page headline, "A Green Light 
to Troops in Afghanistan," and says, "Turkey is leaving the door 
open to demands for more NATO troops in Afghanistan," but asks, "Are 
Turkish troops in Afghanistan the price we pay for U.S. support in 
northern Iraq?"  CNN Turk reports, "A decision on Turkish troops to 
Afghanistan will emerge in the next few days."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman writes, "Spanta is visiting NATO allies during the lead up to 
the NATO summit in April," and "Babacan stated Turkey will have to 
evaluate how to deal with its own terror struggle as well as how to 
fulfill NATO obligations in the international struggle against 
terror."  Mainstream Vatan points out Turkish Chief of General Staff 
Buyukanit said, "We will not fight in Afghanistan," but that 
"yesterday FM Babacan said 'we are thinking about it.'"  Liberal 
Radikal writes "Babacan speaks differently," than prior Turkish 
policy on troop increases to Afghanistan as he "seeks a balance 
between terrorism in Afghanistan and terrorism in Turkey." 
 
 
Cheney's Upcoming Turkey Visit 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Ankara will ask VP Cheney for continued 
coordination regarding intelligence sharing.  Ankara will also 
convey their "unease" with some U.S. generals' calls on Turkey to 
establish contact with the PKK.  Cheney is expected to raise the 
issue of additional support troops for ISAF in south Afghanistan. 
Ankara is expected to ask for the U.S. to be more active in the 
Middle East.  In addition, it is expected that Cheney will raise 
issues related to Iran, Kosovo, and Cyprus. 
 
Turkish Papers Look at the Iraq War on the Fifth Anniversary 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni 
Safak and others carry reports and features covering the fifth 
anniversary of Iraq War.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes 
under the headline "Even Saddam is Missed," as "1.7 million Iraqis 
died, and 2 million Iraqis left the country while another 2.5 
million are displaced inside Iraq." The paper opines, "Iraq, once a 
Ba'athist regime, has now been turned into a Sharia state." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak says "the war's grueling balance sheet 
shows hundreds of thousands of people have paid for it with their 
lives."  Mainstream Sabah quotes President Bush as saying, "the loss 
of life and property is worth it when it comes to a strategic 
victory."  Papers report Bush insisted that the invasion of Iraq has 
made the United States safer.  Liberal Radikal writes, "While Bush 
 
ANKARA 00000543  003 OF 003 
 
 
calls the war the 'right decision,' the whole world protests the 
invasion that threw Iraqis into a nightmare." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Fifth Anniversary of Iraq War 
 
"Bush, Bremer, and Their Pride" 
Fikret Ertan wrote in Islamist-leaning Zaman (3/20): "In the fifth 
anniversary of the Iraq war, the focus is on the numerous mistakes 
made by the U.S.  One of the main figures, as far as mistakes are 
concerned, is Paul Bremer.  From the moment he arrived in Baghdad 
five years ago, he presented himself as an 'I am the law' figure. 
Bremer signed two decrees regarding the future of Iraq, the 
De-Baathification and Dissolving Institutions Decrees.  Five years 
later, the U.S. is suffering intensely from these mistakes.  Bremer, 
most likely due to his embarrassment, is not seen in public.  Just 
like Bremer, President Bush is also suffering from his mistakes 
because he approved Bremer's orders without even consulting his 
advisers.  The essence of the Iraq fiasco is about the pride and 
prejudice of Paul Bremer and President Bush." 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Memicir Eminzade, an Iranian terrorist said to be the regional 
chief of PJAK, was captured in Baskale in the eastern province of 
Van.  He was in the midst of preparations for terror attacks. 
 
- A retired imam, who joined pro-Kurdish DTP protests in Diyarbakir, 
faces a five-year prison sentence for making PKK propaganda. 
 
- The Diyarbakir prosecutor will request that Germany extradite 
Ayfer Kaya, the girlfriend of the PKK's imprisoned leader Abdullah 
Ocalan. 
 
International News 
 
- Claudia Roth, co-chairman of the German Green Party, said during a 
visit to Turkish Cyprus that the Lokmaci Gate on the Green Zone in 
Nicosia should be opened as soon as possible. 
 
- The US agreed to give USD 150 million to Palestinian president 
Abbas' government. 
 
- Kurdish politicians set up an American-Kurdish Association in 
Erbil following the visit of Vice President Dick Cheney. 
 
 
Today's Edition of Sabah carries a cartoon. 
Caption: Celebrating the fifth year of the Iraq War. 
 
Today's edition of Cumhuriyet carries a photo on the front page. 
Photo caption: The US attacked Iraq with the claim to bring 
"freedom," but here is the fifth year of the U.S. occupation of 
Iraq.  The "freedom" the US brought to Iraq has been recorded in 
history with this photograph. 
 
Today's edition of Zaman also carries a photo with the caption, 
"This photo has come to symbolize the invasion as it shows an Iraqi 
father, who was taken captive by U.S. military forces, with his 
son." 
 
WILSON