08ANKARA1158
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1944
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1158/01 1761312
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241312Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6648
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8977
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4382
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3032
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6684
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6514
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3095
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Firat: Ataturk's Revolution Traumatized Turkish Society 
All papers report AKP deputy chairman Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat told 
The New York Times "Turkish society has been traumatized.  Overnight 
they were told to change their religion, dress, and their language. 
Their religious ways were dismantled."  Firat's statement to NYT 
over the weekend was reported in Turkish papers Monday.  Today's 
papers report Firat defended his remarks about the "traumatizing" 
effect of Ataturk's revolution; he stressed he was exercising the 
freedom of expression.  Firat noted the revolution of 1923 led to 
radical changes in the Turkish lifestyle.  "Each revolution is a 
social trauma.  This is true for Ataturk's revolution as well.  The 
French and the Soviet revolution are other examples, and the trauma 
caused by the Soviet revolution is still felt today," Firat is 
quoted as saying, adding, "I'm not longing for the return to those 
days; I'm just making an assessment." 
 
Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan responded by saying, "Turkey is the 
country it is because of Ataturk."  AKP deputy Vahit Erdem said 
Firat's words were "reactionary," and added Firat should have 
"avoided such remarks."  Opposition CHP deputy group chairman Hakki 
Suha Okay said, "Firat's statement is an expression of his views 
regarding the revolution carried out by Ataturk."  Opposition MHP 
leader Devlet Bahceli said Firat's words were a "special attempt" to 
ensure the closure of the AKP.  MHP deputy Oktay Vural blamed Firat 
for acting as a "foreigners' spokesman." 
Istanbul Bar of Lawyers said the words of Firat were the "revelation 
of a hidden agenda." 
 
"We Were Saved From another Lie" 
Mehmet Y. Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (6/24): "This time it 
was The New York Times which reminded us that the AKP's founders 
have serious problems with the founding principles of the Republic. 
Mehmet Firat, the AKP's number two, told the Times the 1923 
Republican revolution was "traumatic" for Turkish society.  His 
words reflect his fundamental views on the issue, which tell us a 
lot about the reasons the AKP has acted vindictively against the 
Republic and its core values.  Unlike many people, I don't think we 
should be angry at Mr. Firat; at least he is the most candid of the 
top level AKP members.  His statement to the Times marks the end of 
the lies claiming the AKP has no problem with the values of Republic 
and strongly supports the values of the Republic.  How many times 
have we heard the AKP leadership, including PM Erdogan, proclaim the 
AKP's commitment to secularism, Ataturk's principles and democracy? 
We can now conclude that these words were nothing but hypocritical, 
as they were speaking out of both sides of their mouths." 
 
"Trauma" 
Zulfu Livaneli wrote in mainstream Vatan (6/24): "First of all, the 
AKP's Firat suffers from a lack of knowledge regarding history. 
Turkey's westernization did not begin with Ataturk, in fact it goes 
back almost 250 years.  There were even initiatives from Ottoman 
Sultans to modernize everyday clothing and change the Arabic 
alphabet to Latin letters.  In other words, Turkey did not change 
overnight, as Firat claims.  Furthermore, the revolutions during the 
founding of the Republic are historical fact, just like the French 
revolution.  This is how history evolves.  The AKP seems to be 
engaging in efforts to ignore or even to set the clock backwards; 
this effort will fail, but not by military intervention.  On the 
contrary, Turkey's Republican revolution carried Turkey out of its 
darkness and improved human rights and development.  The founding 
values brought secularism to us at a time when the world was 
suffering from religious wars.  After all, we are dancing in circles 
around the same issue. Yes indeed, the Republic needs to be further 
democratized, but this cannot be done through religion.  If someone 
argues that it can be done, it only paves the way toward 
totalitarianism." 
 
Erdogan to Visit Baghdad 
 
ANKARA 00001158  002 OF 003 
 
 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others 
report Prime Minister Erdogan is expected to visit Baghdad on July 
¶4.  State Minister Kursad Tuzmen will travel to Baghdad on June 
29-30 to prepare for the visit.  In Baghdad, Erdogan will meet with 
Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki and President Jalal Talabani.  It is 
not clear whether Erdogan will meet Massoud Barzani, the head of the 
Kurdish Regional Administration (KRA).  Leftist Taraf quotes Iraqi 
Member of Parliament Othman Mahmoud as saying, "Erdogan will discuss 
security, political issues and cultural issues, and will sign 
agreements for economic and trade cooperation."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet expects Erdogan and Maliki to announce an "understanding" 
on security, energy, economy and cultural cooperation. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes, "If the understanding 
mechanism is implemented, Ankara will have legitimized the Kurdistan 
Regional Government (KRG)," says Cumhuriyet.  However, mainstream 
papers also quote President Talabani as saying the KRG should not be 
excluded in this mechanism. 
 
KRG President Massoud Barzani: "The PKK is not a Terrorist 
Organization" 
Sabah, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Bugun, Taraf:  Papers report that in an 
interview with Il Tiempo, an Italian newspaper, KRG President 
Massoud Barzani asked if he was afraid of a Turkish invasion. 
Barzani replied, "We are not afraid of anyone.  But, the occupation 
of northern Iraq would trigger a crisis for the whole region.  Kurds 
should wage a political, not a military struggle.  The PKK is not a 
terrorist organization.  If the PKK refuses to meet its pledges to 
hold talks with Turkey, then it could be branded a terrorist 
organization.  The Kurdistan region has taken important steps to 
establish security.  International coordination is needed to fight 
terrorism and extremism." In response to a question regarding 
Kirkuk, Barzani said "Kirkuk is definitely part of Kurdistan. 
However, Kirkuk's identity should be determined by respecting those 
living there.  We have no intensions to jeopardize security and 
stability in Iraq.  The decision about Kirkuk should be based on a 
referendum." 
 
Chief Prosecutor's Verbal Assessment on DTP Comes Today 
Milliyet, Radikal, Star:  Court of Appeals Chief Prosecutor 
Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya will present his views verbally on the DTP 
closure case at the Constitutional Court today.  The party will 
present its defense on September 16.  Meanwhile, Liberal Radikal 
reports that Mahmut Alinak who has announced his candidacy for DTP 
chairmanship said that if he was elected as chairman, he would go to 
Imrali to speak to Abdullah Ocalan or Kandil in order to enable the 
PKK to take a "no-action" decision.  He also added that he would 
urge the Turkish General Staff to end the operations within and 
outside the country, and would propose a solution plan to the 
government to end the Kurdish problem. 
 
Gul, Erdogan to Basel for Turkey-Germany Soccer Game 
All papers report President Abdullah Gul will travel to Basel on 
Wednesday to watch Turkey's match with Germany in the Euro 2008 
soccer championship semi-finals.  Prime Minister Erdogan and German 
Chancellor Angela Merkel also are expected to attend the game. 
 
EU Freezes Iranian Assets 
Coverage regarding the EU's decision to close Iran's national bank 
is portrayed in a straightforward fashion as the measure is 
considered a blow against Iran.  However, coverage noticeably 
excludes Iran's view of the sanctions, except for reporting by 
Islamist Zaman, a paper considered pro-Iran.  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports, "The EU Imposes Heavy Sanctions on Iran," as, "Iran's 
national bank is closed in London, Paris, and Hamburg," and "Twenty 
of Iran's top officials will not be able to travel to the EU." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Iran's banks are banned." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Iran withdrew its money from 
European banks before the news of new U.S.-EU sanctions emerged," 
yet Zaman makes no mention of the assets in the Iranian banks closed 
by the EU.  Leftist Taraf reports, "Following Sarkozy's speech to 
 
ANKARA 00001158  003 OF 003 
 
 
the Knesset during his visit to Israel, Iran's largest bank was 
closed and travel restrictions were placed on 20 Iranian officials 
and 15 Iranian organizations were closed."  Liberal Radikal reports, 
"The EU Cuts Tehran's Financial Arteries." 
 
Yeni Safak: Blackwater Agents in Pakistan 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports from its Islamabad bureau that 
the private security company Blackwater has now entered Pakistan. 
Yeni Safak cites unnamed intelligence sources who confirm, 
"Blackwater agents are disguised as diplomats and are sent in teams 
of 20-25 to assist the CIA and FBI in clashes with the Taliban and 
Al Qaeda."  In addition, the paper reports "Experts warn that 
Blackwater agents in the region could complicate the situation and 
make it worse," as Pakistani defense expert Hamit Mir told the 
paper, "this is a major threat to (Pakistan's) national security." 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Energy Minister Hilmi Guler said Turkish state-owned oil company 
TPAO might form a consortium or bid alone for future Iraqi oil and 
gas deals. 
 
- On Tuesday, Prime Minister Erdogan is to join a ceremony in Ankara 
to mark a contract to be signed by Tusas Aerospace Industries (TAI) 
with Italy's Augusta Westland to co-produce attack helicopters. 
 
- The Turkish Prime Ministry said in a statement a "slush fund" was 
used to meet state spending in 2007.  It's not possible to make 
public statements about the secret fund, the statement said. 
 
International News 
 
- The President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of 
Europe (PACE), Luis Maria de Puig, said the Turkish Constitutional 
Court should abide by the European Convention on Human Rights and 
Venice Commission criteria while ruling on the AKP closure case. 
 
- The International Crisis Group says the new process in Cyprus 
might be the last chance for the reunification of the divided 
island. 
 
- Natural gas-rich Tarija has become the fourth Bolivian state to 
declare autonomy from the government of President Evo Morales. 
 
WILSON