08ANKARA1023
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8891
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1023/01 1541406
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021406Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6435
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8923
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4277
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2967
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6638
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6468
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3046
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JUNE 2, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
AKP-CHP 'Wiretapping' Dispute Continues 
All news outlets continued coverage of main opposition CHP's claims 
that the ruling AKP bugged CHP Headquarters and gave the recordings 
to the Islamist daily Vakit, which published, almost verbatim, a 
conversation between the party Secretary General Onder Sav and a 
former governor.  Vakit said their correspondent called Sav on May 
23rd, and Sav mistakenly hit the button to accept the call and 
failed to hang up.  Meanwhile, Sav was meeting with a former 
governor to discuss CHP political strategy. On Friday, official 
records obtained from the 'Telecommunications Board' supported the 
Vakit correspondent's account that Sav's cell phone had indeed been 
connected to a telephone at Vakit's offices for more than 40 
minutes.  Prime Minister Erdogan said Friday evening the new 
information illustrated the "CHP's intention to destroy the positive 
atmosphere in the country."  Erdogan said the AKP would make sure 
that the CHP answers for its baseless accusations at court.  Erdogan 
stressed the CHP should apologize for "trying to change the agenda" 
by casting shadows over a new plan launched last week by the 
government for enhancing the development of southeast Turkey.  Last 
week, the CHP charged that the AKP was "forming gangs within the 
police force to create its own deep state."  Both the CHP and the 
AKP have taken the case to court, with the AKP asking for CHP to pay 
50,000 Yeni Turkish Lira (YTL) in damages. 
 
Islamist-oriented dailies Yeni Safak and Zaman wrote Sunday the 
documents obtained from Telecommunications Board showed how 
"ridiculous" CHP's allegations were.  Several columnists in Islamist 
and mainstream papers called on Sav to resign.  Sunday papers 
reported CHP as saying the document provided by Telecommunications 
Board was "not reliable," and that they were waiting for documents 
from the GSM operator 'Turkcell.'  Monday's mainstream Milliyet says 
the CHP should not have hurried to blame the government when the 
transcripts of the meeting between Sav and a former governor 
appeared in Vakit daily.  Media outlets close to the government will 
now manipulate the scandal to silence free press in Turkey, Milliyet 
says. 
 
Meanwhile, Sunday's mainstream Vatan reports a court in Ankara on 
April 25, 2007 authorized the police, the intelligence service 
(MIT), and the gendarme to monitor all telephone, SMS, e-mail and 
Internet communications in Turkey.  Sunday's mainstream Milliyet 
says the police were authorized only to monitor communications in 
Turkey without tapping the conversations, with an aim to facilitate 
the fight against terror.  In "Police, MIT and the Gendarme Monitor 
All Communications in Turkey, Including Phone, SMS, E-mail and Fax," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says Turkey has been "bugged from 
three separate channels."   Mainstream Sabah writes in Turkey, some 
"50,000 phones are tapped by the police." 
 
 
Erdogan Holds 'Consultative Meetings' with Party MPs 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan told a "consultative 
meeting" of his ruling AKP cabinet ministers and lawmakers in 
Kizilcahamam resort near Ankara that the longer the closure case 
against the AKP continued, the more likely the Turkish economy will 
be affected negatively.  "The closure case should end as soon as 
possible so that Turkey does not suffer economic problems," 
emphasized Erdogan, adding "Global investors will be reluctant to 
invest in an unstable Turkey."  He also added "incompetent people" 
were fighting to preserve the 40-year old "unfair regime."  Papers 
report lawmakers from the mainly Kurdish southeast urged the PM to 
implement the "Southeast Action Plan" at once and declare the 
southeast as "disaster region" in the face of the severe drought 
seen this year. 
 
US Places the PKK on 'Narcotics Kingpin List' 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and 
others reported Sunday the United States imposed further sanctions 
 
ANKARA 00001023  002 OF 003 
 
 
on the PKK to cut off its funding channels under an anti-drug 
smuggling law.  Under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act, 
the PKK will be denied access to the US financial system and all 
trade transactions involving US companies and individuals, papers 
cite a White House statement released Friday.  "Now that the PKK has 
been designated under the kingpin act, the penalties for doing 
business with them are much higher," said Gordon Johndroe, a 
spokesman for the National Security Council (NSC).  Four 
individuals, including Turkish national Cumhur Yakut, were also 
added to the list.  Yakut, son-in-law of former parliamentarian 
Mustafa Bayram, has been sought by the Turkish police since 2000 
under arrest warrants issued by courts in Diyarbakir, Istanbul and 
Van.  Yakut's whereabouts are not known but media reports say he is 
hiding on the Arab Peninsula. 
 
A Sunday column in mainstream Vatan on Sunday writes, "Over the past 
three or four years, Washington has exerted intensive pressure on 
the European countries to cut off the PKK's financial resources. 
With the latest implementation, it will not be surprising for the 
American Administration to step up anti-PKK pressures at the EU. 
This means that the PKK, which is largely financed in Europe, will 
face much more difficult days." 
 
Peace Assembly Rally in Istanbul 
Sabah, Milliyet, Vatan, Zaman, Cumhuriyet, Radikal:  Papers report 
that around 20,000 people attended a rally in Istanbul to call for a 
democratic solution to the Kurdish problem. The rally was organized 
by Turkey Peace Assembly.  Mainstream Milliyet reports that many DTP 
deputies, including Ahmet Turk, Hasip Kaplan, Sebahat Tuncel, Aysel 
Tugluk, Akin Birdal, also attended the rally.  Security Forces 
stopped ROJ TV's live broadcasting through a rented vehicle from the 
rally area, Milliyet notes. 
 
Ankara University Rowing Team Attacked in Sapanca 
Weekend papers, today's Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal, Cumhuriyet and 
others:  Weekend papers reported that during Turkey Rowing 
Championship in Sapanca town of Sakarya, the Ankara University 
Rowing Team was attacked and beaten by 25 people.  Reportedly, the 
attackers cursed the team members for wearing shorts.  Ankara 
University Water Sports training center head Prof. Yilmaz Akca said 
"I withdrew the full rowing team from the competition because of 
their injuries.  We've been preparing for the championship for the 
last six months.  This unfortunate incident prevented us from 
competing for the championship." 
 
Metropoll Conducts Poll on AKP Closure Case 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports that a poll conducted by 
Metropoll Company showed that closure of the AKP will not change 
people's political preferences and that 48.8% of those polled will 
continue supporting Tayip Erdogan even if the party was closed.  The 
same poll showed that 65.9% of CHP supporters were against CHP 
leader Baykal's re-election. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq; US Elections 
 
"Is There A Happy Ending For Iraq?" 
Hakan Albayrak wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak (6/2):  "In 
order to ensure a hopeful future for Iraq, the Baghdad 
administration must send all occupation forces out of Iraq 
immediately.  If Shiites and Sunnis can unify on this matter, even 
the US will not be able to object.  Given the recent stories from 
Iraq, we may be seeing this happen.  The US is currently working to 
expand its military presence through a long-term strategic agreement 
with Iraq.  Fortunately, Sunni resistance groups have joined Iraqi 
Shiites who oppose the presence of occupation troops.  The prominent 
leaders of both groups clearly state they will not recognize any 
agreement which may violate Iraq's sovereignty. It seems very 
difficult for the Iraqi government to allow American bases in their 
country under such immense opposition.  Prime Minister Maliki also 
confirms that Iraqi groups are getting closer and closer to each 
 
ANKARA 00001023  003 OF 003 
 
 
other every day.  By looking at the overall developments, there are 
good reasons to be optimistic about Iraq's future and the withdrawal 
of all occupation forces." 
 
"Obama-mania and Ankara" 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah (6/2):  "American university 
youth are wrapped up in Obama-mania as they are excited about Barack 
Obama's promises of change.  Obama-mania is also the reason for the 
American youth's interest in elections.  Hillary Clinton, compared 
to Obama's campaign, is falling behind in the race.  I think the 
real defeat will hit John McCain in the upcoming elections since he 
does not comprehend the social desire for change.  The more Obama 
represents change, the more McCain represents the continuation of 
the current administration.  Interestingly enough, the ruling AKP 
favors John McCain, most likely due to his Iraq policy.  Just like 
McCain, Ankara does not want the US to withdraw from Iraq 
immediately.  Ankara worries about a civil war between Shiites and 
Sunnis, along with the possibility of Iraqi Kurds fighting for 
independence.  However Ankara has to realize that Obama also does 
not want an immediate withdrawal from Iraq. He repeatedly assures 
American people by saying 'we will not repeat the mistakes we made 
when we invaded Iraq when we withdraw from Iraq.'  It will be very 
unfortunate if Ankara continues to favor McCain.  Instead of 
focusing on Iraq, Ankara had better think about McCain's policy on 
attacking Iran." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Transportation Minister Binali Yildirim announced June 12 as the 
new date to launch a new generation communication satellite, Turksat 
3A, from French Guiana, which is located on the northeastern coast 
of South America.  The launching of Turksat 3A was postponed on 
Friday due to a problem in its launching software. 
 
- Foreign Minister Ali Babacan will visit the US from June 3-9 to 
meet Vice President Cheney, Secretary Rice and the secretaries of 
Treasury and Energy. 
 
- President Abdullah Gul will pay an official visit to Japan from 
June 3-8.  Gul's 'historic' visit to Japan will be Turkey's first 
presidential visit to Japan since 1924, when the two countries first 
established diplomatic relations. 
 
International News 
 
- Israel disclosed plans on Sunday to build around 900 new homes for 
Jews in the disputed east Jerusalem. 
 
- Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert delayed a key cabinet decision 
on an Egypt-mediated truce with Hamas in and around the Gaza Strip. 
 
 
- The death toll from China's earthquake on May 12 has increased to 
70,000. 
 
WILSON