08ANKARA1781
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5317
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1781/01 2881419
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141419Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7670
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9228
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4830
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3290
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6910
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6754
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3326
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001781 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 14, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
European Efforts Rally the Markets 
Media outlets report that European efforts to stabilize global 
markets over the weekend have paid off.  Mainstream Milliyet reports 
the U.S. Dow Jones Market "broke a 75-year record" in gains that 
followed, "the decisions announced in Paris by EU leaders to save 
the markets."  Mainstream Vatan reports on their front page, 
"England, Germany, France and Spain announced a 1.3 trillion-dollar 
package to ease the tensions in the banking sector, which led the 
markets to rise by more than ten percent." Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports "Europe funds the markets and the markets rise." 
Mainstream Sabah carries the headline, "The First 'Oh!' in the 
Markets," that "Global Measures Stabilized World Markets." Liberal 
Radikal notes in "The West Guarantees the Financial System with $5.1 
Billion," that, "For the first time in a while, yesterday the 
markets created smiles instead of pessimism."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports, "Europe Announces a Rescue Package, and World Markets 
Sigh with Relief."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "Europe 
Acts Quickly and Creates a Ceiling in the Markets," as "EU countries 
create a tough and big packet of measures against the crisis," which 
"rescues markets in the U.S. and the entire world." 
 
In a related article, leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in its 
banner headline, "The Catastrophe for the Poor," and notes "The poor 
will be most affected by the financial crisis as the IMF and World 
Bank indicate the poor countries will feel the lasting damage of the 
financial crisis," as "the poor will pay." 
 
Papers report that on Monday, Turkish markets began showing signs of 
recovery.  The Turkish Lira rallied, interest rates fell below 20 
percent, and the Istanbul stock index rose by 1.6 percent. 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "Turkey wants to attract Turks' savings 
from foreign banks back to Turkish banks."  However, mainstream 
Milliyet reports savings account holders who invest in Turkey will 
not be asked explain the source of their assets.  Milliyet warns 
such an implementation might provide an opportunity for money 
launderers.  Meanwhile, the State Minister for the Economy, Mehmet 
Simsek, was in Washington for meetings with the IMF and World Bank. 
He said an IMF delegation will come to Turkey in order to conduct 
negotiations for a standby agreement.  Economic-political daily 
Referans quotes IMF and World Bank officials as saying Turkey's 
economy is strong, but that the global crisis should not be 
underestimated. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Financial Crisis 
 
Mehmet Barlas commented in mainstream Sabah: "Unfortunately, both 
American and European officials responded to the current global 
economic crisis very slowly. Only now are they taking radical and 
brave steps to address the crisis.  Had these steps been taken 
earlier, the world economy would not have suffered so seriously.  In 
Turkey, the AKP government should determine their priorities and 
take actions accordingly.  It was very wrong of PM Erdogan to 
criticize TUSIAD's warnings regarding the crisis.  Everyone knows 
that global crises first affect financial systems and the markets. 
Therefore, TUSIAD's warnings were not meant to create a crisis, but 
to prevent a crisis by calling for preventive measures." 
 
 
 
Cartoon from today's mainstream Sabah.  In "The Crisis Affects All 
Countries," Prime Minister Erdogan is clinging to a raft entitled 
"2001 Experience."  Prime Minister Erdogan claims that the financial 
reforms undertaken by Turkey after its economic crisis in 2001 will 
prevent Turkey from feeling the effects of the current global 
economic crisis. 
 
First Formal Contact with KRG President Massoud Barzani in Five 
Years 
 
ANKARA 00001781  002 OF 003 
 
 
Sabah, Milliyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak, Cumhuriyet, Radikal and others: 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports that Ankara is preparing for 
its first formal contact with the Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government 
leader Massoud Barzani since the U.S. invasion of Iraq.  A Turkish 
delegation headed by special Iraqi envoy Murat Ozcelik will go to 
Baghdad today in order to hold talks with Barzani. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports that the Turkish delegation 
will request logistical support from Barzani in the fight against 
terrorism.  Islamist-oriented Zaman notes that the Turkish 
delegation will convey Turkish demands regarding the fight against 
PKK to Barzani and will urge the KRG not to shelter the PKK. 
 
Turkish Air Strikes Target Hakurk and Zap 
Monday papers cite an announcement on the Turkish General Staff 
website indicating Turkish jets and artillery bombed 31 PKK targets 
in the Hakurk area of northern Iraq after midnight on Friday October 
10th.  On October 12th, PKK targets in the Zap region were also hit. 
 TGS said that the terrorist groups hit in the Zap area were 
responsible for the Aktutun attack and possibly had high level PKK 
leaders among them. 
 
Taraf: TGS Possessed Intelligence Indicating Plans for an Attack on 
Aktutun 
Leftist Taraf claims today on its front page that just like in an 
earlier terrorist attack on Daglica gendarme outpost, the Turkish 
General Staff (TGS) had intelligence reports from the Internal 
Security Operations and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles indicating PKK 
plans to attack the Aktutun military outpost one month before the 
raid occurred.  An unmanned vehicle transmitted footage on October 3 
to the TGS Electronic Systems Command to the deputy TGS chief at 
09:35 a.m., three and a half hours before the attack was launched on 
Aktutun.  According to Taraf, "the TGS, however, did nothing more 
than merely watch the attack from a monitor during the raid."  Taraf 
also claims an intelligence report submitted a day before the attack 
even gives the name of the PKK commander in charge of the raid. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Northern Iraq/PKK 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "During the 
counterterrorism meetings that followed the Aktutun attack, Ankara 
decided to meet with the Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) 
President Massoud Barzani.  As a matter of fact, Ankara has been in 
touch with Barzani on different levels and at different times.  In 
fact, Barzani's stance (regarding relations with Turkey) has 
improved after each contact.  This time, Ankara will pressure 
Barzani to cut logistical support to the PKK.  At the same time, 
Ankara will remind him of his responsibilities to fight terrorism 
based on international laws.  Moreover, Turkey will urge Barzani to 
participate actively in Turkey's fight against terrorism." 
 
Ihsan Dagi observed in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Following years of 
struggle, the Iraqi Kurds are represented at the presidential level 
in Iraq and have a federal Kurdish administration in the north. 
However, the PKK is the largest impediment to these gains for the 
Iraqi Kurds.  The real aim of the PKK's strategy is not to damage 
Turkey, but the Iraqi Kurds' recent political and economic gains." 
 
 
Husnu Mahalli wrote in tabloid Aksam: "The process launched by Iraqi 
President Talabani's Ankara visit must be continued.  Turkish 
fighter jets have pounded northern Iraq 45 times since December 17. 
If Ankara had met Talabani and Barzani 45 times in this period, 
there wouldn't be a PKK problem today, and Turkey could have gained 
a lot at home and abroad without losing anything.  Today's meeting 
in Baghdad between a Turkish delegation and Talabani and Massoud 
Barzani will prove this fact." 
 
Military Exercises Cancelled in Cyprus 
Sabah, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet and others:  Today's papers report that 
Greek Cypriot Leader Christofias announced on Monday his decision to 
 
ANKARA 00001781  003 OF 003 
 
 
cancel "Nikiforos" military exercises while the Turkish Cypriot side 
announced late Monday its decision to cancel the military exercise 
"Toros" on the island. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Afghanistan 
 
Fikret Ertan in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "The Afghan government, the 
U.S. and NATO have accepted a plan to increase the number of troops 
in the Afghanistan army over the next five years.  The plan will be 
costly, so the U.S. has requested $20 billion from its allies.  It's 
difficult to tell when Afghanistan's army will reach 150,000, but 
the only way to eliminate domestic threats without the intervention 
of foreign forces is through the formulation of a national army 
which represents the ethnic diversity of Afghanistan." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Five people were arrested for their alleged involvement in last 
week's attack on a police bus in the southeastern city of 
Diyarbakir.  Five people including four policemen were killed and 18 
were injured in the attack on October 8. 
 
- The Bingol governor says 30,000 tons of coal will be distributed 
to 30,076 poor families in the province. 
 
International News 
 
- Turkish students in Western Thrace have launched a two-day school 
boycott to protest problems with minority education in the region. 
 
 
- The EU temporarily lifts a travel ban on Belorussian government 
officials, including President Alexander Lukashenko. 
WILSON