08ANKARA1879
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Oct 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6572
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1879/01 3021210
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281210Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7822
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9262
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4903
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3334
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6939
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6783
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3358
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001879 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 28, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Land Forces Commander General Kosaner Briefs Media on Aktutun 
Attack 
All papers gave extensive coverage to General Kosaner's press 
announcement regarding the investigation results from the General 
Staff regarding the October 3rd PKK attack against the Aktutun 
military outpost which left 17 soldiers dead.  At a news briefing at 
the General Staff headquarters, General Kosaner said no flaws were 
found in military actions during the attack.  Kosaner stressed that 
the images published in leftist Taraf daily were not images of 
Aktutun and, contrary to press reports, the people seen in the 
footage were not terrorists but farmers.  General Kosaner noted that 
"American unmanned aircrafts receive the images and after filtering 
them, they pass it to Turkish General Staff headquarters.  The TGS 
shares the information with the relevant offices.  We cannot know 
whether the U.S. shares that intelligence with anybody else. 
Intelligence is to be shared.  It is sent to many receivers.  That 
is why a closed investigation was carried out without the 
possibility of leakage from various places." 
 
Meanwhile, papers report that Chief of General Staff General Ilker 
Basbug attended yesterday's Council of Ministers' meeting and 
briefed the cabinet members about on the fight against terrorism. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Basbug made a detailed 
presentation regarding the recent terrorist attack on Aktutun 
military outpost, the investigation, the steps needed to be taken in 
the fight against terrorism and the demands of the Turkish 
military. 
 
Turkey Thumbs its Nose at the IMF 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan has rejected claims that 
the global financial crisis is affecting Turkey and stepped up his 
criticism of the IMF.  Media outlets are mixed in their coverage of 
Erdogan's defiance of the fund's loan conditions.  Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak carries the front-page headline, "Defiance to the IMF," 
and reports, "Central Bank Governor Yilmaz says Turkey does not need 
the IMF's money."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "The IMF's Plan is to 
Pressure Turkey" and outlines the IMF's "demands" by saying, "The 
IMF is against government plans to use funds to construct new roads 
and to restructure tax debt," while the IMF "is pressuring the 
government to restrict public spending."  Erdal Saglam, columnist 
for economic daily Referans, writes, "Everyone believes that Erdogan 
does not want to make a deal with the IMF because he does not want 
to curb municipal spending before the local elections in 2009." 
Saglam notes "the IMF delegation has been stunned by Erdogan's harsh 
words against the IMF," as "his statements lead one to assume the 
IMF is asking the government to cut spending."  In a related 
article, Referans notes "the IMF wants the government to reduce 
current spending in order to use the funds to ease the pressure on 
the economy," while "the AKP government wants to increase spending 
in the lead up to the local municipal elections."  In addition, the 
article reports, "The IMF is concerned about transparency regarding 
municipalities' spending," because "their budget is almost as large 
as the state budget."  Columnist Ugur Gurses of liberal Radikal 
notes, "This crisis is global, but our mindset is still local," and 
"what needs to be done is to develop formulas in order to ensure 
credit flow," but "our government instead prefers to publicly defy 
the IMF."  Okay Gonensin of mainstream Vatan says, "The PM is acting 
like the IMF is asking for some kind of favor from him and he is 
bravely fighting against the IMF," but "someone should explain to 
the PM that the IMF is trying to help Turkey." 
 
 
A cartoon from today's Milliyet depicts Prime Minister Erdogan 
hanging by a thread and saying "Nothing can happen to us!" 
 
Cartoon from today's Sabah in which a truck called "IMF" is depicted 
running over a Turk who is hitchhiking. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001879  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
Editorial Opinion on Turkey-IMF 
 
Ugur Gurses wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Given the 
magnitude of the current global financial crisis, Turkey needs to 
develop formulas with the IMF and G-7 nations in order to ensure 
credit flow.  Instead, our government prefers publicly defy the IF. 
While this economic crisis is certainly global, our mindset is still 
local." 
 
Okay Gonensin wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "PM Erdogan is scolding 
everyone to the point where he appears pathological.  The IMF has 
had its share of his attitude.  PM Erdogan not only scolded the IMF, 
but also acted as if the IMF was asking for some favor from Turkey 
and he is bravely fighting it!  Someone should explain to the PM 
that the IMF is trying to help Turkey emerge from the global crisis 
with minimum damage.  And of course, it should be explained to PM 
Erdogan that the economic crisis cannot be solved by scolding the 
IMF." 
 
Widespread Protests for Kurdish Rights 
All papers give extensive coverage to the aftermath of recent 
protest marches in many provinces organized by pro-Kurdish political 
party DTP, and focus on the statements from high level officials in 
the party.  Ahmet Turk, Chairman of the DTP, told reporters on his 
way to Brussels that the protests should be considered 'normal' as 
they were reflecting democratic reaction.  DTP's Parliament Group 
Chairman Selahattin Demirtas told the press of an upcoming action 
plan to protest alleged mistreatment of PKK's imprisoned leader 
Abdullah Ocalan.  Demirtas told press of a two-day sit-in protest in 
Diyarbakir, and leftist Birgun mentions that it will start on 
November 1 and 5,000 people are expected to participate.  Meanwhile 
papers carry Chairman Ahmet Turk's remarks that blame PM Erdogan and 
opposition CHP leader Baykal for creating tension in the region on 
the eve of local elections. 
Editorial Opinion on PKK/Kurdish Problem 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "The Kurdish issue 
has polarized Turkey.  When an issue is assessed in only black and 
white terms, solutions are rarely found.  However Turkey must solve 
this problem now.  The AKP has largely linked their solution process 
to upcoming local elections, however, in light of recent 
developments, this approach must be revised." 
 
Barzani Transits Incirlik 
Several media outlets report that Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government 
President Massoud Barzani transited Incirlik Air Force Base in 
Turkey on his way to the U.S.  Kanal 24 carried the reports in 
straightforward coverage, while today's Hurriyet reports Turkey 
acted graciously toward Barzani by facilitating his travel to the 
U.S.  In "Barzani Transits Incirlik for U.S. Tour," 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "Barzani was flown via U.S. 
military aircraft to Incirlik, where he transferred to a flight that 
took him to the U.S. for 'an official visit' with U.S. President 
George Bush." 
 
Human Rights Stays on the Agenda 
In "A Police Battalion against a Handful of Protesters," mainstream 
Hurriyet reports that 27 people protested the AKP in Ankara and all 
of them were detained.  The protesters blamed the AKP government for 
the death of inmate Engin Ceper while he was undergoing police 
interrogation.  Hurriyet, Yeni Safak and Radikal report an upcoming 
human rights review meeting by the Prime Ministry Human Right Board 
on October 30 will examine the case of Engin Ceper.  Mainstream 
Vatan also reports the Parliamentary Human Rights Commission made a 
secret visit to the police station in Istanbul where Ceper was 
allegedly tortured to death. 
 
War Breaks Out in Syria (Yeni Safak) 
All media outlets are critical of the U.S. cross-border raid into 
Syria that killed eight civilians on Sunday.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
 
ANKARA 00001879  003 OF 004 
 
 
carries the headline, "Yes, We Attacked," and reports, "Before, the 
U.S. said 'We don't have any information about an attack launched 
into Syria on Sunday,' but yesterday the U.S. military confirmed the 
strikes."  In addition, Hurriyet notes, "Damascus has called the 
strikes 'criminal' and 'a terrorist attack.'"  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports in "A Cross Border Operation against Al Qaeda Leaders," that 
"U.S. helicopters were targeting Al Qaeda leaders in Gahdiya, but 
instead the fifteen-minute attack killed eight civilians." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "America's Attack against Syria 
Angers Russia and Other Arab Nations."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports in "Enormous Rage In Response to the U.S. 
Attack," that "mourners at the funerals of the civilians killed in 
the raid shouted slogans against the U.S." while "Damascus publicly 
holds the U.S. responsible for the civilian deaths."  Liberal 
Radikal reports, "Damascus is Beside Itself with Rage over the 
American Attack."  Leftist Taraf writes, "Damascus Holds the U.S. 
Responsible for Whatever Results Come from the Attack."  NTV reports 
the Syrian press says the raid constitutes "a war crime." 
 
Editorial Opinion on U.S./Syria 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "The U.S. purposefully 
dispatched four military helicopters from a military base in Iraq in 
order to carry out a military operation 10 kilometers across the 
border into Syrian territory.  This operation surprised the world 
and shocked Syria.  Despite Syria's rapprochement with the West, the 
U.S. has never changed its stance against Syria.  The Bush 
Administration continues to pursue a policy of isolation against 
Syria amid its allegations Syria supports terrorism.  This recent 
incident will create further distance between the two countries. 
The U.S. is following the same kind of cross-border policy in 
Pakistan.  In order to pursue Taliban terrorists who flee 
Afghanistan, the U.S. is launching occasional air operations into 
Pakistan.  Thus, Pakistan's relations with the U.S. and Afghanistan 
are rather tense nowadays.  America's cross-border operations into 
Syria and Pakistan are not solving the terrorism problem.  On the 
contrary, these operations are creating political problems.  Of 
course, no country has the right to violate the sovereignty of 
another country.  But in order to prevent such violations of 
sovereignty, no country should allow others to use its territory as 
a base from which attacks can be launched into other countries." 
 
Barzani Transits Incirlik 
Several media outlets report that Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government 
President Massoud Barzani transited Incirlik Air Force Base in 
Turkey on his way to the U.S.  Kanal 24 carried the reports in 
straightforward coverage, while today's Hurriyet reports Turkey 
acted graciously toward Barzani by facilitating his travel to the 
U.S.  In "Barzani Transits Incirlik for U.S. Tour," 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "Barzani was flown via U.S. 
military aircraft to Incirlik, where he transferred to a flight that 
took him to the U.S. for 'an official visit' with U.S. President 
George Bush." 
 
 
Former Ambassador Mark Parris' Advice for next U.S. President 
Media outlets report former U.S. Ambassador to Turkey Mark Parris 
issued advice to the next U.S. president in an article entitled 
"Common Values and Common Interests - The Bush Legacy in US-Turkish 
Relations," in the latest edition of a quarterly journal published 
by the Turkey-based SETA Foundation for Political, Economic and 
Social Research called "Insight Turkey."  Mainstream Milliyet 
carries the headline, "Mark Parris: The New President Must Place 
Turkey at the Top of the List," and notes Parris wrote, "Ties have 
deteriorated between the U.S. and Turkey during the Bush 
administration."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Whoever wins the 
U.S. election will have a more positive image in Turkish public 
opinion by simply not being George Bush."  CNN Turk says Parris 
"urges the next U.S. president to give Turkey top priority." 
 
 
ANKARA 00001879  004 OF 004 
 
 
Erdogan Sends Advisors to the U.S. 
Mainstream Hurriyet and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet report that 
Prime Minister Erdogan has sent two advisors, chief foreign affairs 
advisor Ahmet Davutoglu and AKP Vice Chair for Foreign Affairs Suat 
Kiniklioglu, to meet with the foreign affairs advisors of both the 
Obama and McCain campaigns.  Hurriyet reports Erdogan's envoys will 
address key bilateral issues with the campaigns, including the 
cooperation against the PKK, Iraq's stability, the Caucasus Platform 
proposal, Turkey's efforts to expand ties with Armenia, and Turkey's 
efforts to promote peace in the Middle East.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet, meanwhile, reports that Erdogan "preferred to send his 
own advisors instead of sending officials from the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs," to discuss these key bilateral issues with the 
presidential campaigns. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
The General Staff briefed the Council of Ministers on developments 
in the fight against terror. 
 
President Gul says he is ready to give up his authority to appoint 
university rectors. 
 
Turkey extends support to Ukraine's NATO membership. 
 
Opposition party MHP starts preparations for the municipality 
elections. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will go to the U.S. next month. 
 
A court in Istanbul declares a news blackout in connection with the 
death of Engin Ceber, who died as a result of torture while in 
police custody. 
 
World News 
 
Monday's Gallup Poll: Obama holds a commanding 52-42 percent lead 
over John McCain among all voters. 
 
WILSON