08BAGHDAD3636
IRAQ PRT TEAM LEADERS CONFERENCE: TRANSITION IN 2009 (SBU)
Sun Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO2225
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3636/01 3211306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161306Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0422
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREZ IZ
 
SUBJECT: IRAQ PRT TEAM LEADERS CONFERENCE: TRANSITION IN 2009 (SBU) 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On October 14-15, 2008, Provincial 
Reconstruction Team (PRT) Team Leaders convened in Baghdad for the 
quarterly Team Leaders Conference.  The theme of transition animated 
this Team Leaders Conference.  Presenters highlighted the need for 
continuing State Department-Department of Defense (DOD) cooperation 
as DoD moves from kinetic operations to civilian-led capacity 
building.  Ambassador Ryan Crocker opened by challenging team 
leaders to actively engage with their Iraqi counterparts, while 
remaining sensitive to the reality that Iraqis want to govern their 
own country.  How quickly we transition will depend on candid PRT 
assessments of progress, he said.  Multi National Forces-Iraq 
Commanding General Ray Odierno highlighted the importance of 
supporting Iraqi sovereignty, and now that the security situation 
has improved, the military can shift its focus from kinetic 
operations to capacity building.  Building on the transition theme, 
other presenters from 20 different offices and agencies, discussed 
their plans for moving forward.  All 31 PRTs and Regional Embassy 
Offices (REOs) were represented, including the teams lead by the 
British, Italians and the Koreans.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
AMBASSADOR CROCKER:  STATUS OF FORCES AGREEMENT (SOFA), PROVINCIAL 
ELECTIONS, U.S.-IRAQI RELATIONS, AND MOVING FORWARD 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador Crocker said that the agreement is in the final 
stages of negotiation, after the overarching framework was approved 
several months ago.  He emphasized that the importance of a good 
SOFA agreement, and the impact it will have on all aspects of USG 
operations in Iraq.  He also told the team leaders to expect moments 
of "high drama" as the final political decisions are made. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Emphasizing that smooth elections were a critical element 
of transition in Iraq and how they are conducted will determine 
Iraq's democratic development; Ambassador Crocker encouraged the 
team leaders to report any emerging threats to the electoral 
process.  He said that cooperation with the United Nations 
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is another vital part of 
transition in Iraq, and represents a fundamental part of Iraq's 
reorientation into the international community.  He highlighted his 
support for joint UNAMI-USG efforts in Iraq, especially as UNAMI 
moves further out into the provinces. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Regarding eventual PRT drawdown, Ambassador Crocker 
encouraged the teams to think about conditions improving to the 
point where the PRTs would not be needed, and said that as more 
provinces move into Provincial Iraqi Control (PIC), civilian 
presence on the teams should be more prominent.  At the same time, 
USG funds available for PRTs is starting to decrease, and he asked 
teams to use funds effectively and transition some of the mature 
programs to Iraqi funding.  He praised quality and innovation as key 
to the PRT efforts. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
MNF-I GENERAL ODIERNO:  2009 is the Year of Transition 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Multinational Forces-Iraq (MNF-I) Commanding General Ray 
Odierno stated that the coming year is vital in the campaign for a 
secure, stable, and prosperous Iraq.  Coalition Forces will steadily 
reduce their overall visibility throughout the country as the 
operating environment changes from security-led to governance-led. 
The way ahead will be less military action and greater DoD-State 
cooperation in Iraqi capacity-building.  He emphasized the 
importance of the military-PRT relationship as the military 
transitions to a supporting role highlighting the increasingly 
important civilian effort.  He said that the PRT will emerge as the 
"tip of the spear" as the overall visibility of the Coalition Forces 
decreases.  He urged communication, coordination, and partnership at 
all levels. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Like Ambassador Crocker, General Odierno cited elections 
as a critical element of transition in Iraq.  He emphasized that 
they must be fair and free in reality and perception, and asserted 
the importance of PRTs as the eyes and ears on the electoral process 
and the transfer of power afterward. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) General Odierno noted the sustainability of Iraqi Security 
Forces, delivery of essential services, and development of a 
unified, Iraqi, political vision as challenges facing the country. 
The PRT's role is to build provincial government capacity, 
facilitate reconciliation by reducing sectarian and ethnic bias in 
government, support provincial budget execution, and foster economic 
development.  This effort should support Iraqis as they exercise 
their full sovereign authority.  Thanking the teams for their hard 
work and dedication, he pledged continued military support to the 
PRT effort in Iraq. 
 
--------------------- 
 
BAGHDAD 00003636  002 OF 002 
 
 
CONFERENCE HIGHLIGHTS 
--------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) OPA Director Phyllis Powers chaired a dialogue with the 
team leaders, telling them about efforts to brief Government of Iraq 
officials on PRT activities.  She emphasized that PRTs will be 
operating with less autonomy in the near future as the SOFA is 
completed.  She also stressed the importance of honest assessments 
from PRT leaders, urging team leaders to report "how it really is," 
even if it is negative change.  This information is essential to 
future transition planning.  She urged coordination and cooperation 
at all levels, and pledged to continue to provide PRTs the tools 
they needed to accomplish their goals. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The road ahead for USAID will be characterized by leaner 
programs, noted Iraq's USAID Mission Director, Chris Crowley.  The 
resources available to USAID have been cut almost in half.  The 
Local Governance Program (LGP) II program is winding down and will 
be complete by the end of 2008. The LGP III program is funded at a 
third of LGP II funding; LGP III will therefore only be offered to 7 
or 8 PRTs.  LGP III program managers must coordinate closely with 
the PRTs to ensure consistency in the training and advice provided. 
USAID economic development programs will still fund lending projects 
to small and micro enterprises, primarily through the Tijara 
program.  USAID will have a presence in Iraq for quite some time 
which necessitates close cooperation with GOI entities. The next 
generation of USAID projects will reinforce strong linkages between 
local and provincial officials and empower communities to better 
articulate their needs. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Multinational Corps-Iraq (MNC-I) Deputy Commanding General 
Major General Paul Lefebvre offered one certainty: Iraq's future 
will be less military action and greater DoD-State cooperation in 
the area of capacity-building.  The operating environment currently 
presents more questions than answers regarding the SOFA, provincial 
elections, and the availability of USG funding.  The goal is to 
increase civil capacity to maintain security and enhance stability 
conditions, and the importance of maintaining unity of effort and 
command. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Speaking about Iraq's political climate, Ambassador Robert 
Ford, Embassy Baghdad's Political Counselor, described shifts in 
Iraqi political alliances and the fragmentation of political 
movements within traditional Sunni and Shi sectarian groups. 
Ambassador Marc Wall, the Coordinator for Economic Transition in 
Iraq (CETI), highlighted provincial budget execution in promoting 
the de-centralization of political power in Iraq. 
 
¶12. (U) OPA's lead on Quick Response Fund (QRF) program officer 
briefed the team leaders on overall funding and spending figures for 
the program, and the guidelines for spending the funds.  He also 
discussed the new micro grant program that will allow up to $25,000 
in grants as another funding option for the PRTs. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Iraq Transition Assistance Office provided an update 
on the Provincial Reconstruction and Development Committees (PRDC) 
funding program, which supports priority projects identified by 
Iraqi leaders and coalition forces.  He explained the funding 
guidelines for PRDC programs provided through the FY 2008 
Supplemental Budget, and discussed the new five million dollar PRT 
Technical Services and Feasibility Program that will compliment 
Iraqi efforts to expedite Provincial Council projects and other 
local initiatives aimed at stimulating development and commerce. 
 
¶14.  (U) Richard Manlove, Acting Chief of Staff for the United 
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) gave an overview of 
UNAMI's plans and challenges heading into 2009.  UNAMI's work is 
still colored by the 2003 bombing of the U.N. headquarters in 
Baghdad, which set the tone for the level of risk that UNAMI is 
willing to take.  Their priorities for 2009 will be election affairs 
and the problem of disputed internal boundaries in Iraq.  UNAMI's 
footprint in Iraq will increase from 148 to 155 in 2009, and will 
embed UNAMI officials into selected PRTs by the end of the year. 
UNAMI depends heavily on security protection from MNF-I and if both 
coalition forces and the PRTs drawdown, UNAMI's scope of work will 
be severely affected.  The SOFA agreement will be critical to 
UNAMI's continuing operations, as will coordination with the PRTs.. 
 
 
¶15. (U) Other presentations focused on OPA assessments and planning, 
budget execution, and upcoming elections. 
 
Crocker