08BAGHDAD618
Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - February 26
Mon Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ1175
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #0618/01 0630408
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 030408Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6008
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000618 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ REL UK
SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - February 26 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: In the regular weekly meeting, the committee discussed 
issues ranging from electricity in Sabi' Al Bor, to Amanat Clean Up 
days and a host of issues related to Haifa Street. Despite being a 
holiday week, the meeting was well attended. Representatives from 
the Ministries of Electricity, Education, Health and Defense were 
present, as were representatives from the National Security Advisor 
(NSA), Joint Planning Commission (JPC), Iraqi Red Crescent (IRC) and 
the Baghdad Operations Command (BOC). The Mayor of Sabi' Al Bor and 
Baghdad Deputy Mayor Naiem also attended. END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Representatives from Sabi' Al Bor Visit the Services Committee 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. Members of the Provision of Services Committee visited Sabi' Al 
Bor in late November. Since that visit, several committee 
recommendations have been implemented to improve services in the 
area. However, according to the Mayor, Sabi' Al Bor still has 
several problems to overcome. 
 
¶3. Electricity is not reliable due to cable theft. Dr. Chalabi asked 
the Sabi' Al Bor representatives, including the Awakening Council 
Chairman, to identify who was stealing the cables and asked what was 
being done to stop the illegal activity. The Awakening Council Chair 
blamed unemployed men for stealing the cables. He said that 400 
Awakening Council members were not enough to provide security in the 
area. The BOC asked the Awakening Council to better cooperate with 
them by sharing any reports of misconduct. Dr. Chalabi encouraged 
the local government to enforce the rule of law. The Awakening 
Council Chair noted that four cases are currently being processed 
through the judicial system. Dr. Chalabi then offered 5 million 
dinars reward for any person caught cutting the electrical cables. 
(Note: It is not clear whether Dr. Chalabi was offering his own 
money or money from the committee. However, it is our understanding 
that the committee does not have a budget. End Note) 
 
¶4. Additionally, the Mayor presented a formal letter detailing the 
water problems in the area. He acknowledged and thanked the Ministry 
of Electricity for their efforts to provide electricity to several 
pumping stations. However, he claimed that several outlying villages 
are not receiving sufficient water due mainly to theft, but 
compounded by electricity and fuel shortages and clogged drainage 
and irrigation canals. He asked for the committee's attention to 
this matter. The second brigade will follow up with both the 
electricity and water issues. 
 
¶5. The Mayor also noted that the health situation has declined over 
the last month after a slight improvement resulting from the 
Committee's visit in November. The Mayor and Dr. Tahseen al Shekhli 
(Fard al-Qanoon spokesperson)both commented that formerly displaced 
persons who returned to Sabi' Al Bor recently are again reportedly 
leaving the area due to security and insufficient services. The NSA 
representative disagreed, noting that security was the "real" 
problem and he encouraged the Awakening Council to do more. 
 
¶6. The Iraqi Red Crescent offered to assist with food ration card 
(PDS) distribution in Sabi' Al Bor and other related PDS issues. The 
Mayor noted that the local police are handling it. Dr. Chalabi 
suggested that the IRC work with the police; however, the IRC 
contended that they are not permitted to work with local government 
entities under Iraqi law. The Amanat also noted their interest in 
establishing municipal offices in Sabi' Al Bor. They asked the Mayor 
and Awakening Council Chair to send a list of qualified individuals 
to be considered for employment. The list is to contain both Sunni 
and Shia names. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
Cleaning Up Baghdad 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. The Amanat has proceeded with a November 20 recommendation to 
implement a "clean-up day" to include trash collection and cleaning 
sewage and storm drainage canals every first Saturday of the month. 
Despite truck shortages, the Amanat would like to add the third 
Saturday of every month to the rotation. 
 
¶8. Deputy Mayor Naeim also discussed the issues delaying the 
privatization of cleaning services around the city. He stated that 
bids have been received for specialized equipment and trucks, but 
the prices are too high. He wants the Prime Minister to authorize 
the Amanat to purchase these items. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Haifa Street Association 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. A Haifa Street Association representative sought assistance and 
support from the committee to address several challenges. According 
to the representative, only 20% of current residents are legally 
residing in the 1,500+ apartments. The Association wants assistance 
in conducting a more thorough survey to determine who the other 80% 
are. Dr. Chalabi asked the BOC to send several officers to assist - 
the BOC agreed. The NSA representative said that the National 
Investigation Agency of the Ministry of Interior maintained a 
database of Haifa Street residents. As a result, Dr. Chalabi 
requested that the NSA get a copy of the database to compare the 
results of the Association's study with that database. Dr. Chalabi 
assigned a staff person from his committee and the BOC agreed to 
assign several officers to assist in the comparative research. 
 
¶10. Listing service problems, including limited electrical supply, 
no trash pick-up, fire hazards, potable water shortages and poor 
sewage treatment, the Association blamed much of this on the 
municipal office, a local branch of the Amanat. The Association 
claimed that Coalition Forces have provided a significant amount of 
funding to rehabilitate Haifa Street and entrusted much of that 
money to the municipal office. According to the Association 
representative, little improvements have been felt because there is 
a significant amount of corruption within the municipal office, 
stating that "the Municipal Council members started awarding 
contracts on their own, which resulted in a lot of negativities that 
have benefited no one except for the contractor and any of the 
Municipal Council members who have been collaborating with him." 
 
 
Crocker