08BAGHDAD600
KIRKUK PROVINCIAL COUNCIL CHAIR DESCRIBES ROLES AND
Sat Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO2144
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0600/01 0610733
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 010733Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5981
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV IZ
SUBJECT:   KIRKUK PROVINCIAL COUNCIL CHAIR DESCRIBES ROLES AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DISTRICT AND SUB-DISTRICT COUNCILS 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 586 
 
¶1.  This is a PRT Kirkuk cable. 
 
¶2.   (SBU) Summary: Chairman of the Kirkuk Provincial Council Rizgar 
Ali convened an information sharing session on February 17 with the 
district and sub-district councils of the predominantly Arab areas. 
Regarding the Provincial Powers Law (PPL), he said it would not take 
effect until after provincial elections but would provide the basis 
for clarifying the roles and responsibilities of local government 
bodies and positions.  The PPL will provide a legal basis for the 
conduct of local government, which has been lacking since the 
institution of the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL), in 
Rizgar's opinion.  Rizgar informed subordinate level council members 
on the sources of funds available to them and called on them to be 
more active in coordinating local affairs with line ministry 
officials, their own administrators and the Provincial Council (PC). 
 End summary. 
 
¶3.  (U) Chairman Rizgar Ali convened an information sharing session 
on Februray 17 with the district and sub-district councils of the 
predominately Arab areas of the Province to cover the status of the 
Law of Governorates Not Organized into a Region (colloquially known 
as the PPL), the financing sources for local government and how to 
access them, operating and maintenance expense budgeting for local 
councils, the requirement for and how to operate committees, 
coordination with the local offices of the Baghdad ministries and 
the Executive authorities, Councils' relationships with their 
constituents and media relations. 
 
¶4.  (U) Regarding the PPL, Rizgar said that it still needs to be 
signed by "The President and his two deputies," with no mention of 
the following step of the GOI publishing it in the Gazette.  It will 
be implemented after the next election but until then, the 
Governorates act of 1969 and CPA 71 will continue to provide the 
authorities of the local councils. 
 
¶5.  (U) Rizgar told the council members that the sources of funds 
available for local councils come from three sources:  the local 
(aka district) allocations of the Provincial project funding 
provided through the Provincial Council; the Ministries' budgets for 
their offices' operations in the province; and grants made by the 
GOI and international donors. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Mr. Rizgar, a PUK member and part of the Kirkuk 
Brotherhood List (KBL), upon seeing Mr. Rakan, the recently selected 
Arab Deputy Governor entering the chamber and attempting to take a 
seat on the floor, invited him to take a seat at the Chairman's 
bench at the front of the PC Chamber.  (Comment:  This is 
significant as KBL cooperation with Mr. Rakan, a key player in the 
"Arab Bloc" and well-connected Hawija district leader, is becoming 
increasingly public.  End comment.) 
 
¶7.  (U) Rizgar said that local councils should have effective 
committees with at least three members on each and they should 
coordinate with their PC counterpart committees.  They should 
coordinate horizontally with line-ministry officials and also with 
their appointed administrators (aka Mayors).  (Note:  The term 
"Mayor" is in common use for these positions, but "administrator" is 
more accurate in translation and official duties.  End note.)  Their 
local council chairs should attend the PC sessions.  They should 
also be available to their constituents, inviting them to local 
council sessions and also including NGOs, "notable people, and 
village representatives." 
 
¶8.  (U) Rizgar directed the councils to prepare operating and 
maintenance budgets based on funding becoming available in the near 
future.  Councils will be able to use these funds for procurement of 
vehicles and other equipment and for office supplies. 
 
¶9.  (U) Interspersed throughout the session, Rizgar addressed 
questions posed by attendees.  The district administrator of Abassi 
complained that district and sub-district officials were not 
involved in the strategic projects planning process and that 
population figures were not correct.  This error produced incorrect 
PC funds allocations.  The reservation of 25 percent of capital 
projects funds for internally displaced persons was also raised. 
Rizgar addressed the census issue by saying, "it is too difficult to 
hold a census now."  Another local council member complained that 
they lack the resources to perform their jobs and that local line 
ministry office directors do not cooperate with them.  Officials 
also asked for weapons carrying permits.  Rizgar responded that 
Coalition Forces (CF) had previously issued weapons permits but were 
no longer doing so and these were now a Ministry of Interior issue. 
He recommended that they coordinate with their local CF commander to 
gain permission for personal carry but this would work in their 
local areas only.  Rizgar also discussed privatizing the State Owned 
Enterprises, based on local resistance to this policy in evidence in 
the meeting.  Local council members called for increased PC 
visibility, including Rizgar visiting their areas. 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000600  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) In discussion with IPAO following the session, Rizgar 
confided that he intended to hold a similar session for the councils 
of the predominately Kurdish districts "next week."  (Note:  Those 
sessions were not scheduled at the time, IPAO confirmed immediately 
following the meeting.  End note.)  On the topic of the 
clarification of authorities, since he feels that the roles and 
responsibilities between Councils and Governors and lower level 
administrators (aka "Mayors") are not clear, Rizgar opined that if 
the PPL is ratified, it will provide a basis for clear legal 
guidance to the branches of Provincial and Local Government.  He 
stated, however, that the law would not go into effect until after 
elections and that it was likely that local gridlock would continue 
until then.  Per Rizgar, while some feel that the Governor's 
position was strengthened by the addition of the Prime Minister and 
COR in removing a Governor, he feels that it is just an additional 
mechanism and one that would be hard to use and that the Council's 
power will grow as part of the overall increase in standing of 
provincial government in general. 
 
¶11.  (U) Comment.  It has been difficult to pin down Rizgar's view 
on whether any relevant law existed granting powers to provincial 
and local governments, with CPA 71 given only lip service. 
Conversations with key advisors (reftel)indicate that the advice he 
has been getting is that there is no legal basis for Council action 
until the PPL is enacted, explaining much of the PC's caution to 
date.  As Rizgar has noted, since the PPL contains a provision that 
the law would not come into effect until after elections are held, 
when combined with the PPL's language calling for elections no later 
than October 1, 2008, local governance stagnation will continue 
until after a new council convenes.  End comment. 
 
CROCKER