08BAGHDAD2959
IRAQIS DESPERATE TO LEARN ENGLISH
Sun Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2959 2581020
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141020Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9391
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 1931UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD, ECA, RELO, NEA/I 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL IZ
SUBJECT:  IRAQIS DESPERATE TO LEARN ENGLISH 
 
1.Summary: Regional English Language Officer Rick 
Rosenberg conducted a workshop for English language 
teachers in Baghdad with participants from across 
Iraq on August 25-26. Countrywide participation 
showed the depth and intensity of the need for 
English language learning. Senior Iraqi officials 
attending the workshop want to work with us on a 
nation-wide plan for English language teaching and 
have stressed that they are not/not requesting US 
funding. End Summary. 
 
¶2. The two day workshop organized by the Cultural 
Affairs section and our PRT colleagues included 
participants from the Ministry of Education, the 
Ministry of Higher Education and secondary school 
and university instructors from Baghdad, Basrah, 
Irbil, Sulaymaniya, DhiQar, Mosul, Anbar, and 
Nasariyah.  Amman-based RELO Rick Rosenberg, in his 
first trip to Baghdad, engaged the teachers with 
student-centered learning strategies, insight into 
the worldwide English language teaching community 
and exposure to USG English teaching resources, both 
electronic and print. 
 
¶3. Thirty years of academic isolation has left Iraqi 
English teaching professionals starved for contact 
and resources. The level of English language ability 
is generally dismal. Lack of exposure to native 
speakers leaves Iraqis prone to reinforcing 
elementary errors. After only two days of exposure 
provided by the workshop, they showed evidence of 
increased fluency and confidence. The participants 
expressed unbounded enthusiasm and commitment to 
resurrecting English language learning. A Ministry 
of Education official arrived the second day 
declaring that he had been Qawake all night 
listening to the Teaching Jazz Chants to Young 
Learners CDQ provided by the RELO. Distribution of 
the DepartmentQs English Teaching Forum Magazine, 
Shaping the Way We Teach English and other 
publications was riotous. 
 
¶4. Addressing IraqQs tremendous English language 
needs is a top priority for Embassy Baghdad. Post 
has already nominated Iraqi teachers to participate 
in on-line E-teacher training and QShaping the Way 
We Teach EnglishQ training. Post will seek more such 
opportunities and encourage Iraqi teachers to 
partner on the training so we get double effect. 
Post will bring English language professionals for 
more workshops. We are working with Iraqi teachers 
of English to develop professional associations and 
to connect them with the US-based TESOL community. 
Post is distributing publications such as FORUM and 
other USG produced English language materials via 
the PRTs. We are also working with the Ministry of 
Education and the Ministry of Higher Education on 
partnerships to support English learning. We are 
approaching the GOI to broadcast English language 
learning materials on television. 
 
¶5. Action Request: One of the conference 
participants was a returned Fulbright Language 
Teaching Assistantship (FLTA) alumna, and she 
mesmerized the conference with tales of her 
Fulbright experience and how she has used the 
experience in her teaching at the University of 
Baghdad. We believe there is a pool of excellent, 
qualified candidates in Iraq for the FLTA. Embassy 
Baghdad was dropped from the program last year 
without explanation. Post requests immediate 
reinstatement of Iraq in the Fulbright Language 
Teaching Assistantship Program (FLTA). 
 
¶6. Action Request: The Public Affairs section has 
already recruited one 3161 English Teaching 
specialist to focus on English teaching programs in 
Baghdad, and we are in the process of recruiting a 
second, who will concentrate on liaison with the 
PRTQs and English teachers outside of the capital. 
RELO RosenbergQs assistance in this workshop was so 
outstanding that we look forward to engaging his 
expertise at an early date to orient and train our 
new staff. 
CROCKER