08BEIJING3109
AUGUST 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BUSH VISIT, DRUM TOWER
Wed Aug 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9474
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3109/01 2261137
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131137Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9162
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2134
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI 0099
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9070
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6721UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 003109 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY PHUM CH KN JA GG RS PK
SUBJECT: AUGUST 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BUSH VISIT, DRUM TOWER 
ATTACK, PROTESTS, PRESS FREEDOM, XINJIANG, SOUTH OSSETIA 
 
¶1.  Key points at the August 13 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- Asked to provide a reaction to President Bush's comments 
regarding religious freedom, the spokesman said that the Chinese 
government safeguards the rights of its citizens, including 
religious freedom. 
 
-- China expressed its condolences to the families of U.S. citizens 
attacked at the Beijing Drum Tower and is currently carrying out an 
investigation of the incident. 
 
-- The spokesman did not have any specific figures regarding the 
number of applications received to protest in Beijing "protest 
parks." 
 
-- Regarding press freedom, local officials are trying to make the 
environment better for journalists to report, but journalists still 
need to "respect Chinese laws and law enforcement authorities." 
 
-- All 56 ethnicities in China, including Uighurs, enjoy their 
rights as citizens as guaranteed by law.  The relevant authorities 
in Xinjiang will crack down on the handful of forces trying to 
"create a rift between Han Chinese and ethnic minorities." 
 
-- China is closely following developments in South Ossetia and 
hopes that the relevant parties begin a dialogue to "properly 
resolve their dispute peacefully." 
 
 
President Bush's Visit to China 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Asked to provide the Chinese reaction to President Bush's 
comments regarding religious freedom, MFA Spokesman Qin Gang said 
the Chinese government puts its "people first" and safeguards the 
rights of its citizens, including religious freedom.  While there 
are differences between the United States and China regarding human 
rights and religious freedom, both sides are involved in dialogue to 
enhance mutual understanding of the issue. 
 
Attack Against US Citizens at the Drum Tower 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked what steps the Chinese government is taking regarding the 
attack against U.S. citizens at the Beijing Drum Tower, Qin said 
that China attaches great importance to the case and took immediate 
measures to rescue the wounded.  China has provided information to 
the U.S. Embassy and local police are currently carrying out an 
investigation.  Qin expressed condolences to the families of the 
victims and said the case will be handled according to the rule of 
law. 
 
Protest Parks 
------------- 
 
¶4. Asked to provide the exact number of people who have applied to 
protest in any of the three "protest parks" in Beijing, Qin said he 
does not have specific information or figures.  Pressed to explain 
why at least three people have been detained after applying to 
protest, Qin said that China is a country under the rule of law and 
if one wants to demonstrate, they will have to go through the legal 
procedures to do so.  People seeking to demonstrate must first "gain 
approval from the relevant authorities." 
 
Revoked Visa for Former U.S. Olympian Joey Cheek 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5. Asked to comment on Joey Cheek's recent visa revocation, Qin said 
that the authorization of visas is a "sovereign affair" of 
individual countries.  Chinese visas are granted according to the 
relevant laws and regulations.  China has made the appropriate 
arrangements to provide a safe and convenient environment for 
tourists coming to China.  Pressed to explain whether China sees 
Cheek as a "threat to a safe and convenient environment," Qin said 
that the relevant authorities follow specific regulations to approve 
visa applications. 
 
Press Freedom 
------------- 
 
¶6. Asked to comment on reports that local police have hindered 
journalists from reporting on the recent bombings in Xinjiang, 
particularly the reports of three Japanese journalists detained on 
Sunday, Qin said that the Chinese government has "adopted a positive 
attitude" toward journalists working in China.  Regarding the 
Japanese journalists, Qin said they are concerned about the case and 
have contacted local officials.  He asked for understanding from the 
journalists regarding the situation in Xinjiang.  On the one hand, 
 
BEIJING 00003109  002 OF 003 
 
 
he said, local officials are "trying to make a better environment 
for your reporting" and on the other hand, "we hope while you are 
reporting you could respect Chinese laws and law enforcement 
authorities."  Asked to explain why journalists are also having 
problems reporting freely in Beijing, Qin said that if journalists 
have encountered some problems or difficulties, the government is 
willing to help, but hopes that foreign correspondents follow and 
respect Chinese laws and regulations. 
 
Demonstration near Olympic Village 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Asked to confirm whether a U.S. group held a demonstration 
earlier today near the Olympic Village, Qin said he heard that 
several foreigners held demonstrations this morning and relevant 
authorities were handling the case.  He reiterated that Chinese 
citizens and foreigners need to abide by Chinese laws and 
regulations regarding demonstrations and processions. 
 
Chinese Dissidents Under House Arrest 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked to explain why Chinese citizens with no history of violence 
have been placed under house arrest, Qin stated that the Chinese 
constitution guarantees Chinese citizens freedom, including free 
speech.  All Chinese citizens enjoy their rights and freedoms 
according to the law.  "No one is persecuted or under house arrest 
because of their speech," he said, "only those that break the law 
will be punished."  When pressed to explain which laws the 
dissidents had violated, he said that China ha "over 300 laws and 
regulations" and suggested that the journalist "read the relevant 
laws and regulations." 
 
Activists Allege Cultural Genocide in Xinjiang 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶9. Asked to comment on allegations by activist groups that China is 
committing cultural genocide in Xinjiang Province, Qin stated that 
the allegations are not in line with the facts and are unacceptable. 
 56 ethnicities are represented in China and all Chinese citizens, 
including Uighurs, enjoy rights as guaranteed by law.  An 
overwhelming majority of people in Xinjiang "support national 
unification" and do not support "terrorism, extremism and 
separatism."  A small handful of forces are trying to vilify China 
and "create a rift between Han Chinese and ethnic minorities;" the 
relevant authorities will crack down on these forces to safeguard 
national and social stability in Xinjiang. 
 
East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM) 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked what specific threat the ETIM poses to China, Qin noted 
that East Turkestan forces have recently perpetrated a series of 
terrorist attacks, which have resulted in "great losses and property 
losses."  The local police will crack down on these forces, and 
safeguard stability in Xinjiang.  Asked whether the recent terrorist 
attacks are linked to ETIM, Qin said there is some evidence that 
there "might be" a connection between the attacks and ETIM. 
Relevant forces are investigating these links and details will be 
released at a later date. 
 
Dalai Lama 
---------- 
 
¶11. Asked for the Chinese position on the Dalai Lama's recent offer 
to relinquish the demand for political autonomy in return for some 
concessions from the Chinese government, Qin stated that the Chinese 
policy on Tibet-related issues is clear and persistent.  He noted 
that people "should not only see what he [the Dalai Lama] said, but 
see what he has done." 
 
South Ossetia 
------------- 
 
¶12. Asked whether China will support a UN Security Council 
resolution calling for all parties in the South Ossetia conflict to 
cooperate, Qin stated that the Chinese government is closely 
following the developments in South Ossetia and hopes that the 
relevant parties begin a dialogue to "properly resolve their dispute 
peacefully" to restore peace and stability.  Asked whether security 
had been stepped up at the Russian Embassy in Beijing after Georgian 
citizens held a protest there on August 11, Qin said that once the 
MFA received word that the protest was underway, they took measures 
to "guarantee the safety of the Embassy area" and persuaded the 
Georgian citizens to disperse. 
 
Meeting Between the DPRK and Japan 
---------------------------------- 
 
BEIJING 00003109  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶13. Asked to comment on a recent meeting between representatives of 
the DPRK and Japan in Shenyang, Qin said that the Chinese government 
had taken note of the meeting and welcomes the progress made in the 
dialogue between the DPRK and Japan.  China supports continued 
consultation through bilateral and multilateral dialogue to 
implement the second phase of the Six-Party Talks. 
 
Poisoned Dumplings in China 
--------------------------- 
 
¶14.  Asked to comment on reports that a poisoned dumpling case took 
place in China in mid-June, Qin confirmed that this was the case and 
that the Chinese government and public security officials are 
currently investigating the incident.  Until the facts are 
collected, we "should not jump to any conclusions," he said.  He 
hoped that Chinese consumers would view the case in a calm and 
objective manner and noted that China and Japan have reached a 
consensus and will work together on the investigation. 
 
Musharraf Impeachment 
--------------------- 
 
¶15. Asked to comment on the Chinese position regarding the 
impeachment of Pakistani President Musharraf, Qin said he hoped the 
situation in Pakistan would remain stable and said he supported the 
efforts of the Pakistani Government and its people to safeguard 
national stability and development. 
 
U.S. Citizen Attacks Chinese Taxi Driver? 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶16. Asked to comment on reports that a U.S. tourist attacked a 
Beijing taxi driver this morning, Qin said he had heard the report 
that a foreign visitor, "maybe American," had beaten up a Chinese 
taxi driver.  He noted that this should be taken as an individual 
case and should not be connected to any conflict between the Chinese 
people and foreigners.  The Public Security Bureau will handle the 
case properly according to the rule of law. 
 
Foreign Leaders at the Olympic Opening Ceremony 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶17. Asked how many foreign leaders were in attendance at the Olympic 
Opening Ceremony, Qin said that altogether 84 accredited 
international dignitaries attended the event: 54 Heads of State; 16 
Heads of Government; 9 High Representatives; 1 Regional Leader; and 
4 First Ladies. 
 
 
RANDT