08BEIJING3729
SEPTEMBER 25 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHAVEZ VISIT, MILK
Thu Sep 25 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1375
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3729/01 2691032
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251032Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0132
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0250
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0952
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2236
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9121UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003729 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ENRG EAGR PHUM TSPA CH VE KN JP
 
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 25 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHAVEZ VISIT, MILK 
SCANDAL, NORTH KOREA NUCLEAR ISSUE, HU JIA, SHENZHOU 7 
 
¶1.  Key points at the September 25 afternoon MFA press briefing 
were: 
 
-- China did not discuss military cooperation with President Chavez 
during his recent visit, despite claims by Chavez that such 
cooperation was discussed.  The two sides signed energy and trade 
agreements during the visit. 
 
-- The spokesperson acknowledged that there are "difficulties" to 
overcome in the Six-Party process in light of the DPRK's recent 
moves to restart its nuclear program. 
 
-- The spokesperson said he was not familiar with reports that 
activist Hu Jia could be under consideration for the Nobel Peace 
Prize, but expressed his hope that the Nobel committee would make 
the "right" choice. 
 
-- China wants to work with food safety authorities of countries 
that have concerns about the safety of Chinese food products. 
 
-- The purpose of China's space program is exploration and 
development of the peaceful use of outer space. 
 
Chavez Visit 
------------ 
 
¶2. At the September 25 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson Liu 
Jianchao said Chinese officials exchanged views on political, 
economic and cultural issues with Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez 
during his September 23-25 trip to Beijing.  Asked if the two sides 
discussed military trade and cooperation, Liu said he "had not heard 
that they had."  Asked to clarify the statement by President Chavez 
that he had discussed "military cooperation" during the visit, Liu 
said flatly that the two sides did not discuss military cooperation. 
 Liu said that China and Venezuela signed twelve agreements on 
trade, energy cooperation, and other topics, but declined to offer 
details of the agreements.  He said that the agreements will promote 
mutually beneficial cooperation between the two sides and he 
expressed hope that the "steady" development of China-Venezuela 
relations would continue.  On the possibility that Russian warships 
could travel to Venezuela for military exercises, Liu said that it 
was an issue between Russia and Venezuela, and China had no 
comment. 
 
DPRK Resumption of Nuclear Program 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked if China has a position on the resumption of the North 
Korean nuclear program, Liu said that there had been "important 
progress" on the nuclear issue and there is now an "opportunity" for 
additional progress.  He acknowledged that there are "difficulties" 
to overcome, and urged flexibility from relevant parties to complete 
Phase II.  When pressed on whether the situation had reached the 
point that energy assistance to the DPRK should be postponed, Liu 
said he had not heard of any delay of assistance.  He added that 
China hopes that issues such as verification can be solved to allow 
for further progress. 
 
Hu Jia/Nobel Peace Prize 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. Asked if China had a comment on reports that activist Hu Jia was 
under consideration for the Nobel Peace Prize, Liu said he was not 
familiar with the reports, but stressed that the Nobel Prize should 
be awarded to the "right" individuals, and expressed his hope that 
the Nobel committee would make the "right" choice. 
 
Tainted Milk/Food Safety 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. Liu said that China is handling the situation of melamine-tainted 
dairy products "carefully."  Asked if the government would take over 
the Sanlu Company, Liu said that questions on "specific measures" 
should be referred to the competent authorities.  Asked whether 
China is considering a national recall of some food products due to 
possible melamine contamination, as some countries that import 
Chinese food products are ordering, Liu said that China wants to 
work with food safety authorities of countries that have concerns 
about the safety of Chinese food products in a "realistic" way.  He 
said China continues to take a responsible attitude toward food 
safety.  Asked for comment on reports that high-level government 
officials enjoy food sourced from special, organic farms to ensure 
its safety, Liu said only that he "doubts this information." 
 
¶6. Asked by a Japanese journalist for an update on the investigation 
into tainted dumplings that were exported to Japan, Liu said there 
was no new information on the case. 
 
BEIJING 00003729  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Shenzhou 7 
---------- 
 
¶7. Asked about the upcoming launch of the Shenzhou 7 space mission, 
Liu said China seeks the peaceful use of outer space, and that the 
ultimate purpose of China's space program is exploration and the 
development of space technology for peaceful purposes. 
 
RANDT