08BEIJING4509
DECEMBER 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, TORTURE IN
Thu Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4227
OO RUEHAG RUEHCN RUEHDF RUEHGH RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4509/01 3462334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 112334Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1338
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004509 
 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PARM PHUM ECON EFIN EAIR CH FR PL JA KS
 
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, TORTURE IN 
TIBET, SAKHAROV PRIZE, CENTRAL ECONOMIC WORK CONFERENCE, SINO-FRENCH 
RELATIONS, SINO-POLISH RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Key points at the December 11 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The Six-Party Talks Heads of Delegation (HOD) meeting is still 
ongoing, as the parties are "discussing and deciding" formalities in 
bilateral sessions as well as plenary sessions. 
 
-- China has "taken note" of a recent Free Tibet report claiming 
that the use of torture by Chinese authorities is widespread in 
Tibet, but questions the credibility of the report. 
 
-- MFA spokesman Liu Jianchao said it is "ironic" that a "criminal" 
such as Hu Jia is being given a human rights award. 
 
-- China hopes that the "initiatives and arrangements" developed 
during the Central Economic Work Conference meetings earlier this 
week, as well as the stimulus package, will counter the effects of 
the current economic crisis and quell social unrest. 
 
-- China claims that reports of a cyber attack on the website of the 
French Embassy are speculative. 
 
-- Liu said that French President Sarkozy's comments that his 
meeting with the Dalai Lama was not meant to harm Sino-French 
relations is "not valid" and that it "won't solve current 
difficulties" between France and China. 
 
-- After expressing its "strong dissatisfaction" with the meeting 
between Polish President Lech Kaczynski and the Dalai Lama, China 
urges Poland to "do nothing to harm Sino-Polish relations." 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. The Six-Party Talks Heads of Delegation (HOD) meeting is still 
ongoing, announced MFA spokesman Liu Jianchao at the December 11 MFA 
press briefing.  He added that the parties are "discussing and 
deciding" formalities in bilateral sessions as well as plenary 
sessions.  The conclusion of the talks, he noted, will be a 
"political decision" made by the parties.  He said China is 
appreciative of the "arduous efforts" of the parties, and hopes that 
these talks will "expand consensus for positive results." 
 
Detention of Charter 08 signatory 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. When asked to elaborate on the detention of Liu Xiaobo, a human 
rights activist and signatory of Charter 08, Liu said that he was 
"not in a position to answer" the question, but that he expects the 
matter to be "handled in accordance with the law." 
 
Torture in Tibet 
---------------- 
 
¶4. Liu said he had "taken note" of a recent Free Tibet report 
claiming that the use of torture by Chinese authorities is 
widespread in Tibet, but that he is "not aware" of the organization 
that published the report, nor is he certain of the credibility of 
their sources.  He said that if there is concrete evidence to prove 
the report's allegations, China "will investigate."  Otherwise, he 
added that China considers torture an "infringement of human rights" 
and is "resolutely against torture" as a matter of policy. 
 
Sakharov Prize 
-------------- 
 
¶5. When asked about whether or not China will allow activist Hu 
Jia's wife to travel to Europe next week to accept the Sakharov 
Prize awarded to her husband by the European Parliament, Liu 
emphasized that the award is being presented despite China's 
opposition to it.  He added that it is "ironic" that a "criminal" is 
being given a human rights award. 
 
Economic Crisis and Social Unrest 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6. All countries are affected by the global financial crisis, said 
Liu, including China.  China hopes that its recently announced 
stimulus package will promote "smooth and rapid" economic 
development, and that there will not be social unrest.  Liu added 
that the Central Economic Work Conference meetings earlier this week 
announced "initiatives and arrangements" for the coming year, and 
that China "hopes this will work" to counter the effects of the 
current economic crisis.  As for the Government's call to urge 
Chinese airlines to cancel or postpone aircraft scheduled for 
delivery in 2009, Liu provided no substantive explanation but said 
that he expects the matter to "proceed smoothly." 
 
Cyber Attack on French Embassy Website 
 
BEIJING 00004509  002 OF 002 
 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. China has taken note that there reportedly was a cyber attack on 
the website of the French Embassy, said Liu.  Liu added that this 
was most likely speculation, however, and that no "questions or 
concerns" had been raised by the French.  He stressed that China is 
"against hacking" and that similar reports in the future should be 
based on "solid proof" and refrain from "targeting China." 
 
Sarkozy's Statement "Not Valid" 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8. As for French President Sarkozy's comments that his meeting with 
the Dalai Lama was not meant to harm Sino-French relations, Liu said 
that this statement is "not valid" and that it "won't solve current 
difficulties" between the two countries.  He emphasized that France 
is "well-aware of the severity" of the situation, and that China 
expects it to "take concrete measures for the healthy development of 
Sino-French relations." 
 
Dalai Lama and Polish President 
------------------------------- 
 
¶9. Liu said that China expressed its "strong dissatisfaction" with 
the meeting between Polish President Lech Kaczynski and the Dalai 
Lama, which took place on December 10 in Warsaw, and urges Poland to 
"do nothing to harm Sino-Polish relations." 
 
China-Japan-ROK Leaders' Meeting 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10. China "attaches importance" to cooperation with Japan and the 
Republic of Korea (ROK) in "economic, financial, cultural, 
investment and personnel" realms, said Liu.  He noted that the 
upcoming China-Japan-ROK Leaders' Meeting is of "important 
significance" due to the financial crisis.  As for the first-ever 
China-ROK strategic dialogue currently in progress, involving Vice 
Foreign Minister Wang Guangya, Liu had no specific information to 
pass on but said that this meeting, as well as the China-Japan-ROK 
Leader's Meeting, is important for "East Asian cooperation and peace 
and development." 
 
 
PICCUTA