08BEIRUT889
LEBANON: ELECTORAL REFORM NEEDED NOW, POLITICIANS
Fri Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO8552
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHLB #0889/01 1651124
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131124Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2255
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 2508
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 2808
RHMFISS/USCENTCOM SPECIAL HANDLING MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIRUT 000889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DRL/FO, NEA/FO, NEA/ELA, NEA/PI 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/SINGH/YERGER/GAVITO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID KDEM LE PGOV PHUM
SUBJECT: LEBANON: ELECTORAL REFORM NEEDED NOW, POLITICIANS 
AND CIVIL SOCIETY SAY 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Lebanese politicians and civil society 
representatives came together for the first time to discuss 
their support for electoral reform in Lebanon at a June 11 
conference cosponsored by the GOL and UNDP.  Caretaker 
Justice Minister Charles Rizk read remarks from President 
Michel Sleiman, in which Sleiman called for a number of key 
reforms to be voted on and adopted by parliament.  Most 
participants agreed that work needed to begin immediately if 
the reforms were to be launched before the spring 2009 
parliamentary elections.  Given the short lead time, however, 
expectations are low that an independent electoral commission 
would be in place within the next 12 months.  Many attendees 
also felt that the Doha Agreement had a negative impact on 
the prospects for proposed reforms such as a female candidacy 
quota, extending the right to vote to include Lebanese 
emigrants, and improving access for those with disabilities 
before next year's planned election.   End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) The Charge, accompanied by Poloff and Polstaff, 
attended the June 11 National Conference on Electoral Reform 
hosted by the UN Development Program, the Civil Campaign for 
Electoral Reform, and the GOL's National Commission on the 
Electoral Law (NCEL).  The event, held at the Phoenicia 
Hotel, was informative and attended by a number of Lebanese 
parliamentarians, caretaker cabinet, and civil society 
representatives. 
 
PRESIDENT SUPPORTS 
ELECTORAL REFORM 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) Caretaker Justice Minister Charles Rizk opened the 
conference by reading a speech from President Michel Sleiman. 
 (Note: Rizk noted to CDA that although he had penned the 
address, Sleiman had approved "every word."  End Note.) 
Rizk's speech affirmed many of the same themes outlined in 
Sleiman's May 25 inaugural speech, in which the President had 
called for the adoption of an electoral law that "provides a 
sound basis for representation, strengthens the relationship 
between voter and representative, and ensures the achievement 
of the people's choices and expectations." 
 
¶4.  (U) In the June 11 address, Rizk called for "electoral 
reforms that would ultimately help to secure the election of 
a political majority that is able to rule and is confronted 
by an elected minority in accordance with what is adopted in 
all the democratic countries, and the representation of all 
religious sects according to a distribution that is specified 
in advance by law."  Rizk,s speech praised the work of the 
National Commission on Electoral Law (which developed most of 
the reforms outlined in the draft electoral law submitted to 
the GOL before the July 2006 war) and he affirmed his support 
for the reforms.  Most notable among the proposed reforms is 
allowing Lebanese residing abroad to participate in the 
election process, setting a minimum quota for participation 
by women in party lists of candidates, controlling campaign 
expenditures, forming an independent body to supervise the 
election operation, and lowering the voting age to 18. 
 
NECESSITIES FOR 
SUCCESSFUL 2009 ELECTIONS 
------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Dr. Ziyad Baroud, a member of the NCEL, said that the 
reforms outlined by Rizk and proposed by the NCEL would need 
to be adopted now so that preparations could begin for the 
2009 parliamentary elections.  Most importantly, this 
includes the establishment of an Independent Electoral 
Commission that would prepare for the election cycle and 
would be charged with preparing for, administering, and 
supervising parliamentary elections.  Baroud argued that even 
without the establishment of the independent commission 
(which some politicians argue can only be established through 
a constitutional amendment), the GOL still needs to begin 
preparing for next year's elections immediately. 
 
¶6.  (U) He said the selection process for election monitors 
from the civil society community should begin as soon as 
 
BEIRUT 00000889  002 OF 003 
 
 
possible, as well as the selection and training of polling 
station workers.  A pre-printed ballot with the names and 
photos of candidates is another of the commission's 
suggestions.  Each candidate and campaign should have equal 
access to the media and the electoral process should take 
place on one day, as opposed to the two to three week period 
in which elections typically occur (Note:  Each district 
typically schedules elections on different Sundays over a 
two-three week period.  End Note.) 
 
¶7.  (U) Automation of electoral machines and transparency in 
polling stations are also a must, according to Baroud.  He 
added that parliament has to vote on all of these reforms, 
and that it will also have to provide a budget to be used for 
training and purchasing new equipment to be used at polling 
stations. 
 
DOHA AGREEMENT CHALLENGES 
ELECTORAL REFORM 
------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) Antoine Haddad, a member of the Democratic Renewal 
Movement (part of the pro-government March 14 bloc), noted in 
his address that because the Doha Agreement specified the 
adoption of the small-district system, the issue of 
redistricting for this election has effectively been killed. 
(Note: One of the NCEL's primary goals was to redistrict 
Lebanon based on a system whereby 77 of the 128 parliamentary 
seats would be selected through the small district system, or 
"qada," and the 51 remaining seats would be chosen by way of 
the large district-proportional system, or "muhafazt."  End 
Note.)  Therefore, in a district with a majority Shia 
population, the voters would most likely be voting for March 
8-Aoun bloc candidates, and in predominantly Sunni qadas, 
voters would most likely be voting for March 14 candidates, 
Haddad believed. 
 
¶9.  (U) The competition will be greatest in predominantly 
Christian areas (and some Druze areas as well) where the 
electorate may be equally split between those who support 
either March 14 candidates or candidates of the March 8-Aoun 
opposition, Haddad explained.  He argued that it is these 
districts that will decide the outcome of the upcoming 
parliamentary elections.  Therefore, the reforms, if adopted, 
may only have an impact in improving the voting process in 
these areas. 
 
HIZBALLAH SAYS IT,S TOO 
LATE FOR ELECTORAL REFORM 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶10. (U) Dr. Ali Fayyad, President of the Consultation Center 
for Studies and Documentation (and a member of Hizballah,s 
Central Council), said the issue of electoral reform should 
be taken up after the 2009 parliamentary elections occur. 
Fayyad argued that the Doha Agreement made it impossible to 
enact a number of the keys reforms.  Only after the current 
political crises ends would there be an opportunity for real 
electoral reform, he argued. 
 
¶11. (U) Fayyad criticized the current proposals for the 
establishment of the Independent Electoral Commission, saying 
that the proposed ten-person staff, comprised of only one 
full-time director, would not be enough and that a much 
larger staff is needed.  He also believed that a 
constitutional amendment would be needed for the independent 
commission,s creation.  Fayyad said that civil society 
organizations have a right to monitor elections and re-check 
election results but the NCEL did not define the 
justifications that such organizations would need to make in 
order to review the results.  As it relates to the issue of 
media regulations, Fayyad said the draft law proposed by the 
NCEL only deals with electronic media, but that print media 
is exempt from the regulations. 
 
WOMEN'S QUOTA ALSO 
HURT BY DOHA AGREEMENT 
---------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) One of the original reforms espoused by the NCEL was 
a requirement that there by a 30 percent female quota for all 
 
BEIRUT 00000889  003 OF 003 
 
 
party lists.  (Note:  Lists are part of the proportional 
system.  End Note.)  Since the proportional system was not 
included in the Doha Agreement, it will be difficult for 
female politicians to run for direct election under the qada 
framework, according to Dr. Arda Ekmekji, a NCEL member (and 
only woman to sit on the 12 person commission).  Women in the 
audience also argued that female politicians would not have 
the same means to finance their individual campaigns against 
better financed male competitors. 
 
¶13. (U) Dr. Fahmiah Charafeddine, vice-president for the 
Committee on Women's Issues, also argued that there need to 
be female election monitors and polling station workers to 
check IDs and faces of veiled female voters for transparency. 
 The women in the audience also pointed out that no women 
participated in the Doha talks and argued the Doha Agreement 
did not take female voters into consideration. 
 
EXPANDING PARTICIPATION 
IS KEY 
----------------------- 
 
¶14. (U) Ms. Guitta Hourani, Director of the Notre Dame 
University's Lebanese Emigration Research Center, noted that 
Lebanese emigrants also need to be allowed to participate in 
next year's election.  Lebanese emigrants help to increase 
trade and investment in Lebanon, and have provided over $6 
billion dollars in remittances, according to Hourani.  She 
noted that this $6 billion is taxed by the GOL when it enters 
Lebanon; therefore, if Lebanese emigrants are being taxed by 
the GOL from abroad they should be allowed to vote while 
abroad. 
 
¶15. (U) Expanding the electorate to include Lebanese 
emigrants will also require funding by parliament in order to 
give Lebanese emigrants the tools to vote from abroad. 
Expanding participation is the most important aspect, Hourani 
argued.  The independent commission, if established, or the 
Ministry ofInterior, should work with the Ministry of 
Forein Affairs to have Lebanese consulates and embassies 
abroad facilitate voting for emigrants. 
 
¶16. (U) Ms. Sylvana Lakkis, President of the Handicapped 
Association, argued that many people are unable to 
participate due to the inability to gain access to polling 
stations, the majority of which are not 
handicapped-accessible.  In addition, many elderly Lebanese 
voters are unable to acquire transportation to polling 
stations. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶17. (U) The conference identified a number of key reforms 
that are in theory supported by key players, including 
Lebanon's President, parliamentarians, and civil society. 
However, the GOL will have to begin now if it wants to have a 
real opportunity to improve the electoral process in time for 
next year's parliamentary elections.  Given the fact that 
political leaders are still focused on the formation of a 
national unity cabinet and all parties will be seeking to 
gain advantages for the 2009 elections, it will not be easy 
to promote all of the reforms cited in the conference.  End 
Comment. 
SISON