08BEIRUT359
LEBANON: ADVANCING FREEDOM AND DEMOCRACY REPORT
Mon Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO0564
OO RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHLB #0359/01 0701533
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101533Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1254
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIRUT 000359 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR ABRAMS/SINGH/YERGER/GAVITO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB KDEM PGOV PHUM PREL
SUBJECT: LEBANON: ADVANCING FREEDOM AND DEMOCRACY REPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 3738 
 
Introduction 
------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Lebanon's democratic traditions go back at least to 
its initial elections in 1854, under Ottoman 
Empire rule.  The key landmarks in Lebanon's democratic 
history are the 1924 Constitution, the National Pact of 1940, 
and the 1989 Ta'if Accord.  Throughout Lebanon's history 
democratic initiatives have been challenged and the 
challenges 
continue in this present day.  Lebanon has had no president 
since the 
term of the former president ended in November 2007.  The 
Speaker of 
the parliament has canceled parliamentary sessions intended 
to elect 
a president sixteen times in recent months.  The political 
impasse in Lebanon is deepening, despite international 
efforts 
to mediate a solution.  What is at stake in this election are 
two competing visions:  one envisioning a free, independent, 
and sovereign country; the other a Lebanon under the de facto 
hegemony of Syria.  The pro-government March 14 majority, 
which the USG supports, 
feels under severe threat, with its Members of Parliament 
taking extraordinary security precautions after the 
assassinations of several of their colleagues. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Beyond the current presidential vacuum, Lebanon 
faces a number 
of long-term challenges which affect its ability to move 
forward on various democratic issues.  Among these are the 
still strong remains of a post-feudal social and political 
structure, an economy suffering the effects of the 2006 war 
between Hizballah and Israel, lack of political stability, 
weak 
governmental institutions, the political and military 
strength of Hizballah, the residual influence of the former 
Syrian occupiers, and the absence of a national consensus on 
what type of democracy Lebanon should embrace.  Optimism was 
high in spring 2005 when the Syrians withdrew from Lebanon. 
Unfortunately, the series of political assassinations since 
then, 
the Hizballah-Israeli war and the current 
boycott of the government by pro-Syrian forces has shaken the 
confidence of many 
citizens. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Thus, Lebanon has a clear need for stronger, better 
functioning democratic institutions. 
In addition, though, there are a number of 
positive factors which make Lebanon an ideal location for USG 
democracy-building activity.  Lebanese society is highly 
educated with a vibrant press.  Although many young people 
have emigrated to build secure futures, they would prefer to 
stay in Lebanon if conditions became more favorable. 
Finally, we have seen civil society groups, supported by 
international donors, begin to take hold over the last few 
years.  Certainly, a great deal of work remains, but 
the foundations for improved democratic functions are being 
laid. 
 
Mission Priorities to Promote Democracy 
---------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The primaryaim of our Mission's democratization 
programs 
s to promote Lebanon's sovereignty and stability. 
Three key focus areas for our work include: 
 
-- a new electoral law; 
 
-- competent, effective, and transparent government 
institutions; and 
 
-- an independent judiciary. 
 
Specific USG Programs in Lebanon in Support of Democracy 
Priority Areas 
------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) ELECTORAL REFORM 
Our overall goal here is to help Lebanon 
hold free and fair parliamentary elections which reflect the 
independent 
will of the people.  The Mission has formed an Electoral 
 
BEIRUT 00000359  002 OF 003 
 
 
Reform 
Working Group which meets brings together USG representatives 
with local NGOs and implementing partners.  The Embassy also 
coordinates with international donors as we help build 
Lebanese 
capacity to hold free and fair elections in accordance with 
international electoral standards.  The current political 
stalemate which began with the opposition's November 2006 
withdrawal from the Cabinet and the action by the parliament 
Speaker, a leader of the political opposition, to keep the 
Parliament from 
meeting has greatly hampered efforts to reform the current 
electoral 
law.  Our support to local NGOs has been credited with 
"keeping the issue alive."  In 2008-2009, the Mission will 
focus 
on the spring 2009 parliamentary election.  A new electoral 
law 
accepted by all parties will help grant legitimacy to this 
election and enhance stability in the country. 
 
¶6. (SBU) STRENGTHENING GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS 
All USG funds 
are coordinated by the Mission to strengthen Lebanese 
sovereignty by bolstering the democratic governing 
institutions and improving transparency and accountability. 
More effective institutions will repel Syrian 
influence and decrease Hizballah's authority and influence. 
Embassy Beirut also plans to improve Lebanese citizens' 
ability to 
participate in decision-making processes.  While current 
political events have hampered our ability to work with 
certain national institutions, the Mission has placed a 
renewed 
focus on finding opportunities to strengthen municipal 
governments throughout Lebanon.  The Lebanese constitution 
mandates that certain government institutions be led by 
persons from specific groups.  For example, the president 
should be a Maronite Christian, the prime minister a 
Sunni Muslim and the speaker of the Parliament a Shia Muslim. 
 
However, demographic changes have occurred over time and 
the strict focus on confessional make-up has led to many of 
the current problems plaguing Lebanese government 
institutions. 
USG-funded initiatives offer support to civil society 
organizations that promote enhancing cross-confessional 
proposals throughout Lebanese society and within government 
institutions. In the coming two years, we will support the 
work of 
cross-confessional civil society groups, including 
non-extremist Shia and Sunni groups throughout Lebanon. 
Embassy 
Beirut will also work to improve the professionalism of 
various 
government employees and support the idea that employees 
should be hired based on merit, not confessional ties or 
personal connections.  A new USD 60 million program launched 
in 2007 also provides training and support to the Internal 
Security Forces (Lebanon's national police force) to 
enhance professionalism in that institution. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY 
After decades of Syrian control, the Lebanese judiciary has 
not improved over the 
last two years and remains in disrepute.  With USG technical 
support, laws are drafted according to international 
standards and more judicial officials have been trained 
by professionals from the U.S. and other donor 
countries.  Problems remain, however; for example, money 
and influence still derail the Lebanese judicial process; 
judicial decisions are not transparent; and, the appeals 
system fails to address the public's needs.  Lebanese 
citizens lack faith in their own court system.  USG-funded 
initiatives will focus on improving these conditions.  This 
likely is a long-term project which will need continued 
financial support from the USG. 
 
¶8. (SBU) OTHER INITIATIVES 
The Mission is also involved in supervising USG grants which 
seek to improve the plight of 
trafficking victims and to monitor labor practices, 
particularly to stop 
any forms of child labor.  The Mission also coordinates 
various programs aimed at improving 
the economic and political status of women.  Finally, the 
Mission has launched a USD 5 million program 
which seeks to improve anti-corruption practices, promote 
 
BEIRUT 00000359  003 OF 003 
 
 
freedom of the press and strengthen NGOs. 
SISON