08BEIJING1662
APRIL 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Torch Relay, Dalai Lama,
Tue Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0620
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1662/01 1201142
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291142Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6965
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY PTER CH KS KN JA PK GM BB
SUBJECT: APRIL 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Torch Relay, Dalai Lama, 
Indonesia Kidnapping, Hu Japan Visit, Visa Policy, Olympics, DPRK FM 
Visit, Other 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 29 MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- Chinese students who attended the torch relay in Seoul intended 
to defend the dignity of the torch. 
 
-- China's willingness to meet with the Dalai Lama's representatives 
shows China's "consistent policy" and "forgiveness." 
 
-- Seven Chinese citizens were kidnapped in Indonesia and one has 
been released. 
 
-- President Hu's May 6-10 visit to Japan will promote "mutual 
trust" and "pragmatic cooperation" 
 
-- China's visa policy is in line with international practice. 
 
-- China's Olympic preparations are nearly complete and the security 
situation stable though there is a risk of terrorist attacks. 
 
Chinese Students at Seoul Torch Relay 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the April 29, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA 
Spokesperson Jiang Yu said the Olympic torch was welcomed by 
overseas Chinese and South Koreans when it passed through Seoul. 
Some who attempted to disrupt the relay were prevented from doing so 
by the actions of Chinese citizens.  Jiang expressed China's 
"solicitude" to South Korean policemen who were injured.  Pressed on 
why China would not condemn the violence, Jiang said journalists 
should look at the nature of the incident.  According to Jiang, 
students who wished to "uphold justice" went to the torch relay to 
"defend the dignity of the torch."  Jiang drew a contrast between 
"the Tibetan separatist forces" who "intended to disrupt the relay, 
violating the Olympic spirit and the concept of peace and 
friendship" and the Chinese students who "proceeded from goodwill 
and coexist harmoniously with local people."  Jiang said China 
requests that Chinese abide by local laws when abroad. 
 
¶3. Jiang denied that the Chinese Embassy organized Chinese citizens 
to defend the torch, saying they attended the event 
"spontaneously." 
 
China to Meet with Dalai Lama Representatives 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Jiang did not offer any details about a meeting between China and 
representatives of the Dalai Lama, referring reporters to "relevant 
internal authorities."  Jiang emphasized that the Chinese 
Government's contact with the Dalai Lama is entirely an internal 
affair.  China's willingness to meet with the Dalai Lama's 
representatives shows China's "consistent policy" and "forgiveness." 
 China and the Chinese people will never yield to external pressure 
on issues of security and territorial integrity.  A decision to meet 
with the Dalai Lama's representatives is "absolutely not" a result 
of external pressure. 
 
¶5. Jiang had no information on reports that 17 people were sentenced 
for their participation in the Tibet riots, saying only that the 
government handled the incident in accordance with law. 
 
¶6. Asked when foreign journalists would be allowed to visit Tibet, 
Jiang said it was necessary and natural to resume tourism to Tibet 
and that information would be released in due course. 
 
Seven Chinese Kidnapped in Indonesia 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Jiang confirmed that seven Chinese citizens were kidnapped in 
Indonesia and that one has been released.  China asked Indonesia to 
do its utmost to rescue the hostages and take effective measures to 
ensure the safety of Chinese citizens in Indonesia. 
 
Hu Jintao to Visit Japan 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8. Jiang announced that President Hu will visit Japan May 6-10.  Hu 
will meet Emperor Akihito, PM Fukuda and have "extensive contact 
with Japanese leaders from the Diet and people from various walks of 
life."  Jiang said the improvement in China-Japan relations is in 
the fundamental interests of the two countries and is conducive to 
peace and stability in Asia and the world at large.  China's goals 
are to enhance mutual trust and pragmatic cooperation and increase 
people-to-people exchanges.  When asked about the East China Sea 
dispute, Jiang said the issue is sensitive and both sides are making 
progress.  China is "willing to work together with Japan to find a 
resolution acceptable to both sides."  On whether the most recent 
revelations of more tainted dumplings would be discussed, Jiang said 
"no possibility should be ruled out" and China hopes both sides can 
"increase cooperation." 
 
China's Visa Policy "Convenient" 
 
BEIJING 00001662  002 OF 002 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9. Jiang said China's visa policy is in line with international 
practice and is convenient.  China may require some materials, such 
as hotel confirmation and an invitation letter, but normal visits 
will not be affected. 
 
Olympics 
-------- 
 
¶10. Asked how China felt it was doing on its Olympic promises to 
improve human rights, press freedoms and environmental protection, 
Jiang said the reporter was brining up issues that are not relevant 
to the Olympics.  China has made "remarkable progress" on human 
rights and guarantees all citizens the "right to development." 
Jiang said preparations for the Olympics are nearly complete.  The 
security situation for the Olympics is "basically stable," though 
there is a risk of terrorist attacks.  Security is the number one 
priority of the Chinese Government and preparations are being made 
to ensure a safe Olympics, said Jiang. 
 
Darfur 
------ 
 
¶11. Asked whether she had a message for Mia Farrow, Jiang asked 
journalists to let Farrow know what China has done for Darfur. 
China supports the "tripartite and double track" proposals and has 
made efforts to resolve the problem even though it is not a "Chinese 
issue."  Jiang encouraged activists to concentrate on European 
governments. 
 
DPRK FM Visit to China 
---------------------- 
 
¶12. DPRK FM Pak Ui Chun met with China FM Yang Jiechi April 28 to 
discuss the Six-Party Talks.  Jiang said the recent negotiations 
between the United States and the DPRK were "helpful."  China hopes 
to continue exchanges with relevant parties to complete phase two 
and push the talks to the next chapter. 
 
China-Pakistan Relations 
------------------------ 
 
¶13. Jiang said she did not have information about specific 
agreements reached during FM Yang's visit to Pakistan.  She 
characterized China-Pakistan relations as an "all weather 
friendship" and "cooperative partnership."  China appreciates 
Pakistan's firm support on issues of sovereignty. 
 
Human Rights Watch "Prejudiced" 
------------------------------ 
 
¶14. Jiang had not seen a Human Rights Watch report about 
difficulties faced by human rights lawyers in China.  Jiang said the 
organization is "prejudiced and disregards facts."  Human Rights 
Watch is always critical of China yet Chinese citizens enjoy rights, 
she stated. 
 
German Interior Minister Visit 
------------------------------ 
 
¶15. German Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble visited China April 
28-29.  While in China, Schaeuble signed agreements on sports 
cooperation and met Chinese security officials. 
 
Barbados PM Visit, Iranian Nuclear Talks 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶16. Barbados Prime Minister David Thompson will visit China May 5-9. 
 AFM He Yafei will represent FM Yang Jiechi at the May 2 P5 plus 1 
talks on the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 
RANDT