08BERLIN1566
MEDIA REACTION: Somalia, Obama, U.S.-Iraq Latam, Congo EU
Thu Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 201145Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2684
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 001566 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/AGS, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: Somalia, Obama, U.S.-Iraq Latam, Congo EU 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Somalia)   Pirate Activities 
¶3.   (U.S.)   Obama Team 
¶4.   (U.S.-Iraq)   Status of Forces Agreement 
¶5.   (Latam)   China's Influence 
¶6.   (Africa)   Congo 
¶7.   (EU)   Economic Stimulus Package 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused on the dissolution of the state parliament in 
Hesse, on the activities of pirates off Somalia's coast, and the 
offer of energy company Solarworld to buy carmaker Opel.  ZDF-TV's 
early evening newscast Heute opened with a report of rescue measures 
for Opel, while ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened 
with a story on the expected budget deficit for FY 09. 
 
¶2.   (Somalia)   Pirate Activities 
 
Regional radio station Norddeutscher Rundfunk radio of Hamburg 
commented: "Thus far the international community has idly watched 
the activities of pirates [off the Somali coast].  The navy ships of 
'Operation Enduring Freedom' have the official order to fight 
terrorism and this has been going on for more than six years now. 
But thus far, we have not heard of any arrest.  Instead, piracy has 
really begun to prosper in the region. " 
 
According to Frankfurter Rundschau, "the much lauded international 
community of nations is about to take a practical decisions:  Soon 
war ships from the European Union will safeguard the maritime sea 
routes of the Somali coast from the plague of modern pirates.  Tens 
of thousands of defenseless children, women, and men in eastern 
Congo, however, are likely to wait in vain for the European 
community that shares the same values to protect them from the 
ravaging of marauding, cruel soldiers.  But the people there deserve 
no less protection than the oil tankers." 
 
Handelsblatt editorialized: "The protection of maritime routes is 
vital for the global economy and therefore deserves highest 
priority.  That is why it is all the more surprising to see the 
carelessness that the international community has demonstrated for 
months towards the pirates' activities off the Somali coast.  The 
hijacking of a supertanker has shown the limited cooperation of the 
international community.  In vast area of the seas a terrifying 
lawlessness still dominates the 21st century." 
 
Berliner Zeitung opined: "One wants to wait before sending a UN 
force to Somalia until it has become more peaceful.  But it is cleat 
that the fight against the pirates can be won only from the land. 
Only if a stable state order dominates in Somalia again, will it be 
possible to fight pirates nests.  Only if jobs are again available, 
will the run for the pirate trade cease.  Only if there is again a 
Somali coast guard, will it be possible to effectively control the 
Somali coast." 
 
N|rnberger Nachrichten noted: "The basic question remains whether 
there will ever be a permanent solution in bypassing the mainland. 
For decades, the international community has left Somali to its fate 
by shrugging its shoulders.  This is now coming back to haunt it. 
This state has disintegrated.  Bloody clashes between clans, the war 
with Ethiopia, the increasing influence of radical Islamists, which 
cannot be contained by anti-terror units on the sea, and now the 
lucrative business sector of piracy are, in the end, the result of 
international ignorance." 
 
¶3.   (U.S.)   Obama Team 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung had this to say: "Not Obama's message [to 
protect the climate] as such is surprising, but the timing.  The 
financial crisis is overshadowing the long-term climate change 
problem, but, nevertheless, Obama is calling per video for a giant 
restructuring of the U.S.   President-elect Obama has now claimed a 
leading role for the United States, but there is even more.  He has 
demonstrated leadership strength.  We have not seen this strength 
before.  The Europeans could have filled this vacuum, but they are 
too weak to do so.  The signal from Washington, which is 
uncompromising and unmistakable, could give the UN climate 
conference in Poznan at the beginning of December a new impetus." 
 
Die tageszeitung judged: "Barack Obama now wants to save the 
climate.  With his remarks, the United States is now bidding 
farewell to the careless use of resources in the United States.  But 
it is much more important that the large companies are now also 
calling for strict climate protection laws.  Following the financing 
institutions, the companies are now also bidding farewell to the 
previous dogma that the free play of market forces with as little 
state intervention as possible will help society thrive.  It is to 
be hoped that this view will remain dominant after the recovery of 
the global economy." 
 
In the view of Tagesspiegel, "Barack Obama's magic is based to a 
great extent on the promise to lead the United States to a 'new era' 
and to leave 'old politics' behind.  It was his core argument 
against Hillary Clinton.  But now he is nominating only people we 
know from the Clinton years.  Does this mean, Obama is a phoney, who 
promises change but relies on the decision-makers from the past? 
But this is not the case.  Obama is relying on a reservoir and is 
not risking a new beginning with idealistic masterminds without any 
practical governing experience.  Something else is characteristic: 
Obama was able to get the support of many from the Clinton team when 
Hillary was still the favorite presidential Democratic candidate. 
The formation of the new administration is still in its infancy. 
His team is composed of many facets and even the current picture 
demonstrates one thing:  Clinton to the outside, Obama to the 
inside." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine deals with the nomination of Eric Holder as 
Attorney General and wrote: "Former deputy attorney general Eric 
Holder, as first African American, is to take over the job as 
attorney general in the new Obama administration.  Holder's 
confirmation in the Senate is considered certain and the most 
influential senators already signaled their approval.  Unlike his 
future boss, Holder is an opponent to the death penalty." 
 
¶4.   (U.S.-Iraq)   Status of Forces Agreement 
 
According to Handelsblatt, "There is a system behind the lamenting 
about SOFA among all sides involved.  If the Iraqi parliament 
approves the agreement next week, it will be of use for everyone, 
and probably Barack Obama will profit the most, because he promised 
in the election campaign to bring back the U.S. forces within 16 
months.  But SOFA would give the new U.S. administration a greater 
scope of action, and it has sufficient 'grey zones' that are open to 
interpretation.  For Iraq's Premier al-Maliki, the agreement would 
be gold value because he could celebrate himself as the one who laid 
down the rules for the U.S. withdrawal before the regional elections 
on January 31.  For Barack Obama, SOFA would be a reason to take the 
haste out of the issue, and for U.S. Chief of Staff, General Mullen, 
this three-year horizon would create room to maneuver.  But no one 
wants to admit this publicly." 
 
¶5.   (Latam)   China's Influence 
 
Berliner Zeitung dealt with China's influence in Latin America and 
observed: "China wants to establish closer links with the countries 
in Latin America.  A few days before the APEC summit, China has now 
presented a 'White Book on Latin America.'  President Hu is now 
traveling the region and China aims at increasing trade exchange 
with the states in South and Central America to deepen cooperation 
in the energy sector in particular and to conclude free trade 
agreements.  Over the past few years, China has developed into the 
most important trading partner for a few countries in South America 
in particular and is challenging the U.S. influence in the region. 
 
¶6.   (Africa)   Congo 
 
Die Welt dealt with President Khler's appeal to the EU to send 
soldiers to Congo.  The paper opined: "The Bundeswehr is working 
under full capacity with 7,100 troops operating abroad.  That is why 
the Bundeswehr must set priorities.  In Afghanistan, where our 
security and our interests are directly affected, Germany is not 
doing enough to win the war against the Taliban.  Our mission in 
Darfur continues to remain under the 29 soldiers that the Bundestag 
approved, even though the mission there lacks the most essential 
things.  That is why it is not very reasonable to seek new tasks. 
Europe is the most important donor for Congo but also for Rwanda. 
It is clearly too early to talk about the use of troops before these 
means of pressure have been used." 
 
Regional daily Braunschweiger Zeitung noted: "With out hearts we 
must second President Khler.  In Congo, the merciless killing 
between ethnic groups in 1994, is now repeating itself.  Would a 
European force be able to stop the genocide?  This would probably 
only be the case if it massively intervened over a period of years, 
if not decades.  Such a policy could not be asserted in Europe, as 
much as we would like to support Khler.  The world will again 
helplessly watch when people make apocalypse a reality." 
 
¶7.   (EU)   Economic Stimulus Package 
 
In the view of Financial Times Deutschland, "the impact of the 
financial crisis is coming closer every day and with a breathtaking 
speed.  Only a few weeks, economic stimuli programs were looked down 
upon.  When this taboo fell, the government in Berlin insisted on 
developing its own program and to give up plans for an overall 
European solution.  But now it is becoming increasingly clear that, 
like with the bailout program for banks, joint action of the 27 EU 
nations will be necessary.  In view of the depth of the crisis it is 
good that the EU is now getting its act together and is launching an 
urgently necessary action.  But it is a great danger that such a 
package will be talked to death and pulled to pieces in a few 
countries." 
 
 
TIMKEN