08BEIJING2179
JUNE 5 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Security Dialogue, Tibet,
Thu Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1945
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2179/01 1571056
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051056Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7752
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1961
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0695
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9010UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002179 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY PTER PHUM KS ZI KN MG SA YM QA
SUBJECT: JUNE 5 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Security Dialogue, Tibet, 
Darfur, Tiananmen, North Korea 
 
¶1.  Key points at the June 5 MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- The Security Dialogue held in Beijing was pragmatic and conducive 
to the development of security relations. 
 
-- Tibet is stabilizing "gradually." 
 
-- China has taken note of Australian Prime Minister Rudd's proposal 
for an Asia Pacific Union.  China would support any proposal which 
enhances trust and cooperation in the region. 
 
-- China's efforts to reach a "proper solution" in Darfur are "not 
less than any other country." 
 
-- Regarding Tiananmen prisoners, the spokesman said the United 
States should stop its "erroneous practice" of interfering in 
China's internal affairs. 
 
-- Vice President Xi Jinping will visit North Korea from June 
17-19. 
 
Security Dialogue 
------------------ 
 
¶2. At the June 5, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesman Qin 
Gang said the fourth U.S.-China "Strategic Security Multilateral and 
Nonproliferation Consultation" focused on the international security 
situation, security relations between China and the United States 
and arms control and disarmament.  Both sides felt the consultations 
were pragmatic and conducive to the development of bilateral 
security relations.  Qin said Under Secretary Rood agreed with 
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi that the talks were conducive to 
relations and should continue.  China hopes Iran will implement 
relevant UN Security Council resolutions and enhance its cooperation 
with the International Atomic Energy Agency.  On the Korean 
Peninsula nuclear issue, Qin said China supports a political 
solution that maintains the authority of the nuclear 
nonproliferation regime and peace and stability of the region. 
 
Tibet Gradually Stabilizing 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked when journalists can expect to see evidence of the Dalai 
Lama's involvement in the March 14 Lhasa unrest, Qin said China 
already released information proving the "Dalai clique" incited the 
riots and attacks against Chinese Embassies in foreign countries. 
The Dalai Lama should stop his splitist activities and stop 
undermining the Beijing Olympics.  The date for the next round of 
talks between representatives of the Dalai Lama and China is under 
consultation.  Qin noted that relevant authorities in China are 
preoccupied by disaster relief and said China hopes the Dalai Lama 
will "create conditions for contact through concrete actions." 
Asked when journalists would be allowed into Tibetan areas, 
including Qinghai, Gansu and Sichuan, Qin said foreign journalists 
would be allowed into these areas when social stability is further 
restored.  Pressed repeatedly on why Tibet has not yet been 
stabilized, Qin said China was fully capable of restoring stability 
and the process is a "gradual" one.  To suggest otherwise is to 
"look down on the Chinese Government and people."  Qin did not have 
any information on reports of arrests in Lhasa over a bomb plot. 
 
Prime Minister Rudd's Asia Pacific Union 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Qin said China has "taken note" of Australian Prime Minister 
Rudd's proposal for an Asia Pacific Union.  China will support "any 
proposal" which seeks to enhance exchanges, political trust and 
deepen mutually beneficial cooperation to promote common development 
in the Asia Pacific region. 
 
Darfur and Zimbabwe 
------------------- 
 
¶5. Responding to a question regarding "high-level U.S. officials'" 
comments on China's role in Darfur, Qin said China has always 
supported a "proper solution" to the Darfur issue based on dialogue 
and consultation.  China has made efforts to this end, including 
sending engineering teams to the region.  In promoting a proper 
solution, China's efforts are "not less than any other country." 
Qin said the tri-party coordination mechanism should be pushed 
forward to promote a "proper solution of the issue," political 
dialogue and deployment of peacekeepers. 
 
¶6. Regarding Zimbabwe, Qin said China upholds the principle of 
noninterference in other countrys affairs.  China is confident in 
the ability f the Zimbabwean people and government to resole their 
own issues. 
 
Tiananmen Prisoners 
 
BEIJING 00002179  002 OF 002 
 
 
------------------- 
 
¶7. Asked to respond to U.S. demands that China release the remaining 
Tiananmen prisoners, Qin said the political turmoil of the late 
1980s has "concluded."  In the past 20 years, China has enjoyed 
economic development, social stability and the development of 
democracy.  The Chinese people enjoy fundamental human rights "in 
accordance with law."  Qin said "year after year, the United States 
makes groundless accusations against China, seriously violating the 
basic norms of international relations and grossly interfering in 
China's internal affairs."  China expresses "strong dissatisfaction 
and firm opposition" to the U.S. statements, and demands that the 
United States stop this "erroneous practice" that obstructs the 
development of bilateral relations. 
 
Xi Jinping to travel to DPRK and Middle East 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. The spokesman confirmed that Vice President Xi Jinping will visit 
North Korea June 17-19.  VP Xi will also visit Mongolia June 19, 
Saudi Arabia June 21-23, Qatar June 23-24 and Yemen June 24-25.  The 
specifics of Xi's visit to North Korea are still under discussion, 
but he is expected to meet with North Korean leaders and discuss 
regional issues, bilateral relations and the denuclearization of the 
peninsula.  Qin confirmed that this is Xi's first trip abroad as 
Vice President. 
 
Other Visits 
------------ 
 
¶9. Vice Premier Wang Qishan will be in the United States June 17-18 
for the fourth Strategic Economic Dialogue.  German Foreign Minister 
Frank-Walter Steinmeier will visit China June 13-15.  FM Yang Jiechi 
will travel to Japan on June 14 for meetings with the foreign 
ministers of the ROK and Japan.  The agenda for the meeting has not 
been decided, although the Six-Party Talks would likely be 
discussed, Qin noted. 
 
Other 
------ 
 
¶10. The spokesperson did not have any information about a meeting 
between FM Yang Jiechi and Indian FM Pranab Mukherjee.  Qin also had 
no information about the search for a missing rescue helicopter 
which crashed during earthquake relief operations. 
 
PICCUTA