08BEIRUT1015
Beirut Media Reaction: July 14, 2008
Mon Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
O 141241Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2463
WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
CIA WASHDC IMMEDIATE
JOINT STAFF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
INFO AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 
ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA PRIORITYUNCLAS BEIRUT 001015 
 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA - IRWIN, NEA/PPD, R, INR/R/MR 
INR-PARENT 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
LONDON/POL 
PARIS/POL 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
USCENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL KMDR OPRC KPAO KISL KPAL LE
SUBJECT:  Beirut Media Reaction: July 14, 2008 
 
Atmospherics: 
------------- 
 
Media outlets agreed that the "Union for the Mediterranean" Summit 
was in fact a milestone that put an end to Syrian international 
isolation.  It  also changed Syrian-French relations, and 
Syrian-Lebanese relations. 
 
During the weekend, the Lebanese media highlighted the announcement 
of the new Lebanese Government, noting that formulating it on the 
eve of President Suleiman's visit to Paris bolstered his position 
before the French and Syrian presidents.  The press was engaged in 
interpreting the political affiliation of each new minister, with 
some noting that the new government is in fact a prototype of the 
expected results of the 2009 parliamentary elections. 
 
On Sunday and Monday, the Lebanese press highlighted in particular 
President Suleiman's and President Asad's positions in Paris.  The 
press observed that the establishment of diplomatic relations 
between Lebanon and Syria has been placed "on hot fire." 
Journalists noted that, although President Suleiman seems extremely 
careful to be neutral when dealing with all Lebanese factions 
internally, he was very clear about wanting to normalize Lebanon's 
relations with Syria. 
 
The press also prominently highlighted a statement by President 
Suleiman in which he said that the Shebaa Farms will be regained 
first by diplomacy and implementation of international resolutions, 
particularly UNSCR 1701.  If diplomacy fails, the President added, 
"then military operations will come." 
 
Selected Headlines: 
------------------ 
 
"The Prisoner Swap to Take Place Next Wednesday; Tens of Thousands 
Will Accompany the Liberated Prisoners from Nakoura to Beirut; The 
Mediterranean Summit: Normalization and Reconciliations" 
pro-opposition Al-Akhbar (7/14) 
 
"Suleiman Launches the Battle of Liberating Shebaa" independent 
Al-Balad (7/14) 
 
"Suleiman: Diplomacy First to Regain Shebaa and If it Fails, 
Military Operations Will Come" pro-Suleiman Al-Bayraq (7/14) 
 
"Suleiman: We Will Resort to Military Operations if Diplomacy Fails 
To Liberate the Shebaa Farms" centrist Al-Anwar (7/14) 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Asad Allowed Sarkozy to Announce Establishment of Diplomatic 
Relations between Syria and Lebanon To Avoid Looking As if He is 
Complying with the French Wishes...," an editorial by Rosana 
Bou-Monsef in moderate, anti-Syrian An-Nahar (7/14): 
 
"...President Asad wanted President Sarkozy to announce 
establishment of diplomatic relations between Syria and 
Lebanon...because he did not want to appear as if he is complying 
with international wishes in order to break Syria's international 
isolation.  ...It is well known, however, that exchanging embassies 
between Syria and Lebanon is extremely important because Syria has 
been refusing to take this step for over fifty years.  ...The Syrian 
President tried to belittle the importance of such a step...but 
establishment of diplomatic relations is in fact a reflection of the 
continuous international pressure on Syria to take the necessary 
steps that prove that Syria respects the independence of 
Lebanon..." 
 
"Sarkozy Sought to Set a Date for Announcing Establishment of 
Relations between Lebanon and Syria...," an editorial by Khalil 
Fleyhan in moderate, anti-Syrian An-Nahar (7/14): 
 
"Lebanese political sources noticed that President Sarkozy...tried 
to set a date for the establishment of diplomatic relations between 
Lebanon and Syria.  ...President Asad announced that the 
announcement of establishment of relations between Lebanon and Syria 
should take place in Damascus and Beirut and not in Paris. 
...President Suleiman disclosed that there should be legal and 
administrative arrangements that need to be worked out before a date 
is set..." 
 
"The General's Shares Are Escalating...," an editorial by Imad 
Marmal in Arab nationalist As-Safir (7/12): 
 
"...There are those in the Christian arena who are describing the 
Christian situation by noting that, what General Aoun lost as a 
result of his 'Understanding' with Hizballah, he regained following 
the Doha Agreement.  ...After Doha, General Aoun had the chance to 
prove that, similar to the way he backed Hizballah, ...Hizballah 
also backed him when he needed it.  Aoun was always accused of being 
a follower of Hizballah Secretary General Nasrallah, but when the 
government was being formed, Aoun was in the lead and all other 
opposition members followed.  ...Following the Doha Agreement and 
the formulation of the government, Aoun proved to be the primary 
leader of the Christians..." 
 
"All of Lebanon's Government: When Concessions Change into Gains," 
an editorial by Nicolas Nassif in pro-opposition Al-Akhbar (7/12): 
 
"...Looking at the new Lebanese Government we note the following: 
1) Syria seemed to have returned to the Council of Ministers through 
its allies, particularly those who failed during the 2005 
parliamentary elections like Minister Talal Arslan and Minister Ali 
Qanso as a result of their alliance with Syria; 2) Three of the 
leaders in the majority, who had most of the ministerial portfolios 
in the last cabinet, seemed to have gained only two portfolios each 
in the new cabinet:  Fouad Siniora, Walid Jumblatt, MP Saad Hariri. 
Furthermore, Walid Jumblatt admitted that there are other Druze 
leaders, and MP Hariri admitted that there are other Sunni leaders; 
3) The Christians of March 14 owe their portfolios to General Aoun 
and Hizballah, because they were able to get much more than MPs 
Hariri and Jumblatt were originally willing to give as a result of 
General Aoun's clever maneuvers during the formulation of the new 
government ..." 
 
 
Grant