08CAIRO155
GAZA BORDER UPDATE JANUARY 29, PT. II
Tue Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO4039
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #0155 0291500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291500Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8002
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS CAIRO 000155 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL CASC PTER EG IS
SUBJECT:  GAZA BORDER UPDATE JANUARY 29, PT. II 
 
REF:  CAIRO 148 
 
¶1.  On January 29, econoff and FSN traveled from El Arish to the 
border crossing at Rafah, encountering little traffic all the way to 
the commercial customs terminal.  There were thirty central security 
trucks on the highway between El Arish and Rafah, and state security 
officers blocked side roads and footpaths from the town of Sheikh 
Zuweid to Rafah, a distance of about ten kilometers.  The commercial 
terminal appeared to be closed. 
 
¶2. The non-commercial Salah ad Din border crossing in downtown Rafah 
was heavily congested with people and traffic, as well as swampy 
from the rains.  There were several thousand Palestinians buying, 
selling, and trading, or simply  hanging out in Rafah before 
trickling slowly back to Gaza with crates of cigarettes, cases of 
soda, sheep, goats, electronics, a few cattle, and all sorts of 
other consumer goods, using trucks, taxis, and even donkey carts -- 
all with Gaza license plates. 
 
¶3.  Despite all the muck and congestion and uncertainty, there was 
no apparent tension.  Egyptian security forces were present in 
Rafah, but not in overwhelming numbers.  They seemed to be 
channeling the Palestinians with relative efficiency toward the 
border. 
 
¶4.  Returning to El Arish, econoff encountered only light traffic 
and a few pedestrians heading east, towards Gaza.  The few westbound 
cars on the highway were stopped at checkpoints for inspection.  The 
roads were calm.  An Egyptian businessman told econoff that two 
Hamas members had crossed the border to track down a Fatah 
"collaborator" in El Arish.  They trashed a hotel looking for him, 
but he got away, and they returned to Gaza, according to the 
businessman. Another businessman said that he was ordered to close 
his shop, rather than being forced to close because he had run out 
of supplies, as had happened to many others. 
 
¶5.  Separately, Egyptian security sources have told us that the 
border is still open, but foot traffic has slowed to a trickle. 
They say that the GOE is blocking the resupply of Al Arish and Rafah 
area shops.  The shops are, consequently, very low on supplies, and 
many shops have closed altogether.  Egyptian security contacts 
believe that the number of Palestinians trying to enter Egypt has 
shrunk due to bad weather (rain and unusually low temperature) and 
the lack of supplies in Egyptian shops. 
 
¶6.  According to security contacts, four Border Guard Force members 
are still in serious condition with the following injuries: one 
soldier lost an eye when he was hit by a stone; one soldier was 
severely burned when the armored vehicle he was traveling exploded 
flames after being hit by a grenade; and two soldiers are 
hospitalized with gunshot wounds.  Palestinian snipers also shot 
five dogs used by the Border Guard Forces. 
 
¶7. Our consular colleagues report that two AmCit-Palestinian 
families from Gaza made it to our consular section and have 
subsequently departed Cairo for the U.S. after we confirmed with 
Egyptian immigration that they would have no trouble in exiting 
Egypt (they didn't).  Also, Canadian diplomats told us that they 
have received two Canadian-Palestinian families from Gaza at their 
embassy in Cairo.  There are also reports of Gazans reaching Beni 
Sweif (about 100 km south of Cairo), and as many as 3000 Gazans at 
Suez.  The British tell us that they are considering making changes 
to their travel warning, though none of the European embassies we 
have spoken to have made any changes yet.  Finally, Soliman Awad 
reportedly told the Canadian ambassador January 24 that "We will 
rebuild the fence." 
 
RICCIARDONE