08CAPETOWN232
U.S.  ELECTION RESULTS COULD BRING NEW ERA TO USG-SAG
Tue Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Cape Town
VZCZCXRO8826
PP RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHTN #0232/01 3300726
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 250726Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2881
INFO RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 6238
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 2054
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 3191UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAPE TOWN 000232 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM SF
SUBJECT:  U.S.  ELECTION RESULTS COULD BRING NEW ERA TO USG-SAG 
RELATIONS 
 
REF:  CAPETOWN 00224 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On November 5, 2008 the Consul general hosted an 
election party at her residence.  After the confirmation of Barrack 
Obama as President Elect, Professor Ben Turok, an ANC MP who was 
imprisoned with Mandela strolled into the CGR with a pronouncement 
that ANC Parliamentary members would now engage more with USG 
officials.  In addition to Turok's promise that the ANC would work 
more closely with the USG, the presence of the Speaker of Parliament 
and three other ANC MPs at the CG's event, and invitations by ANC 
officials at a Cape Town Press Club event that same week, the CG 
believes these are changing times in the USG-SAG relationship. End 
summary. 
¶2. (SBU) The U.S. Presidential election results breakfast at the 
Consul General's was dubbed "the place to be" for that historic 
event.  With more than 150 individuals in attendance, the sentiments 
and emotions were obvious.  While the guest list was almost an exact 
duplication of the September 25 welcome reception for the newly 
arrived CG, the presence of ruling party members was much larger at 
the election event.  At least five ANC Parliament members/party 
officials were in attendance at the breakfast compared to zero ANC 
MPS for the welcome reception.  Even more important was the presence 
of the newly appointed Speaker of Parliament Gwen Mahlangu-Nkabinde. 
Mrs. Mahlangu-Nkabinde was first elected Deputy Speaker on April 23, 
2004 and was elected to Speaker on September 25, 2008. She chairs 
the Disciplinary Committee of the National Assembly and is the 
former Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental 
Affairs and Tourism. Committed to women's issues, at one stage Mrs. 
Mahlangu-Nkabinde served as Vice-President of the 
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) coordinating the Committee of Women 
Parliamentarians as well as an executive member of the IPU. 
¶3. (SBU) The Speaker arrived early, engaged freely with other 
invitees and the press and showed genuine emotions at the results of 
the election of Barrack Obama.  More significant was her vision of 
peaceful transition of the democratic process.  She was quoted in 
the local daily The Cape Argus saying, "This is a moment of change, 
not only for America, but for the whole world. We know that if there 
is change and hope in America then there can be hope for change in 
the whole world." 
 
¶4. (SBU) In her private comments to the CG and other Consulate 
staff, the Speaker assured them a willingness to work with the 
Consulate staff in the future.  Other ANC officials present included 
Sindi Shayi, Deputy Director-General of the Western Cape Education 
Department. Minority party MPs present included Shiela Camerer of 
the Democratic Alliance and Dr. Pheko Motsoko, leader of the Pan 
African Congress. Deputy Executive Mayor Grant Haskins, ACDP, a 
stalwart friend to the Consulate, also attended the party and the 
relationship was solidified by his presence at the election event. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Toward the end of the morning, Professor Ben Turok entered 
the CGR with a request to be introduced to the new CG.  Mr. Turok is 
a long term ANC member and supported Mandela during his trials and 
imprisonment.  Turok has been a Member of Parliament in South Africa 
since 1995, representing the African National Congress. He was the 
founding Director of the Pan-African policy research Institute for 
African Alternatives (IFAA) in 1986 with centers in the UK, Nigeria, 
Senegal, Tanzania, Zimbabwe and South Africa.  Upon his 
introduction, the CG welcomed him to the historic event.  Asked if 
Qintroduction, the CG welcomed him to the historic event.  Asked if 
he had heard the results, he indicated that the results were the 
reason that he had come to the breakfast.  Turok acknowledged that 
relations had previously been strained between ANC and U.S. 
officials.  The last eight years with the current administration and 
the war in Iraq made it an uncomfortable environment to work with 
Americans, but said the election of Obama as President-elect is a 
reason for change.  Furthermore, he guaranteed that American 
consulate staff would be provided access and assistance by ANC MPs. 
With that message delivered in person, he summarily left the venue 
without having as much as a cup of coffee or tea.  Message 
delivered. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
U.S. Info Central Election Event 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) On the afternoon of November 5, following the election 
breakfast, the Consulate's Public Affairs Section hosted an election 
results forum at the Central Library in downtown Cape Town.  While 
most of the 50 plus attendees were students, academicians and local 
resident Americans, two ANC researchers were also in attendance. 
They raised questions and exchanged views on the President-elect's 
plans and the up-hill battle he will face.  Upon their departure, 
they asked for, and the PAS staff was astute enough to grant them 
permission to take one of the very popular Obama full size cut outs 
back to Parliament. 
 
 
-------------------- 
Press Club Event 
--------------------- 
 
CAPE TOWN 00000232  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Following a very successful trip to the USA, ANC President 
Jacob Zuma returned to South Africa to face a split in his party and 
potential challenges to his majority party in the upcoming spring 
2009 national election.  On a recruitment swing through the western 
Province, Mr. Zuma was the featured speaker for the Press Club 
breakfast on November 7 (reftel).  Privately, Mr. Zuma raved to the 
CG that the trip to the USA was wonderful.  He also mentioned his 
meeting with Jesse Jackson, noting the role he had played in U.S. 
politics, and his meeting with senior American statesman Andrew 
Young. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In his initial comments to the Press Club, Mr. Zuma 
publicly lauded the election of President-elect Obama, noting the 
smooth transition of America's leadership.  He went on to pledge 
cooperation and anticipated improved relations between the USG and 
the SAG. 
 
¶9. (SBU) While at the breakfast, the Political officer met ANC MP 
Francois Beukman, who Poloff is again meeting next week at a one on 
one lunch.  The CG met the newly appointed Deputy Minister for 
Education Andre Gaum also an ANC MP and the ANC Chairperson for the 
Western Cape Province Mcebisi Skwatsha.  After weeks of unsuccessful 
or non-responsive attempts to arrange a courtesy call with the top 
party official in the Cape region, Mr. Skwatsha told the CG to call 
his personal assistant to arrange a meeting and at this time the CG 
is waiting for an appointment date. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment.  Increased access to Parliamentarians and other 
ANC officials has already resulted in meetings being scheduled with 
Consulate employees.  It appears that change has come to South 
Africa, at least as far as professional decorum in political 
relations is concerned. End comment.