08DAKAR771
WADE TAKES CONTROL OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
Tue Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO7266
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0771 1831323
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011323Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0756
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS DAKAR 000771 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM ECON SG
SUBJECT: WADE TAKES CONTROL OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
 
¶1. SBU) Summary:  On June 24, the National Assembly renewed its 
leadership.  The changes further isolated the President of the 
National Assembly, Macky Sall, whose main supporters lost their 
positions.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Harassing the Chair of the National Assembly 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU)  After firing him as the number two of the ruling 
Democratic Party of Senegal (PDS), President Abdoulaye Wade is 
continuing to put the pressure on Sall to force his resignation as 
the President of the National Assembly.  The latter fell into 
disgrace after he initiated a hearing to have Wade's son, Karim, 
testify about the use of public funds in building infrastructure 
projects in the run up to the Organization of Islamic Conference 
(OIC) Summit that some have estimated go as high as USD 800,000,000. 
 Wade and his son Karim no longer trust Sall.  A counselor at the 
President's office close to Karim told Embassy that Karim played a 
major role in the latest changes because Sall has clearly shown that 
"he does not want to cooperate with him." 
 
The losers 
----------- 
¶3.  (SBU)  Among the most significant changes are the dismissal of 
MBaye Ndiaye and Aliou Sow, who were respectively vice President of 
the Assembly and Chair of the Assembly's Foreign Affairs Committee. 
Their departure will deprive Sall of strong figures who can repel 
attacks against him within the Assembly.  Kalidou Niasse and Serigne 
Fallou Mbacke, who did not sign a petition initiated by the ruling 
party to remove Sall, have also lost their positions as members of 
the Assembly's Directorate.  As a result, they lose generous 
financial and in-kind privileges of access to two cars; one thousand 
liters of gas; USD 1,000 in telephone credit per month; and a 
monthly salary almost double that of a regular member.  With the 
departure of Aliou Sow, the Youth wing of the PDS no longer has a 
voice in the leadership of the Assembly.  A young Deputy at the 
Assembly told Embassy that Wade was unhappy that the Youth wing of 
the party did not oppose Aliou Sow when he sided with Sall's stance 
against the President. 
 
The winners 
----------- 
¶4.  (SBU)  Those who supported the removal of Sall received 
promotions.  Bocar Sedikh Kane, the Mayor of Gediawaye (a very 
populous suburb of Dakar) is now Chair of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee and NDiawar Toure, the Mayor of Rufisque becomes Vice 
President of the Assembly.  Both executed Wade's orders to remove 
Macky Sall without hesitation.  They also received promotions within 
the Directorate Committee of PDS.  Wade also promoted Mamadou Diagne 
Fada to the rank of Vice President as part of his process to reunite 
his "political family" by allowing dissidents back.  The new 
leadership of the Assembly also includes, Abdoulaye Babou as Deputy 
Majority Leader, Babou was a member of the opposition who joined the 
ruling party two years ago.  He will help the PDS with legal issues 
especially as Wade attempts to extend his term in office. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶5.  (SBU)  President Wade has a hawkish and unsophisticated 
political entourage that does not tolerate any dissent within the 
party.  At present, there are still about fifteen questions pending 
raised by Deputies to which Ministers have yet to answer.  An 
atmosphere of suspicion between those who support the current chair 
and those who oppose him is prevalent.  This negative atmosphere has 
paralyzed the institution with most deputies fearing reprisals if 
they show independence.   Wade seems determined to pursue a strategy 
of total control of institutions and the elimination of 
independent-minded leaders such as Macky Sall.  Wade does not 
forgive and forget.  His last attempt to emasculate Sall was stopped 
at the behest of the new Khaliphe-General of the Mouride brotherhood 
to which Wade belongs.  It was clear then this was just a temporary 
reprieve.  Wade will not be satisfied until he has totally destroyed 
Sall and thus we can expect a further intensification of the battle 
between the two. 
Smith