08DAMASCUS766
DAMASCUS MEDIA REACTION, OCTOBER 31, 2008
Fri Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0016
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0766 3051414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 311414Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5516
INFO RUCNNAF/NORTH AF NEA AND SOUTH ASIAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAMASCUS 000766 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/PPD, NEA/ELA, INR/NESA, IIP, PA, ECA; BEIRUT FOR 
SISSON, GRANT, LENZEN 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPAO SY
SUBJECT: DAMASCUS MEDIA REACTION, OCTOBER 31, 2008 
 
------------ 
News Summary 
------------ 
 
¶1. Only government-owned daily al-Thawrah was published on Friday 
October 31. al-Thawrah gave pride of place to strident coverage of 
the alleged U.S. raid in Abu al-Kamal. The top half of its front 
page reported on the protest march organized by the Syrian 
government on October 30 in downtown Damascus and a condolence visit 
by the Minister of Labor and Social Affairs, on behalf of President 
Assad, to families of the victims in AlbuKamal.  The article was 
accompanied by a huge photograph of the demonstration. Pages 2-3 
were fully devoted to coverage of the demonstration and messages 
received from regional and international groups and leaders 
condemning the attack. 
 
-------------- 
Key Headlines: 
-------------- 
--"Damascus rejects - in a popular march...and the world continues 
to condemn the American aggression; With President Assad's 
authorization, condolences to the families of the victims" (front 
page) 
 
--"A crime against humanity whose perpetrators must be held 
accountable" (p. 2) 
 
--"[The attack] reflects the bankruptcy of the American 
Administration and its political defeat: Arab and international 
condemnation continues" (p. 3) 
 
---------- 
Editorials 
---------- 
¶1. "Perpetual Fumbling:" (op-ed by columnist Mustafa al-Miqdad) 
 
"The Bush Administration once again has confirmed the loss of its 
[moral] compass in its political, military, intelligence, and 
strategic calculations. It chose to launch the aggressive attack on 
civilians working near the border under the pretext of anticipating 
a confrontation with 'terrorists'... . 
 
"The current Bush Administration is in a perpetual crisis which is 
still providing reasons for it to continue to pursue a policy of 
murder and criminality under the pretext of combating the 
'terrorism' hidden in the Islamic world, according to its 
superstitious beliefs. 
 
"The occupation and the Bush Administration, threatened by the loss 
of the Republican seat in the White House, are practicing a war of 
psychology and distortion against the American people a few days 
before the presidential elections in an attempt to implant its idea 
of pursuing terrorism in all corners of the world and of carrying 
out preemptive strikes... 
 
"The Syrian response came with clear indications and I believe that 
more responses are still in the Syrian basket. There is no doubt 
that it is able to uncover the falsehood of the American allegations 
and the [U.S.] Administration's fumbling, as a great power, in 
taking an effective international role." 
 
¶2. "Towards a balanced American policy" (op-ed by Mundhir Eid) 
 
"The criminal operation which the American forces carried out in the 
bombing of the city of Albukamal and the violation of Syrian 
sovereignty are a clear sign of the criminal mentality of Bush and 
his bloody planners, which began with the occupation of Iraq and 
which he wishes to finish with terrorism and blood. 
 
"It's clear that Bush can't hide his wrath and hatred towards Syrian 
which was always an obstacle to his colonialist plans in the region. 
Likewise, his 'mind' can't absorb the European opening towards 
[Syria] and the proof that it is a hard number in solving the 
region's problems. The response was with a rash and aggressive 
policy embodied by a wicked crime. There is no doubt that the goal 
of the aggression on Albukamal was not, as Washington claims, the 
pursuit of al-Qaeda elements...but rather the state of stability in 
the region, in which Syria plays a clear and fundamental role... 
 
"Eight days till the end of the Bush term and his departure from the 
White House, and they are long days with a neurotic person who can 
take the decision to launch wars and sedition all over the world. 
Here the responsibility falls to the minds in the US to hasten to 
reject his policy which has brought them devastation and 
destruction...." 
CONNELLY