08HARARE395
HUMANITARIAN SITUATION INTENSIFIES DRAMATICALLY WITH
Mon May 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO5079
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0395/01 1260737
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050737Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2860
INFO RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1219
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 HARARE 000395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
 
DCHA/AA FOR MIKE HESS 
AFR/AA FOR KATE ALMQUIST AND FRANKLIN MOORE 
AFR/SA FOR ERIC LOKEN, LORIE DOBBINS, JENNIFER KOLE 
OFDA FOR KY LUU, ANNE CONVERY, SHANNON ROGERS, AND TRESJA DENYSENKO 
 
FFP FOR JDWORKEN, LPETERSON, AND ASINK 
PRETORIA FOR JWESSEL, OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PHUM PGOV KHIV ZI
SUBJECT: HUMANITARIAN SITUATION INTENSIFIES DRAMATICALLY WITH 
VIOLENCE 
 
REF:  HARARE 343 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  In October 2007, then- Charge d'Affaires Kathy Dhanani renewed 
the complex emergency disaster declaration for Zimbabwe based on the 
continuing effects of poor governance on the most vulnerable 
segments of the population (Ref). Post draws attention to the 
rapidly declining and new, violent nature of the humanitarian crisis 
following the March 29 harmonized elections. Although current needs 
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) are being met with in-country 
resources, Post alerts USAID's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance 
(OFDA) and AFR to a potential need for USG emergency assistance for 
IDPs, including food, non-food, medical, and protection support, if 
violence intensifies or is prolonged. Although Post realizes that a 
second declaration is not required, Ambassador McGee will be issuing 
a statement reinforcing the existence of a humanitarian disaster 
septel. Post will continue to work with OFDA's Regional Advisor to 
monitor the situation and to identify the most appropriate forms of 
assistance as needs grow. 
 
¶2.  Following the harmonized elections, the Government has embarked 
on a systematic, country-wide campaign of intimidation and violence 
in a concerted effort to punish opposition party supporters for not 
voting "correctly" and to influence in their favor the outcome of 
the expected Presidential run-off. War veterans, military personnel, 
and youth militia have established centers (geographically widening 
their coverage) to beat, torture, and "reeducate" Movement for 
Democratic Change (MDC) party members and supporters, polling 
agents, and human rights defenders. An unconfirmed number of homes 
and granaries have been burned and cattle slaughtered by the 
government's "hit squads." A growing number of persons are displaced 
due to property destruction and fear of reprisal. Post is concerned 
that the situation will deteriorate and possibly plummet after a 
run-off if Mugabe is not the clear winner. 
 
¶3.  The international community is monitoring the situation closely 
and OCHA is beginning to take a more active role to assess and track 
the number, location, and needs of IDPs. Human rights organizations 
are documenting locations and cases of violence. The most urgent 
needs for those displaced include tents, blankets, food, soap, and 
sanitary items. Local NGOs and churches are hesitant to provide 
assistance based on threats received and for fear of reprisal. 
However, through existing resources, IOM is providing for the 
majority of the needs of IDPs, with additional support provided by 
the USG-funded NGO Zimbabwe Community Development Trust (ZCDT), 
Christian Alliance, and some church affiliated groups. Title II 
emergency food aid from in-country stocks are also being utilized to 
respond to food needs. Since much of the violence is directed 
towards small-scale farmers and their laborers the impact on both 
the upcoming harvest and planting of the winter wheat crop is of 
particular concern. Food insecurity, in this dismal crop year, will 
be affected further by the burning of granaries and slaughter of 
livestock. A worrisome pattern of areas being declared by war 
veterans, military officers, and even district administrators as "no 
go" areas and threats against international NGOs is emerging and 
this may hamper future efforts unless the international community is 
able to successfully push back on the government for access to IDPs. 
OCHA has requested permission for field observation teams but has 
been denied by the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare. However, 
the UN has been told to resume field activities. Donors have 
requested a Senior Humanitarian Affairs Officer with a background in 
protection. OECD Heads of Mission are preparing a joint statement 
denouncing the violence. End summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
CURRENT SITUATION: POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The nature of the humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe rapidly 
deteriorated following the March 29 harmonized elections when the 
Government initiated a campaign of intimidation and violence, 
unleashing "hit squads" comprised of war veterans, military 
officers, and youth militia throughout the country to punish MDC 
supporters for not voting for the ruling party and to influence a 
potential run-off vote. Torture centers, from which the "hit squads" 
operate, have proliferated in rural areas, and training camps for 
youth militia are reported to exist. Abductions appear to be 
occurring at night and in the daytime alike. Reports abound about 
victims being beaten and then released far from home and medical 
 
HARARE 00000395  002 OF 004 
 
 
care. The most commonly reported injury is deep tissue wounds; 
however, the nature of violence is requiring a higher degree of 
specialized surgery. Horrific accounts of maiming, psychological 
intimidation, and rape have also been reported. IOM reports and 
recent trends confirm that incidents of violence and the geographic 
extent of human rights abuses are increasing. To date, the 
USAID-supported Counseling Services Unit (CSU) has provided 
approximately 500 individuals with medical, psycho-social, and 
protection assistance, with most individuals having been treated in 
Harare after arriving from other parts of the country. On a typical 
day, CSU processes approximately 50 victims per day, providing them 
with medical and psycho-social assistance and helping them to find 
safe havens with family or friends after being treated. 
 
¶5.  As violence increases so too is the number of displaced persons 
who are forced homeless by arson or who fear for their safety after 
being threatened or tortured. At present, displaced persons are 
concentrated in Harare, Mutare, Chipinge, Nyanga, Gokwe, Karoi, and 
Bulawayo, where they are seeking refuge at MDC offices. Reports of 
displacements have also surfaced in Murewa, Mutoko, Mutasa, Makoni, 
Hwedza, Uzumba Maramba Pfungwe, and Mvuma Drefontein, but the 
numbers and locations of these individuals are hard to track at this 
point. Furthermore, an unknown number of MDC leaders are in hiding. 
To date, IOM reports that the number of people crossing border posts 
is within normal levels. Although large-scale displacement has not 
occurred, Post is concerned that this is highly likely as violence 
intensifies. (Comment: There is also concern that the Government is 
attempting to displace larger numbers of people to inhibit the 
ability of opposition supporters to vote in a run-off. For this 
reason, it is important to keep IDPs in their home constituencies. 
End comment.) 
 
¶6.  From April 19-20, two members of the USAID/Zimbabwe Democracy 
and Governance Office and OFDA's Harare-based humanitarian 
specialist conducted an on the ground assessment of violence in 
Mutare, Chipinge, and Nyanga. The general findings of their 
assessment are noted below (see para 9 for emergency needs and 
response to date).  Post plans to conduct subsequent monitoring 
trips on a routine basis to confirm reports of violence and 
emergency needs. Post has encouraged other donors, particularly 
OCHA, to conduct similar trips. 
 
--Harare: Until Friday, April 25, approximately 200 people were 
seeking refuge at the MDC headquarters (Harvest House) in Harare. 
Many of those present had traveled to Harare from rural areas after 
having been victimized to seek safety and medical assistance and to 
report other victims in need of care and protection. However, 
mid-day on April 25, armed police raided Harvest House and forcibly 
removed all IDPs, taking them to Harare Central Policy Station. 
Women and children were released by police over the weekend and are 
being provided assistance by the Women's Trust; however, most men 
were dispersed throughout the city to various jails and subsequently 
released on Tuesday April 29. USAID food was to be provided to the 
IDPs at Harvest House, but the food was not delivered before the 
IDPs were taken to the police station. Now that they are accounted 
for, the women and children are being provided USG food aid through 
the Catholic Development Commission. 
 
--Mutare: As of Friday, April 25, 105 families were seeking refuge 
at the MDC office after having witnessed the destruction of their 
homes at Evans Farm and having been forced at gun point off of their 
property. Most of the displaced arrived on April 16. At the time of 
the USAID assessment, the families were sleeping in the open 
surrounded by the furniture and other belongings that they were able 
to carry with them. Limited water and toilet facilities were 
available. Beginning on April 25, IOM began moving 57 households to 
other locations. Eleven households are returning to their rural 
areas and another 46 are being relocated to Tsvingwe Transit Camp in 
Manicaland. Most of the families at Tsvingwe (36) will be sheltered 
in private one-room buildings; the other 10 families will stay 
together at a warehouse. 
 
--Chipinge and Nyanga: Approximately 35 individuals are seeking 
refuge at MDC offices in both Chipinge and Nyanga. Reports were made 
to the assessment team that people are not sleeping in their homes 
for fear of abduction. In Chipinge, war veterans are preventing food 
supplies from being delivered to local shops. Maize meal is 
available from the Grain Marketing Board, but only to those with a 
letter from war veterans demonstrating affiliation to ZANU-PF. 
 
----------------- 
FOOD IMPLICATIONS 
 
HARARE 00000395  003 OF 004 
 
 
----------------- 
 
¶7.  Since much of the violence is directed towards small-scale 
farmers and farm laborers, the impact on both the upcoming harvest 
and planting of the winter wheat crop is of particular concern. Food 
insecurity will be affected further by the burning of grain stocks 
and the slaughter of cattle. Food needs this hunger season also will 
be exacerbated by below average crop yields resulting from flooding 
that took place in December/January. In-country stocks of cereals, 
pulses, and vegetable oil are adequate to meet the current need. 
 
¶8.  Normal food distributions for this point in the year have ended. 
Given the violence, it is uncertain to what extent school feeding 
and safety net/vulnerable group feeding programs will be able to 
resume. The first test of this will be in mid-May when schools 
reopen. USAID is working with WFP and its C-SAFE NGO partners to 
re-establish contact with counselors at the local level to test the 
feasibility of operating in schools. USAID is hopeful that the 
non-sensitive nature of schools will provide an opening from which 
to support IDPs. The Mission has established a working group 
comprised of its food aid partners (WFP and C-SAFE) and human rights 
groups to ensure that the food needs of the displaced are met. 
Although large-scale distribution of household rations will 
apparently be needed earlier in the year due to the poor harvest, 
because of the inability to hold community meetings (essential for 
registration) there will no doubt be a delay in start-up. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
HUMANITARIAN NEEDS/CURRENT RESPONSE CAPACITY 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  The most urgent needs for those displaced include tents, 
blankets, food, soap, and sanitary items. Using existing resources, 
IOM, ZCDT, Christian Alliance, and some church affiliated groups 
have been able to meet food and non-food needs of the displaced. The 
existing stock of non-food relief supplies of IOM, UNICEF, WHO, 
OXFAM, and NGO partners is sufficient to meet ongoing non-food needs 
of IDPs for a limited (though not protracted) period of continued 
violence. Items in stock include plastic sheeting, tents, water 
containers and tanks, chlorine, solid waste kits, and soap. 
Similarly, on the food side, WFP and C-SAFE have adequate stocks 
in-country and in the pipeline; however, these levels are intended 
for school feeding and safety net/vulnerable group feeding. 
Therefore, if the number of IDPs increases dramatically, the 
pipeline will need to be revisited. Delivery of assistance is 
dependent on operational space. The designation of "no go" areas by 
war veterans, military officers, and even district administrators 
(under pressure of those perpetrating the violence) may hamper 
efforts to provide assistance. International NGOs have also received 
worrisome threats in the field. OCHA has now encouraged each of the 
UN agencies to resume operations in rural areas unless prohibited to 
do so because of security threats. Those NGOs with curtailed 
operations are likely to follow suit. OCHA is working with the 
Government on the access issue. This will be important to overcome 
not only for ongoing programs but also for assistance to IDPS, as 
many local organizations (including churches) have been hesitant to 
provide support to victims of torture for fear of retribution. 
 
¶10.  The network of hospitals and clinics throughout the country are 
either non-functional or unaffordable, resulting in victims having 
to travel great distances (oftentimes on foot) to access medical 
care. Absence of essential drugs and other health care commodities 
is also affecting the ability of victims to obtain medical 
treatment. Though DFID and the EU have provided UNICEF with funding 
to procure enough essential drugs for four months, distribution of 
the drugs is problematic since NATPHARM is government operated. 
Another constraint to medical care for victims of torture is the 
fact that CSU is the only donor-funded organization that provides 
medical and psycho-social treatment free of charge. Furthermore, 
because CSUs services are entirely funded by the USG, they are in 
jeopardy of being interrupted by overstretched financial resources. 
The Mission is in the process of requesting an early release of FY 
08 resources for CSU. The length, scale, and severity of violence 
will affect how quickly these resources are exhausted. 
 
-------------- 
USG ASSISTANCE 
-------------- 
 
¶11.  Based on the existing complex emergency disaster declaration 
issued in October 2008, the USG has utilized existing programs to 
respond to the violent turn of events. OFDA is building on a 
 
HARARE 00000395  004 OF 004 
 
 
previous grant to put into place a follow-on award of $750,000 to 
IOM; funding under this mechanism will be used to respond to IDP 
needs. In addition, through a small grant provided by the Mission's 
democracy and governance program, ZCDT is providing food and 
non-food assistance to IDPs. Furthermore, the USG is providing soap 
to IDPs via Oxfam's existing grant with OFDA to alleviate the 
effects of water and sanitation service delivery breakdowns for 
urban vulnerable populations. Title II emergency food aid is being 
provided from in-country stocks to assist IDPs. OFDA also is 
supporting humanitarian coordination through $100,000 in FY 08 
direct funding to OCHA. 
 
¶12.  Post may request OFDA consideration for additional non-food 
relief assistance for IDPs, protection- related programs, and 
medical aid for victims of torture if violence intensifies or is 
prolonged. Post will continue to monitor and report on the 
humanitarian crisis, and consult with OFDA about appropriate USG 
assistance in response to continuing and, likely, expanding needs. 
 
------------ 
COORDINATION 
------------ 
 
¶13.  Per reftel, there are concerns regarding OCHA's ability to 
effectively coordinate information collection and dissemination and 
a multi-donor response. However, they appear to be stepping up to 
the plate to lead the effort. OCHA is beginning to track numbers, 
locations, and needs of IDPs, is holding meetings with more 
frequency, and is considering the deployment of a Senior 
Humanitarian Advisor. Additionally, the UN has fielded two 
representatives from the UN Office of the High Commission for Human 
Rights. OCHA also is coordinating the possible deployment of two 
sets of multi-agency field visits to investigate the violence and 
ascertain any associated needs. Three of the teams were to visit 
Mudzi, Mutare, and Harare environs from April 26-27, but were put on 
hold following the Ministry of Social Welfare's dismissal of the 
need for the donor missions. Due to the government's response, it is 
unclear at this point if the assessments will take place. From May 
1-2, three additional assessment teams are tentatively scheduled to 
go to Bulawayo, Masvingo, and Hurungwe. 
 
¶14.  As more information becomes available, an update to this sitrep 
will be provided. 
 
MCGEE