08HAVANA759
Havana Lessons Learned from Hurricane Ike
Tue Sep 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
US Interests Section Havana
VZCZCXYZ0036
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUB #0759 2601924
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161924Z SEP 08
FM USINT HAVANA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3736UNCLAS HAVANA 000759 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
State for M and S/ES-O/CMS 
State for WHA/CCA and WHA/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AFIN AEMR AMGT ASEC CASC KFLO CU
SUBJECT: Havana Lessons Learned from Hurricane Ike 
 
Ref: State 98095 
 
¶1. USINT Havana's EAC met on September 12 to discuss lessons learned 
from Hurricane Ike.  As requested in reftel, post reports on what 
was learned specific to requesting and implementing authorized 
departure. 
 
2.USINT's EAC met on September 6 to discuss preparations for 
Hurricane Ike should its eventual track include Havana.  The EAC 
determined that it wanted to wait until more information was 
available on the storm's track before a decision was made on 
authorized departure.  In the meantime, employees were asked about 
their interest in authorized departure to be reported to the EAC the 
next day. 
 
¶3. The EAC reconvened on September 7.  Overnight, the storm had 
strengthened and its track was forecast to move over Havana. 
Several employees had expressed interest in authorized departure 
with one family confirmed that they would take advantage should it 
be granted.  The EAC decided to request authorized departure based 
on this information. 
 
LESSONS LEARNED 
 
¶4. Post has determined that there were several factors that led to 
only one TDY staff member departing prior to the storm:  inability 
to confirm seat reservations for charter flights during the weekend, 
sudden cancellations of flights, misconceptions about authorized 
departure and amount of time away from post, passports awaiting 
Cuban visas at the Ministry of Exterior (MINREX), and concerns about 
the protection of family pets and personal property. 
 
¶5.  Post has determined that any decision regarding authorized 
departure will be made no less than 72 hours in advance of an 
incoming storm with enough lead time to make flight arrangements. 
Post is working with U.S. charter companies and with foreign 
commercial airlines on contacts and flight schedules so that prompt 
decisions can be made on where to fly evacuees. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Post management is working on a fact sheet to educate 
employees and their family members on authorized departure so they 
can have an informed determination made for their family prior to 
any future emergencies.  Post is also working with WHA/CCA on the 
issue of the large number of passports of staff and family members 
typically awaiting multiple entry Cuban visas from the MINREX. 
While post would have made every effort to obtain the return of the 
thirty-three passports from the Cuban government for potential 
evacuees, there is a sense that some families may have felt they had 
no option of departing as they were without passports or if they did 
depart, renewing their visas in CUBINT in the U.S. would take longer 
than the authorized departure time. 
 
¶7.  In conclusion, post has reviewed and will be tightening its 
evacuation tripwires and procedures in the event that another 
serious storm or other emergency affects Havana. 
 
FARRAR