08JAKARTA1644
CONFIDENCE LOW DESPITE STRONG Q2 GDP
Fri Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO1480
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #1644/01 2420730
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290730Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9933
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2434
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5345
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 2972
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 4866
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 001644 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS AND EB/IFD/OMA 
TREASURY FOR IA/MALACHY NUGENT 
COMMERCE FOR 4430/KELLY 
DEPARTMENT PASS FEDERAL RESERVE SAN FRANCISCO FOR CURRAN 
DEPARTMENT PASS EXIM BANK 
SINGAPORE FOR SBAKER 
TOKYO FOR MGREWE 
USDA/FAS/OA YOST, MILLER, JACKSON 
USDA/FAS/OCRA CRIKER, HIGGISTON, RADLER 
USDA/FAS/OGA CHAUDRY, DWYER 
USTR WEISEL, EHLERS 
 
E.O. 12598: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN EINV ECON EAGR ID
SUBJECT: CONFIDENCE LOW DESPITE STRONG Q2 GDP 
 
REF: Jakarta 1487 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Indonesia's economy expanded a 6.4% in the second 
quarter of 2008, mainly on strong export and investment performance. 
 High prices, particularly in food commodities, continue to 
undermine the gains from faster economic growth.  Indonesian 
confidence in the economy and government remain very low by 
historical standards, despite an increase in July.  Government 
policies to offset the impact of rising prices on the poor exclude a 
large portion of the near poor community.  End Summary. 
 
GDP Growth Unexpectedly Strong 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) Indonesia's GDP expanded 6.4% (yoy) during the second 
quarter, beating most market forecasts.  Export growth remained 
strong in the second quarter, rising 16.1% (yoy), supported by high 
commodity prices.  The prices of many commodities have declined 
significantly since that time, however, dampening the outlook for 
export growth in the second half of the year.  Import growth 
remained robust, increasing 16.7% (yoy) during the second quarter. 
If import growth remains high and lower commodity prices hamper 
export growth, Indonesia may face slower growth and pressure on the 
Rupiah later this year, as the trade balance weakens. 
 
¶3. (U) The pace of investment and domestic consumption remained 
strong in the second quarter, but decelerated from the previous 
quarter.  Investment rose 12.8% (yoy) in the second quarter, down 
from 15.4% (yoy) in the first three months of the year.  Growth in 
domestic consumption fell to 5.5% (yoy) in the second quarter, down 
from 5.7% in the previous quarter.  A recent GOI report noted that 
the importance of domestic consumption to economic growth has 
declined this year, falling to 42% in the first half of the year, 
down from 52% in 2007. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Credit growth continues to rise in Indonesia, indicating 
investment may remain strong during the rest of the year.  Credit 
grew almost 35% (yoy) in July according to Bank Indonesia.  The 
banking sector has largely balanced credit growth across consumption 
loans, working capital loans, and investment loans.  While loan 
growth has increased significantly over the past year, deposit 
growth has slowed, likely due to negative real interest rates (the 
inflation rate is now roughly 300 basis points above the overnight 
interest rate).  If these trends persist, liquidity constraints 
could curb loan growth later this year.  Moreover, rapid loan growth 
usually causes deterioration in loan quality, which could prompt 
more conservative loan practices moving forward. 
 
High Food Prices Undermine Gains from Growth 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) High food and overall prices continue to strain household 
budgets.  Headline inflation rose to 11.9% (yoy) in July, driven in 
large part by a 19.9% (yoy) increase in the overall price of food 
(reftel).  Food price increases continue to hit the lowest income 
groups, which spend roughly 60% of their incomes on food, the 
hardest.  The price of rice, Indonesia's most important staple food, 
has stabilized in recent months, although the price is up 16.4% on a 
yoy basis.  If the international price of rice, which also declined 
significantly in June and July, rises again before the end of the 
year (when Indonesia traditionally imports rice), domestic rice 
prices could rise again, hurting consumers.  The current 
international price of rice is between $550 and $700, depending on 
the quality.  World Bank economists believe that rice prices over 
$700 per metric ton encourage smuggling out of Indonesia, putting 
additional pressure on domestic supply.  While rice harvests in 2008 
are not low by historic standards, the international rice market 
remains thinly traded and subject to significant volatility. 
According to rice market analysts, major buyers are currently 
waiting for lower prices, temporarily suppressing demand. 
 
 
JAKARTA 00001644  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) According to World Bank estimates, the rise in food prices 
in Indonesia has significantly undermined the positive impact of 
economic growth on poverty reduction.  The official poverty rate 
fell to 15.4% in 2008, from 16.6% in 2007.  However, according to 
World Bank estimates, the poverty rate would have been two 
percentage points (or 4.5 million people) lower in the absence of 
food price inflation.  World Bank officials also estimate that every 
additional 10% increase in the price of rice in Indonesia not only 
erodes all gains from economic growth, but also increases the number 
of people living below the poverty line by as much as 2 million. 
 
Food, Fuel, Jobs Remain Top Concerns 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (U) Despite some improvement in July, consumer confidence and 
confidence in the government are at historic lows in Indonesia. 
Danareksa Research Institute's Consumer Confidence Index rebounded 
in July, most likely in response to the government's direct cash 
transfer program and steadier rice prices.  However, the consumer 
confidence index, at 73, remains well below the 80 average level 
recorded in 2007.  The key concerns of consumers are the price of 
basic foodstuffs, the price and scarcity of fuel, and the lack of 
jobs.  Concern over each of these factors worsened from June to July 
in contrast to the overall trend.  Consumer concern over general 
inflation declined significantly over the same period. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Danareksa's confidence in government index also improved in 
July, but remains well below the level seen in 2007.  The index 
dropped to 80 in June from over 100 in late 2007 before rebounding 
to roughly 82 last month.  According to Danareksa analysts, a score 
of 100 or more is necessary for the current government to remain in 
power.  The sharp decline in the index is almost entirely due to the 
high and volatile price of food and the scarcity of job 
opportunities.  The other components of the index, namely the 
government's ability to maintain public safety, to support public 
infrastructure and to ensure legal certainty, remain at or near 100. 
 
 
Government Policies Overlook Near Poor 
-------------------------------------- 
¶9. (SBU) The Government of Indonesia's (GOI) policies to offset the 
impact of rising prices on the poor have succeeded for those 
receiving benefits, but the programs exclude a large portion of near 
poor community.  According to the World Bank, two of the 
government's largest pro-poor programs, the direct cash transfer 
program and the subsidized rice program, have been very effective in 
offsetting rising food and fuel prices for the 19 million poor 
households that receive benefits.   However, the program entails 
considerable leakages.  The means testing used to identify the 19 
million households placed on the list of poor families is very labor 
intensive and subject to error.  Because the list is static, it also 
misses many families that were just above the poverty line before 
the study, but have now fallen below that level, and retains 
families that have moved out of poverty.  Economists believe the 
latter is a particular problem in Indonesia's outer islands, where 
economic growth has increased significantly in recent years.  The 
GOI is planning to conduct an updated survey this year. 
 
¶10. (SBU) More targeted pro-poor policies are difficult to implement 
in Indonesia, according to experts.  Most economist feel large 
public works programs that provide low wage jobs are the best way to 
target poor households, as only individuals with true need apply to 
work.  However, analysts and government officials have noted that 
these programs are often ineffective in Indonesia, as public 
officials divert large portions of the project's resources through 
corrupt practices. 
 
HUME