08JAKARTA1097
INDONESIA -- CHILD/FORCED LABOR IN THE PRODUCTION
Thu Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO1626
OO RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #1097/01 1570354
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050354Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9198
INFO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 2602
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 2714
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2062
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 4649
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5107
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 1902
RUEHKA/AMEMBASSY DHAKA 1002
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 1046
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 3836
RUEHPT/AMCONSUL PERTH 0857
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 2722
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 JAKARTA 001097 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR FOR DRL/ILCSR (MMITTELHAUSER), G/TIP FOR STEVE 
STEINER, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS 
DOL FOR ILAB (RRIGBY, BSASSER) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB EIND ETRD PHUM PGOV ID
SUBJECT: INDONESIA -- CHILD/FORCED LABOR IN THE PRODUCTION 
OF GOODS 
 
REF: A. STATE 43120 
     ¶B. JAKARTA 0157 
     ¶C. (07) JAKARTA 3359 AND PREVIOUS 
 
JAKARTA 00001097  001.2 OF 007 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This report was coordinated with Consulate General 
Surabaya and Consulate Medan. 
 
¶2.  (U) SUMMARY:  As requested in Ref A, this report 
documents incidents of exploitation of child labor in the 
production of goods in Indonesia.  We found evidence of such 
activities in the following industries:  the shoe industry in 
West Java; tobacco plantations in East Java; furniture 
industry in East Java; and, fish and shrimp processing 
industries in North Sumatra. 
 
¶3.  (U) SUMMARY (Con'd):  In addition, we report on possible 
exploitative labor in tobacco plantations in North Sumatra. 
We also document forced child labor in the birds nest 
industry in Jakarta.  We will continue to investigate other 
allegations of exploitative or forced labor cases which we 
were unable to substantiate for this report.  We researched 
extensively for evidence of forced adult labor but found 
none.  Based on the totality of our research, child labor in 
the production of goods is a serious problem in Indonesia. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶4.  (U) Shoe Industry in Ciomas Regency, West Java: 
 
a.  Good:  Shoes, primarily women's shoes and sandals, 
manufactured in a household cottage industry in West Java for 
distribution to outlets throughout the archipelago.  There is 
no evidence that the shoes are exported.  Labels are local as 
well national brands, possibly counterfeited brand names.  We 
could not confirm whether national shoe companies purchased 
the shoes using their labels. 
 
b.  Type of Exploitation:  Exploited child labor, primarily 
aged 13-17, some younger, working long hours, for low pay and 
in unsafe work conditions. 
 
c.  Sources of Information:  A short 2008 report by Elsppat 
(a local NGO which works with out of school children), based 
on research for the International Labor Organization (ILO). 
In addition, in May 2008 Labatt interviewed Elsppat staff and 
made a field visit to Ciomas to directly observe this cottage 
shoe industry, visiting about 30 homes and observing two or 
three children in most homes.  Labatt interviewed children 
and adults in the households.  (Note:  See ref B for more 
details on Labatt's investigation.) 
 
d.  Narrative:  In Ciomas, West Java, a rural community near 
Bogor about 90 minutes from Jakarta, a cottage shoe industry 
encompassing 20 villages manufactures shoes in households. 
The shoes are purchased by Jakarta wholesale buyers for 
distribution to outlets across the country, from local 
markets to mall boutiques.  Children regularly work 16-hour 
days - or sometimes round the clock during rush orders, 
napping at the workplace.  They sit on the floor (causing 
ergonomic injuries) in enclosed spaces applying toxic glue 
with their fingers.  Children typically begin working at age 
14, after completing junior high school.  A local department 
of health doctor told Labatt that the glue causes nausea and 
dizziness, and is addictive.  Glue is possibly linked to 
liver damage later in life.  Some children attend school half 
days but still work 12 hours a day and neglect their studies. 
 Once children begin working, they do not want to return to 
school. 
 
Each household employs between 3 and 20 workers which include 
the heads of households, their families, neighbors and 
workers from other cities in West Java.  Many of the 
households employ children.  Children are family members, 
 
JAKARTA 00001097  002.2 OF 007 
 
 
neighbors and children who accompany adult workers from other 
cities.  Under research done for ILO in a DOL-funded study 
completed in 2008, Elsppat documented 600 children in six of 
the villages.  Children were mostly boys.  This situation has 
existed for at least the four years documented by Elsppat. 
Elspatt told Labatt that it conservatively estimates over a 
thousand children working in an expanding industry across 20 
villages.  Wholesale buyers own many of the household 
factories, built on former rice paddies.  Industry is driven 
by poverty with the average education level of children in 
Ciomas area grade six.  Wholesale buyers claimed they are not 
aware of child workers or that it is not their concern. 
Adults said they cannot survive without the children's income 
and while many admit they would like their children to return 
to school, they do not believe they are exploiting the 
children.  Children are considered "helpers" or "apprentices" 
and are paid through the adult workers, receiving a fraction 
of the USD90 a month paid to the adult based on piece work. 
(Minimum wage in a factory is about USD90 for a 40-hour 
week).  Children do the same work as adults, cutting molds 
and gluing the materials. 
 
e.  Incidence:  We have no evidence that a cottage shoe 
industry of this scale which employs children exists outside 
of Ciomas, although we have unsubstantiated reports from NGOs 
of scattered cottage shoe industries in poorer Jakarta 
suburbs. 
 
f.  Efforts to Combat Forced Labor:  ILO and Elsppat worked 
with local officials over the past several years to improve 
the work situation and reduce child labor.  Some local 
officials were responsive and others not; the impact on 
changing the attitudes of households and wholesale buyers in 
using child labor was minimal.  Elsppat reported that 
outreach did persuade some households to stop employing 
children.  Other households adopted the use of benches and 
tables to reduce the ergonomic stress, as well as use of glue 
applicators, keeping the glue containers closed, and doing 
the work in more open, airy rooms.  Elsppat has also taught 
children how to sew clothing with sewing machines donated by 
the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce, a healthier occupation 
for children.  Elsppat helped households to form organic 
vegetable farmers' cooperatives and to market the produce 
locally in order to reduce the need for children to work. 
Elsppat provided tutoring and vocational education to out of 
school children using their own volunteer staff donations and 
tutors who live in the community. 
 
¶5.  (U) Swallow Bird Nest Industry, Jakarta 
 
a.  Bird nests for use in food and medicines. 
 
b.  Type of exploitation:  Forced child labor in western 
Jakarta, enslaved in cottage industries hidden in housing 
complexes behind locked gates.  Children are forced to work 
long hours at low or no pay, in unsafe environments, and are 
not free to leave the workplace. 
 
c.  Sources of information:  Labatt interview in April and 
May 2008 with the National Commission on Child Protection; 
evidence from police arrests.  Child Commission conducted 
field investigation into this case in 2007 and 2008.  Based 
on observations, interviews in the community and interviews 
with parents of exploited children, the Child Commission 
gathered enough evidence to persuade the Manpower Ministry 
and Indonesian National Police (INP) anti-trafficking unit to 
conduct a raid which uncovered more evidence.  Police are 
still investigating.  Labatt assistant interviewed the local 
Legal Aid Society attorney handling the case on behalf of the 
children and their families. 
 
d.  Incidence:  This practice is limited to one neighborhood 
 
JAKARTA 00001097  003.2 OF 007 
 
 
in west Jakarta.  The 22 children cited above were documented 
because of police action.  The Child Commission believes that 
based on observation and interviews that hundreds of more 
children are enslaved in this same neighborhood in locked 
housing complexes. 
 
e.  Narrative:  Bird nests are a multi-million dollar 
industry in Asia. Indonesia exports birds nests to Hong Kong, 
Singapore and other countries.  Only a small fraction is 
intended for the local market.  In West Jakarta, Child 
Commission found dozens of houses located in an elite housing 
complex used as a factory to clean swallow bird nests, 
employing children aged 12 -17, although age was difficult to 
prove because of the tight security at the factory.  They 
work 10-14 hours a day - and round the clock during peak 
demand -- cleaning birds nests and processing the nests into 
medicine and soup.  Children are exposed to chemicals used to 
clean the birds nests from impurities.  They sit on the floor 
in an enclosed room without sunlight. They work, eat and 
sleep in the house, on mattresses or on the floor in crowded 
rooms.  They are promised salaries of USD35-40 per month but 
those rescued were never paid.  Between 50-100 child workers 
are believed to be confined in a single house and not allowed 
to go out or accept visits by parents or other relatives, 
Child Commission alleges based on observations and interviews 
in the community.  Children are beaten if they attempt to run 
away. 
 
Oftentimes, parents were not aware that their children were 
lured into this slavery situation through employment brokers. 
 Parents could locate their children or were forced to pay 
exorbitant debts to secure their release.  Employers paid 
USD50 per child to the recruitment agencies.  Some children 
were forced to sign a two-year contract, while other children 
did not have contracts. 
 
f.  Efforts to Combat Forced Labor:   On August 12, 2007, the 
Child Commission worked with Indonesian National Police (INP) 
and Manpower Ministry to carry out a raid rescuing six 
children who worked in a bird nest factory located in West 
Jakarta.  On January 3, 2008, INP arrested a male suspect who 
employed the children. The trial is still ongoing.  Chair of 
Legal Aid in Banyumas, Central Java told Labatt assistant 
they are currently representing 15 children who have been 
rescued from the bird nest industry owned by the accused. 
 
¶6.  (U) Fish Processing Factories in Sibolga, North Sumatra 
 
a.  Fresh fish 
 
b.  Type of Exploitation:  Exploited child labor in a North 
Sumatra seaport town, mostly aged 14-17, and some under age 
10,  working long hours, for low pay and in unsafe 
conditions. 
 
c.  Sources of Information:  An investigative freelance 
television reporter documenting child labor in North Sumatra 
filmed the children in the two factories using a hidden video 
camera.  The filming took place in April 2008.  Subsequent 
filming was planned but the reporter has been unable to 
reenter the factory. In May 2008, ConGen Medan viewed the 
video showing the children at work and spoke with the 
reporter, who is trying to market the film to Indonesian TV 
stations.  In late May, a local television station, TV-ONE 
showed approximately 30 seconds of the video as part of an 
evening news program, but no official action appears to have 
been taken. ConGen intends to investigate this case at the 
soonest opportunity.  There are no official or other sources 
for this case due to the hidden nature and sensitivity of the 
case. 
 
d.  Incidence:  We have no reports of children used in the 
 
JAKARTA 00001097  004.2 OF 007 
 
 
fish processing industry outside of this one small town on 
the west coast of North Sumatra. 
 
e.  Narrative:  Approximately 50 children were observed and 
videotaped in each of two factories using small scaling 
knifes to clean remove fish scales.  The children are brought 
to the factory by adults, often parents, who employ the 
children to help meet their daily production quotas. The 
cameraman captured the video using a hidden camera. The video 
seen by ConGen Medan depicted teenage children who appeared 
to be under age 18 sorting and cleaning the fish with small 
knives.  Some appeared to be under age 10. Two youth were 
interviewed while cleaning fish. The cameraman asked if they 
were to attending school. Both replied that they had dropped 
out. At this factory fish are brought directly by fishing 
vessels and exported to Asian countries, the reporter told 
ConGen. 
 
f. Efforts to Combat Forced Labor:  No action is being taken 
at this time but ConGen intends to discuss this case directly 
with the governor. 
 
¶7.  (U) North Sumatra Prawn Factories 
 
a.  Prawns 
 
b.  Types of exploitation:  Exploitation of child labor, aged 
14-18, in two prawn and squid canning factories in industrial 
zones in Medan, North Sumatra, who work long hours, for low 
pay and in unhealthy conditions. 
 
c.  Sources of Information:  A 2008 written report by a 
highly respected North Sumatra NGO  (it asked to have its 
identity protected) and interviews by ConGen Medan with this 
NGO in May 2008, as well as a June 2008 telephone 
conversation by Labatt with this NGO.  ConGen stated that 
this NGO is among the most reliable NGOs in North Sumatra 
whose reports have proven accurate in the past.  The NGO 
directly observed the conditions, had staff working in the 
factory, and interviewed families and their children to 
document this case. 
 
d.  Incidence:  We do not know of any other such industries 
in Indonesia. 
 
e.  Narrative:  The NGO cited above recently documented 
exploitive employment of 70 children age 14-18 and an unknown 
number of children in another factory in industrial zones on 
the outskirts of Medan, the capital of North Sumatra. 
Children work 12 or more hours a day peeling prawns and 
slicing squid for export, for wages that are fraction of 
poverty adult wages. Children are recruited from villages 
around Medan through family who work in the factories. 
Children are bused in from homes by the employers into the 
factory compounds and not allowed to leave during breaks, 
making documenting their employment difficult.  The children 
are not registered among the contract workers in the 
factories and employers claim the children are helping their 
parents.  Work involves sorting export quality prawns, 
peeling them and putting them into boxes.  Children inside 
the factory building work in very cold rooms and wear heavy 
coats, while other children work outside in the open air. 
They are paid according to daily quotas, receiving about 
USD1.50 a day in one factory and about USD80 a month in a 
second factory, slightly below the prevailing minimum wage 
for factory work with eight-hour days.  Children are picked 
up by buses at 5 a.m., work from 7 a.m. until 7 p.m., and do 
not get home until 10 p.m.  They are constantly weak and 
tired. 
 
f.  Efforts to Combat Forced Labor:  The NGO which 
investigated this case has not reported this child 
 
JAKARTA 00001097  005.2 OF 007 
 
 
exploitation to authorities out of concern that the 
government action could worsen the children's welfare.  The 
government would remove children from the factories and 
return them to the plantations where they live, where they 
are vulnerable to being trafficked to Malaysia.  The NGO 
instead intends to propose a solution which would remove 
children under 15 years of age from the factories, and 
provide decent working hours, food and better conditions for 
the older teenage workers.  The children are largely 
illiterate and have few alternatives. 
 
¶8.  (U) Tobacco Plantations, North Sumatera 
 
a.  Tobacco for cigar wrappings 
 
b.  Type of exploitation:  Exploitation of child labor who 
work helping their families in harvesting tobacco on 
plantations in North Sumatra Province.  Allegedly children 
worked long hours at low wages, using dangerous tools and 
were subject to pesticides, according to a 2004 ILO study. 
However, ConGen Medan investigated this from several sources 
in May 2008, including a visit to the plantation in question, 
and could confirm no use of child labor. 
 
c.  Sources of Information:  ILO's Child Labor Report on 
Tobacco Plantations on North Sumatera Province based on 2004 
field research by a local NGO; ConGen Medan interviews with 
local NGOs and a visit to one of the plantations which 
allegedly exploited children.  The NGO which conducted the 
study used questionnaires to interview 100 adults and 100 
children in 2004.  This NGO refused to discuss the case with 
personnel from Consulate Medan. 
 
d.  Narrative:  Adult workers in the North Sumatra tobacco 
plantations have traditionally brought family members to help 
in the fields, including young children. In the 2004 ILO 
study, children worked for families sharing in the adult 
contract workers' wages.  Child laborers help their family in 
seasonal work by performing jobs suited to their age and sex. 
The child labor shifts usually are designed to accommodate 
school hours and the nature of tobacco growing.  This means 
work can only be done at certain times of the day, 
particularly picking insects off the plants (which feed at 
dawn and dusk). Harvesting leaves is done in the early 
morning to ensure that they can be sorted, processed, and 
sent for drying in one day.  Hazards include injuries from 
pickaxes and hoes, and exposure to pesticides. 
 
e.  Incidence: The ILO study was done in several state-owned 
plantations in Deli Serdang district, North Sumatera province 
and this type of tobacco plantation is limited to that 
district.  This particular type of tobacco is used for export 
to high-end cigar manufacturers in Europe.  ConGen Medan 
interviewed NGOs and visited one of the tobacco plantations 
and could find no proof that child labor still exists. 
European buyers closely inspect the production process for 
cigar wrappers and it is possible that this has discouraged 
the traditional use of child labor.  ILO told Labatt that 
they would follow up with their sources to see if they can 
find any evidence that this practice still exists. 
 
f.  Efforts to Combat Forced Labor:   ILO worked with the 
local government following their study to educate plantation 
owners and families on use of child labor. 
 
¶9.  (U) Labor on Tobacco Plantations Jember District, East 
Java 
 
a.  Tobacco for cigarettes, primarily clove cigarettes 
 
b.  Type of exploitation:  Exploitation of child labor, 
mostly age 15-17, in growing and processing tobacco in East 
 
JAKARTA 00001097  006.2 OF 007 
 
 
Sumatra, working long hours, for low pay and in unsafe 
conditions. 
 
c.  Sources of Information:  ILO-IPEC 2006 study "Child Labor 
on Tobacco Plantations in Jember District."  Researchers 
interviewed 100 parents and 100 children, 50 respondents each 
in four locations. Labatt also interviewed the executive 
director of Community Self-Sufficiency Initiative Foundation 
(YPSM) in Jember District which researched this situation. 
Surabaya Consulate General interviewed directors of radio 
stations in Jember who are familiar with the issue. 
 
d.  Narrative:  Children in Jember District of East Java have 
traditionally helped parents in the tobacco fields.  Work 
involving children includes preparing the land, planting, 
watering, fertilizing, spraying insecticides, planting, 
drying tobacco and other processing work.  Work is seasonal. 
Boys and girls participate equally.  The numbers involved are 
not known.  Children age 15 to 17 work between 7 and 9 hours 
a day; younger children work fewer hours.  Over 86 percent of 
those interviewed are age 15 or older.  Children are paid 
basically the same as adults according to output, making 
between USD12 to USD35 a month.  Hazards include extreme heat 
and rain, heavy lifting, exposure to toxic fertilizers and 
insecticides, exposure to tobacco dust and aroma, hot and 
stuffy rooms, use of sharp tools, and no access to toilets. 
Fifty four percent of children interviewed reported 
occupational related accidents and sickness. 
 
e.  Incidence:  Use of child labor in this type of tobacco 
plantation work appears to be limited to this part of East 
Java. 
 
f.  Efforts to Combat Child Labor:  ILO has worked with the 
local government to educate the community by asking parents 
to let their children, especially girls, return to school. 
They have also carried out safety and health education 
programs.  Families still choose put their children to work, 
particularly during harvest season.  However, YPSM and ILO 
told Labatt that although child workers still exist in the 
plantations the number of children has been reduced 
significantly in the past ten years due to government efforts 
to promote compulsory study. 
 
¶10.  (U) Furniture and Woodworking Industries in Jepara 
Regency, Central Java 
 
a.  Wood furniture, screens, handicrafts and other products 
carved from wood 
 
b.  Types of exploitation: Exploitation of child labor, age 
12-17, in furniture and woodcarving cottage industries in one 
district of Central Java, who work long hours, for low pay, 
and in unhealthy, unsafe work conditions. 
 
c.  Sources of Information:  ILO's 2008 draft report of Rapid 
Assessment on Occupational Safety and Health (OSH), Child and 
Young Workers in the Furniture and Woodworking Industries in 
Central Java, Indonesia; a Labatt interview with a lecturer 
at the University of Diponegoro in Semarang and with an 
official at the Jepara Manpower Office.  (Note:  While the 
ILO study is still in draft form, Labatt interviewed the 
Diponegoro University researcher who conducted that research, 
and the information in this section is based primarily on 
that interview with permission from the researcher to source 
him.)  University of Diponegoro methodology used direct 
interviews in the community using questionnaires and focus 
group discussion, observation and gathering of secondary 
data.  Interviews also were done with local government 
agencies, village heads, and some members of Jepara District 
Action Committee on Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child 
Labour. They interviewed 152 respondents:  28 female and 124 
 
JAKARTA 00001097  007.2 OF 007 
 
 
male, 75 of below 18 years of age, and 77 over age 18. 
 
d.  Narrative:  In Jepara, Central Java, the furniture and 
woodcarving industry employed 85,250 workers in 2001. 
Woodcarving began in Jepara in the 15th century.  In 2007, 
University of Diponegoro documented 2300 child workers in 
just half the Jepara Regency.  Over 80 percent are boys. 
Children work in cottage or household furniture and 
woodcarving industries which supply medium to large companies 
for domestic and foreign markets.  Children are regarded as 
apprentices. The wholesale buyers pay the adults based on 
production and either do not know about child labor or choose 
to ignore it.  Children earn about USD2 a day, working at 
least 12 hours a day.  Child wages are comparable to what 
adults earn. (Note: Minimum factory wages in Jepara for 
eight-hour shifts are about USD100 a month.) The Jepara 
Manpower Office provided Labatt a long list of medium and 
large companies that outsourced their orders to home 
industries.  These companies usually have over 300 employees 
and are oftentimes are foreign direct investment companies, 
according to the Manpower Office. 
 
Production is mainly of unpainted screens, and European style 
furniture carved in teak, mahogany and ebony, as well as of 
handicrafts responding to changing demands. The tasks 
performed by children include box making, carpentry (wood 
cutting, plane the wood, assembling), wood carving, furniture 
caulking, product coding, lifting, heating wood in ovens, 
packing, painting furniture, plaiting rattan, polishing, 
sanding, and upholstery crafting.  There was no separation 
between child workers and adults.  Hazards include chemical 
exposure to glue, paint, coloring as well as solvent, and LPG 
for rattan dryer support, as well as exposure to teakwood sap 
and wood dust, and loud noise. 
 
e.  Incidence: University of Diponegoro said this type of 
furniture and woodcarving industry is not unique to Jepara, 
Central Java, but is common in other parts of Indonesia, such 
as in Cirebon, West Java. 
 
f.  Efforts to Combat Child Labor:  The Central Java 
Provincial Regulation on Prevention of Child Labor was passed 
in December 2007.  To enforce the regulation, initial actions 
included data collection on the number of child workers by 
the Japara Manpower Office and pursuing the legal cases of 
child workers.  Manpower also is  planning to conduct 
workshops on child worker protection with focus on the 
furniture industry.  ILO presented the results of its study 
at a workshop in collaboration with the Japara Manpower 
Office. 
 
¶11.  (U) We also obtained information about goods that may 
have some indication of exploitive child labor in their 
production, but not enough to report in this tasking.   NGOs 
reported to us, based on first-hand witness accounts from 
their staff, of exploitation of child labor in clothing and 
shoe industry in Jakarta, brick making in Sumatra, gold and 
silver mining in Java and Kalimantan, and in the lumber 
industry in Kalimantan.  We will continue to investigate 
these in the coming weeks.  We also will work with labor 
organizations and NGOs to advocate for the elimination of the 
child labor exploitation cited in this report. 
HEFFERN