08JAKARTA2247
FINANCIAL CRISIS IMPACT ON AVERAGE INDONESIAN RISING
Fri Dec 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO4675
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #2247/01 3471052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121052Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0956
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2846
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5730
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 3403
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 5229
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 6394
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 JAKARTA 002247 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS, EAP/EP AND EEB/IFD/OMA 
TREASURY FOR IA/MALACHY NUGENT AND TRINA RAND 
COMMERCE FOR 4430/KELLY 
DEPT PASS FEDERAL RESERVE SAN FRANCISCO FOR CURRAN 
DEPARTMENT PASS EXIM BANK 
SINGAPORE FOR SBAKER 
TOKYO FOR MGREWE 
USDA/FAS/OA YOST, MILLER, JACKSON 
USDA/FAS/OCRA CRIKER, HIGGISTON, RADLER 
USDA/FAS/OGA CHAUDRY, DWYER 
DEPT PASS USTR WEISEL, EHLERS 
 
E.O. 12598: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN EINV ECON EAGR ID
SUBJECT: FINANCIAL CRISIS IMPACT ON AVERAGE INDONESIAN RISING 
 
REF: A) Jakarta 2206 B) Jakarta 2207 C) Jakarta 2104 D) Jakarta 
2157 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  To date the global financial crisis has affected 
primarily Indonesia's wealthy population, as middle and low income 
Indonesian have few or no stock or bond investments and the 
Indonesian banking sector has remained stable.  The concurrent 
reduction in food prices and increase in government anti-poverty 
programs have also eased pressure on middle and low-income families 
in recent months.  Yet analysts are predicting a sharp slowdown in 
growth, tighter credit conditions, rising unemployment, and pressure 
on wages through early 2009, increasing the likelihood that the 
effects of the financial crisis will spread to average Indonesian 
households. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Turmoil in global financial markets has reduced the 
government of Indonesia's (GOI) ability to increase fiscal spending 
and ease monetary policy to blunt the impact of slower growth. 
Corporate and consumer credit quality is also set to decline, 
limiting the local banks' appetite to extend significant new loans. 
As the impact on middle and low-income Indonesians intensifies, 
confidence in the government may begin to wane.  End summary. 
 
 
Lower Food and Fuel Prices Boost Purchasing Power 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
¶3. (SBU) To date the global financial crisis has largely affected 
Indonesia's wealthy population, as middle and low-income Indonesian 
have few or no stock or bond investments.  The concurrent slowdown 
in overall and food price inflation have eased pressure on middle 
and low-income families.  Overall food prices fell 0.12% between 
October and November 2008 and the price of rice, which comprises as 
much as one-third of the total household spending in Indonesia, is 
down almost 7% from its 2008 peak (ref A).  The government's recent 
reduction in the price of subsidized gasoline will also help offset 
transportation costs for Indonesian families.  [Note:  Although poor 
and middle-income families receive some benefit from lower gasoline 
prices, the bulk of the benefit accrues to wealthy, automobile 
owning Indonesians. End note.]  In addition, the government's direct 
cash transfer program and subsidized rice scheme have successfully 
boosted poor households' purchasing power this year. 
 
¶4. (SBU) These benign trends helped increase consumer confidence and 
reverse some anti-government sentiment that had built up earlier in 
the year. Danareksa's Consumer Confidence Index rose for the fifth 
straight month in November, and Roy Morgan's consumer confidence 
barometer jumped 5.6 points between the second and third quarters 
this year.  The gains in consumer confidence where attributed in 
large part to improved confidence among households earning less than 
IDR 500,000 per month ($45.50).  Danareksa's Confidence in 
Government Index also rose in November increasing 2.2% over the 
previous month, reflecting respondents' view that overall economic 
conditions had improved.  Despite improved consumer confidence, the 
number of respondents that stated job scarcity was a major problem 
rose from 23.3% in October to 24.7% in November. 
 
Growth Set to Slow Significantly 
------------------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) While lower price levels have supported improved standards 
of living for many low-income households, a slowdown in the real 
sector resulting from the prolonged global financial crisis will 
likely undermine these trends.  Analysts have significantly reduced 
their growth forecasts for Indonesia in 2009, in some cases from 
6.0% to less than 4.0%, as exports and investment show significant 
signs of weakening.  The sharp slowdown in overall world demand, as 
well as the sharp decline in the prices of many of Indonesia's 
primary commodity exports will continue to put downward pressure on 
the value and volume of exports in the coming months.  Export growth 
slowed significantly in October (ref A) and anecdotal information 
from the business community suggests this trend will intensify in 
 
JAKARTA 00002247  002 OF 004 
 
 
November and December.  The sharp drop in commodity prices has also 
delayed payments to Indonesian commodity exporters, as buyers seek 
to renegotiate prices and bankers seize shipments that producers put 
up as collateral for loans, according to recent press reports. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Limited access to financing also threatens to undercut 
export and investment growth over the medium term.  The Indonesian 
corporate sector is significantly healthier now than in the years 
leading up to the 1997-98 financial crises, with debt-to-asset 
ratios of companies listed on the stock exchange declining 30 
percentage points between 2000 and 2007, according to the IMF. 
However, even healthy firms are having difficulty accessing 
short-term trade finance due to a reduction in USD liquidity in the 
domestic banking system and rising risk aversion among foreign 
banking organizations, according to bankers at ING Jakarta.  Bank 
Indonesia (BI) has announced plans to guarantee trade finance 
extended by banks with high credit ratings, but the effectiveness of 
the new program, initiated on December 5, remains unclear.  The 
price of USD credit has more than doubled since June, according to 
the ING bankers, making loans cost prohibitive for all but the 
strongest Indonesian firms.  According to bankers from UBS Jakarta, 
several prominent Indonesian firms with strong balance sheets have 
approached them to provide funds to refinance maturing USD debt in 
excess of $100 million, raising concerns of large refinancing 
requirements in the corporate sector that have not been met by local 
or foreign banks.  A growing number of local firms have cancelled 
all expansion plans in the near term in an effort to preserve cash, 
further diminishing the outlook for investment, according to ING. 
 
Job Losses Begin to Mount 
------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Formal unemployment is set to rise significantly in 
Indonesia as economic activity slows, tempering the outlook for 
robust domestic demand growth.  In particular, reduced global demand 
is likely to adversely impact Indonesia's labor-intensive export 
industries, such as garments, footwear, and electronics. 
Unemployment rates have already begun to rise, with over 60,000 
workers in the formal sector either terminated or laid off this 
year.  Analysts expect these trends to intensify during the first 
half of 2009, with as many as 1,000,000 people in danger of losing 
jobs (ref B).  Rising job losses among middle class workers in the 
formal sector may flood the informal sector, as middle class 
families shed household staff.  While the informal sector can absorb 
many of the workers, the rise in the number of individuals seeking 
work will drive down already low wages in the sector. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Anton Gunawan of Bank Danamon noted in a recent 
presentation that layoffs and wage reductions in the commodities 
sector outside Java have already lowered consumption levels in those 
regions.  Many small palm oil plantation holders who enjoyed 
windfall profits this spring when palm oil prices reached their peak 
are now drastically readjusting their spending patterns, according 
to a recent World Bank survey.  In line with these trends, car sales 
in Indonesia dropped to over 47,000 units in November from that of 
54,000 units in the previous month, according to the Indonesian 
Automotive Industry Association.  ING representatives in Jakarta 
warned of significant asset quality and liquidity problems in the 
consumer finance sector as job losses increase.  These weaknesses 
may result in a sharp contraction in the availability of consumer 
credit and the failure of a number of subprime consumer credit 
firms, further depressing consumption patterns in 2009. 
 
Financial Market Turmoil Limits GOI Ability to Respond 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
¶9. (SBU) Although the GOI and BI have been proactive in addressing 
the global financial crisis to date (ref C), higher funding costs 
and ongoing pressure on the currency limit the GOI's ability to 
blunt the impact of the global financial crisis on the real sector. 
In terms of fiscal policy, the yield on 10-year IDR denominated 
 
JAKARTA 00002247  003 OF 004 
 
 
government bonds eased recently to roughly 12.0%, but had risen to 
over 20.0% as recently as late October as global risk aversion to 
emerging market debt intensified.  The GOI has made significant 
efforts to secure funding from multilateral organizations (ref C), 
reducing the need to secure financing from the private sector to 
maintain spending levels.  The reduction in oil prices has also 
reduced the size of the government's subsidy bill, creating 
additional space for spending.  The GOI has stated plans to increase 
pro-poor and infrastructure spending in 2009, but few observers 
expect these initiatives to yield significant new jobs.  A new 
large-scale spending program capable of creating long-term job 
growth will require private sector funding that is increasingly 
difficult to secure in a climate of rising risk aversion.  In 
addition, the potential for corruption in large-scale infrastructure 
and disputes over land use continue to hinder the GOI from moving 
more quickly on job creating public works programs. 
 
¶10. (SBU) In terms of monetary policy, Bank Indonesia (BI) eased its 
overnight policy rate by 25 basis points on December 4, but ongoing 
pressure on the Indonesian rupiah (IDR) limits the central bank's 
ability to ease monetary policy at a rapid pace.  Indonesia's 
currency continues to trade near the IDR/USD 11,000 level, up from 
9,500 just three months ago, and rose above IDR/USD 13,000 during 
the month of November.  Analysts expect pressure on the currency to 
continue given the risk of further capital flight amid global 
uncertainty and Indonesia's deteriorating balance of payments 
position.  Indonesia's balance of payments turned negative during 
the third quarter of 2008, despite an improvement in the current 
account deficit.  The negative balance resulted from a significant 
decline in the capital account balance.  Net portfolio flows fell 
from $4.3 billion in the second quarter to negative $58 million in 
the third quarter.  Analysts expect both the current account and the 
capital account to deteriorate further in the fourth quarter, as 
export growth and portfolio flows continue to decline, putting 
additional pressure on the IDR. 
 
Banking Sector Vulnerabilities Rise 
----------------------------------- 
¶11. (SBU) The rapid increase in credit recent years provided 
considerable support for economic growth in Indonesia, but 
deteriorating credit quality and tighter liquidity conditions will 
temper banks' appetite to extend new loans and spur economic growth. 
 Credit growth remained high through October 2008, with year-on-year 
growth reaching 37%, but signs of a slowdown are emerging.  While 
recent official figures are unavailable, anecdotal information from 
the business community suggests a deceleration of credit growth in 
November.  In addition, as the global crisis spreads to the real 
sector, credit quality will likely deteriorate.  While overall 
nonperforming loans in the banking sector remain low, at 3.9% as of 
October 2008, analysts expect an increase in nonperforming loans in 
the commodities and transportation sectors, as well as small and 
medium-sized enterprise (SMEs) and consumer segments.  Loan 
concentrations in the mining, agriculture, and transportation 
sectors have increased in recent years; these sectors comprised 28 
percent of total bank loans as of September 2008. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Indonesian banks' cost of funds also continues to rise, 
putting additional upward pressure on lending rates.  Deposit growth 
has improved but has not kept pace with credit growth and remains 
low, at a rate of 18% (yoy) in October 2008.  Moreover, the lack of 
a blanket guarantee on deposits raises the risk of depositor flight 
to neighboring countries such as Singapore that have imposed a 
blanket deposit guarantee.  At the same time, tighter liquidity 
conditions in the interbank market have increased the need for banks 
to attract additional deposits.  Interbank lending rates remain 
roughly 100 basis points above the level recorded six months ago, as 
concerns about counterparty credit risk among banks persist, 
particularly in the wake of the failure of Bank Century.  Deposit 
rates at some banking institutions have exceeded 13% in recent 
months, up from 9-10% in July and August.  As a result, lending 
 
JAKARTA 00002247  004 OF 004 
 
 
rates have risen to close to 18% and are unlikely to fall until 
confidence and liquidity in the interbank market returns. 
 
Government Approval Ratings Unaffected, Yet 
------------------------------------------- 
¶13. (SBU) Approval ratings for President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's 
administration have increased in recent months, largely in line with 
the easing of price pressures on average Indonesian households (ref 
D).  As the impact of the global financial crisis spreads, these 
ratings trends may begin to weaken.  The outlook for job creation 
and the cost of living have been significant drivers of confidence 
in the government in recent years, according to researchers at 
Danareksa.  While lower global commodity prices and slower inflation 
will continue to boost purchasing power among the poor, the 
anticipated acceleration in job losses and decline in nominal wages 
could significantly dilute the impact of lower inflation.  Spending 
associated with the 2009 election cycle and pro-poor government 
programs should help alleviate the immediate spending needs of 
Indonesian families.  Yet the GOI's ability to create a significant 
number of long-term jobs and spur economic activity in the near term 
remains questionable. 
 
HUME