08JERUSALEM941
FATAH REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL CRITICIZES
Wed Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO1117
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #0941/01 1561437
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041437Z JUN 08
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1703
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 000941 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR FO/IPA, NSC FOR ABRAMS/SINGH/PASCUAL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWBG PGOV PREL PTER PHUM IS
SUBJECT: FATAH REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL CRITICIZES 
NEGOTIATIONS AND PM FAYYAD, LOOKS TOWARD FATAH SIXTH 
CONGRESS 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The Fatah Revolutionary Council (FRC) met in 
Ramallah May 24-26 and addressed four key issues: permanent 
status negotiations, Fatah-Hamas dialogue, the Fatah Sixth 
Party Congress and PA performance.  FRC members criticized 
the ongoing negotiations and said if there is no permanent 
status agreement by the year's end, Fatah must pursue an 
alternative strategy.  Some FRC members pushed for dialogue 
with Hamas through Arab mediation, but President Abbas was 
firm that Hamas must first accept his conditions.  FRC 
members discussed preparations for the Sixth Congress, and 
most agreed it must be held this summer.  However, there was 
no decision on the number, composition or selection mechanism 
of delegates.  The final communiqu highlighted that a new 
government should include Fatah and other political factions. 
 There were strong critics of PM Fayyad's government, 
especially Nasser Yusif and Haj Ismayil Jabr, but Abbas 
strongly defended Fayyad.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Note: FRC members Adnan Samara, Muhammad al-Madani, Raji 
al-Nijmi, Samir Shahadah, Zafir Nubani and Ahmad Ghnaym 
briefed POL Specialist on the discussions described below. 
End Note. 
 
Negotiations' Failure and Alternative Strategy 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3.  In opening the meeting, PA President and Fatah Chairman 
Mahmud Abbas (Abu Mazen) expressed concern over the "fading 
hope" of an agreement this year and his personal 
disappointment in the process, but said he will continue to 
work for an agreement.  Ahmad Quraya' (Abu Ala'a) said 
negotiations continue and are serious, but he doubts there 
will be a breakthrough.  Most FRC members criticized 
negotiations and pointed to the declining chances of an 
agreement this year.  Most also said they want Fatah to 
identify alternative strategies if the negotiations fail, and 
they agreed a committee should develop such strategies for 
FRC consideration.  Some FRC members urged Fatah to embrace 
armed resistance if negotiations fail, but the overwhelming 
majority agreed on a strategy of non-violent resistance if 
there is no agreement.  The FRC specifically recommended that 
Fatah adopt the model that has been used in Bili'n where 
activists have held weekly peaceful protests against the 
separation barrier. 
 
FRC Favors Fatah-Hamas Dialogue, but 
Yemeni Initiative Must be Starting Point 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Many FRC members pushed for dialogue with Hamas through 
Arab mediation; however, their position was weakened by 
Hamas' refusal to accept the Yemeni initiative and Abbas' 
reiteration that he will not engage with Hamas until it 
accepts this conditions.  Most FRC members supported Abbas' 
position and rejected Azzam al-Ahmad's efforts to open a 
dialogue with Hamas on implementation of the Yemeni 
initiative. 
 
Sixth Fatah Congress 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  FRC members discussed preparations for the Sixth 
Congress, and most agreed it must be held this summer. 
Several members identified Abbas' conflict with Faruk 
al-Qaddumi as a key obstacle and suggested the Congress 
should only proceed when members are confident it will 
improve Fatah's standing.  The FRC discussed draft political 
platforms developed by the preparatory committee.  Many said 
the movement's original charter should be changed only by the 
Congress when it convenes and Fatah's fundamental principles 
as a national liberation movement should remain intact.  The 
FRC deferred further discussion to the Fatah Central 
Committee (FCC). 
 
¶6.  The FRC made no decision on the number of delegates or 
the selection mechanism, but there was general agreement on a 
maximum of 1,000 delegates.   Members suggested the next 
Congress preparatory meeting distribute draft Fatah documents 
to facilitate input from grassroots leaders and reduce the 
number of direct delegates.  Some members insisted that the 
security sector should have no less than 33 percent of total 
delegates. 
 
PM Fayyad's Government 
---------------------- 
 
¶7.  The third day of the FRC meeting was dedicated to 
discussing PA performance.  Some members evaluated the 
 
JERUSALEM 00000941  002 OF 002 
 
 
performance of PM Fayyad and his government positively, but 
several key FRC/FCC members were harshly critical, especially 
Nasser Yusif and Haj Ismayil Jabr.  Yusif described Fayyad as 
an "accountant speaking to Generals" and said "the accountant 
cannot and should not work on security issues."  He compared 
Fayyad's PA security forces (PASF) retirement program to 
dissolution of the Iraqi army by the Coalition Provisional 
Authority.  President Abbas defended Fayyad, stressing his 
full support for the government. 
 
¶8.  Several FRC members discussed a government reshuffle and 
the possibility of a committee to hold a dialogue with Fayyad 
and consider the different legal and political scenarios that 
would produce a change in the cabinet.   The FRC did not 
create such a committee, but Azzam al-Ahmad said that he 
would meet with PM Fayyad and inform the FRC of their 
discussion.  The FRC communiqu issued at the end of the 
meeting highlighted the call to create a new government that 
would include Fatah and other political factions. 
WALLES