08KABUL82
Terms of Reference for a Senior Civilian Representative to
Mon Jan 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #0082 0070945
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 070945Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2309UNCLAS KABUL 000082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AF
SUBJECT:  Terms of Reference for a Senior Civilian Representative to 
Afghanistan 
 
For the record, on December 31 the Afghan government approved the 
following terms of reference for a Senior Civilian Representative to 
Afghanistan. 
 
Begin text. 
 
Concept and Terms of Reference for a Senior Civilian Representative 
to Afghanistan 
 
The Senior Civilian Representative to Afghanistan will be the 
multilateral face and voice of the international community to both 
the Government of Afghanistan and all international donors and 
organizations.  The figure will provide political advice to ISAF and 
OEF on military activities in theater.  We seek a high profile, 
senior-level European political figure for this role, which will 
require coordinating, proposing, and implementing international 
activities, including aid, in support of Afghan Government 
priorities and mobilizing new resources from foreign capitals and 
international organizations.  To accomplish this role, the 
Representative must: 
 
     ¶1.  Direct all United Nations activities in Afghanistan as 
SRSG, including UN efforts in Kabul and the rest of Afghanistan by 
the pillars of the UN system responsible for activities there, 
including humanitarian, economic and development work.  Coordinate, 
with the Afghan authorities, donor activity in Afghanistan itself, 
and manage UNAMA. 
 
     ¶2.  Be the principal multilateral civilian liaison with 
NATO-ISAF and Operation Enduring Freedom with structures for this 
liaison role. 
 
     ¶3.  Operate within the framework of, and serve as the lead 
international authority for the Afghanistan Compact and the 
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, and co-chair with the 
Afghan Government representative meetings of the Joint Coordination 
and Monitoring Board (JCMB). 
 
     ¶4. Work with the President of Afghanistan, the Afghan 
Government at senior levels and the international community to forge 
and maintain a common and comprehensive international strategy, in 
order to ensure unity of international effort across Afghanistan. 
Coordinate with other international institutions, non-governmental 
organizations and donors, in and outside Afghanistan with respect to 
development, humanitarian efforts, counternarcotics efforts and 
governance.  Seek in particular to assure support for programs in 
all provinces, avoid duplication and share best practices, through 
the management of a consultative board of heads of key international 
organizations and/or heads of missions of major donor countries. 
 
     ¶5.  Work with the Government of Afghanistan at senior levels to 
effectively and accurately translate Afghan Government priorities 
into a coherent, countrywide strategy for international support. 
 
     ¶6.  While based in Kabul, travel extensively to international 
capitals in order to meet with senior officials, mobilize additional 
resources for Afghanistan, and coordinate diplomatic efforts for 
maximum impact.  The role will require leveraging personal prestige 
and relationships to mobilize resources and enhance political will 
among international donors. 
 
     ¶7.  In coordination with the Afghan Government and in 
furtherance of the London Declaration and the Afghanistan Compact, 
facilitate regional cooperation with neighboring countries of 
Afghanistan, including through the Representative's contacts. 
Regular travel to the capitals of neighboring countries would be 
appropriate. 
 
     ¶8.  Represent the UN Secretary General, working as lead 
coordinator on international action with the EU and NATO at the 
highest levels. In order to make his dialogue with the Government of 
Afghanistan more productive, maintain a close coordination among 
Ambassadors and other international representatives in Kabul and 
Governments involved in working for the stability and development of 
Afghanistan. 
 
In these and all activities, the Government of Afghanistan is the 
ultimate decision-maker for Afghanistan. 
 
End text. 
 
WOOD