08KHARTOUM7
INCOMING FOREIGN MINISTER DENG ALOR WANTS TO IMPROVE
Wed Jan 02 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3322
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0007/01 0021610
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021610Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9650
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS, AF SE WILLIAMSON 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT:  INCOMING FOREIGN MINISTER DENG ALOR WANTS TO IMPROVE 
SUDAN-US RELATIONS 
 
REFERENCE: (A) 07 KHARTOUM 2053 
(B) KHARTOUM 1 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. CDA Powers met with newly sworn-in Foreign 
Minister Deng Alor on January 2 who said that he wanted to improve 
Sudanese-U.S. relations.  Deng offered GoS assurances to work 
together in the investigation of the killing of the U.S. diplomat 
and his Sudanese driver. Also with the aim towards improving 
Sudanese-U.S. relations, Deng said he would facilitate visas for 
U.S. staff and for congressional delegations and wanted to avoid any 
negative consequences stemming from the recently signed divestment 
law.  Separately, CDA Powers met with State Foreign Minister Al 
Sammani Al Wasila who repeated that the GoS wanted to cooperate in 
the investigation and that he wanted to ensure the killings do not 
put Sudanese-U.S. relations in a negative light. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On January 2, CDA Powers and poloff (notetaker) met with 
newly sworn-in Foreign Minister Deng Alor, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs American Affairs Desk Officer 
Ambassador Abdel Basit Badawi Al Sanousi, and Counselor Muawia 
Eltoum Elamin.  Deng, who had only been sworn in as Foreign Minister 
on December 27 (ref A), said that he was just becoming acquainted 
with the portfolios but wanted to highlight a few issues and get 
into the details at a later point in time.  FM Deng Alor requested 
the meeting on December 31.  His Office Director stated that the FM 
wanted to ensure that his first meeting with the diplomatic corps be 
with a U.S. Government representative in view of the USG's efforts 
to promote CPA implementation and address the crisis in Darfur. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Deng said that now that the Sudan People's Liberation 
Movement (SPLM) has returned to the government, he wanted the 
embassy to know that his ministry wants to improve Sudanese-U.S. 
relations. He said that when he asked for the appointment with the 
CDA shortly after his swearing-in, the divestment legislation had 
not yet been passed.  Now that it has been signed, Deng said he 
wanted to work together to avoid its implications and noted that the 
U.S. has always played a positive role in Sudan. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Noting the January 1 killings of the Sudanese employee and 
American diplomat (ref B), Deng offered his condolences to the 
family of the two Embassy employees.  He said that he had spoken 
with President Bashir on the incident and that the GoS was willing 
and ready to cooperate in its investigation of the killings.  He 
also noted that he communicated this to African Affairs Assistant 
Secretary Frazer and said that he had told her that if the Embassy 
 
SIPDIS 
encountered problems to let the ministry know. 
 
¶4. (SBU) CDA Powers thanked the Foreign Minister for his condolences 
and said that the embassy would indeed need the Ministry's 
cooperation and facilitation of visas for a number of teams that 
would be coming to Khartoum to assist the embassy on security issues 
and in providing counseling and other assistance to staff, both 
American and Sudanese, as a result of the killings.  For example, 
Powers said that speedy approval of visas for the Regional Medical 
Officer and several security officers will be needed.  As far as 
improving bilateral relations, CDA Powers noted that authorization 
of visas to a U.S. congressional delegation led by Congressman Payne 
at the end of the week would be a first opportunity to demonstrate 
the Government's willingness to promote dialogue.  He further stated 
that a visit by the new Special Envoy to Sudan Richard Williamson 
would another opportunity to pursue dialogue.  In response to the 
FM's declaration that the Sudanese Government was desirous of 
sending a Parliamentary delegation to the US, Powers stressed that 
the embassy would work with Washington to facilitate such a visit 
once a list of visitors and other details are provided.  Finally, 
responding to Deng's concerns about the divestment law, Powers said 
that the embassy took pains to ensure that the signing of the bill 
by President Bush would not come as a surprise to the MFA, which was 
why Powers had briefed the Acting Director of the America Desk the 
day before.  He further stated that the Administration had been 
opposed to the legislation and did not support passage of the bill. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Powers raised the issue of the New Embassy Compound (NEC) 
construction and stated that we were disappointed that there had 
been no progress on this issue due to continued failure to grant 
customs clearances.  Deng said that the GoS had a number of ideas on 
the NEC, and would like to have another meeting to address this 
issue in detail. 
 
¶6. (SBU) As for the issue of the upcoming congressional delegation, 
Deng responded positively saying that "we need to encourage visits." 
Deng said that he will follow-up on the visas after getting the 
files from the interim Foreign Minister, but said that visas should 
not be a problem.  As for the Sudanese Parliamentarian visit, he 
 
KHARTOUM 00000007  002 OF 002 
 
 
said that State Department assistance to ensure that the delegates 
obtain appointments with Congressmen would be most helpful. 
He said that the main issue is that the U.S. and Sudan needs to have 
a dialogue, and he had said as much to Assistant Secretary Frazer. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Separately, CDA Powers met with State Foreign Minister Al 
Sammani Al Wasila, at his request, who commented on the shooting of 
the U.S. diplomat and his Sudanese driver, saying that the shooting 
was not in keeping with Sudanese culture which frowns on hurting 
people and stresses mutual cooperation.  He promised "we will find 
out what happened and who did this and will spare no effort in this 
investigation."  Al Sammani said that the media was using the 
killings to create a distorted and negative picture of Sudanese-U.S. 
relations.  "We want to refrain from giving a negative 
interpretation on this incident."  Al Sammani requested that his 
condolences and those of his Government be conveyed to Washington 
and to the family of the deceased USAID officer. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment:  In leaving the Foreign Ministry, CDA Powers found 
himself before a lectern and well over 20 media representatives 
eager for an interview.  Powers stated that the meeting had 
presented an opportunity for the USG to extend congratulations to 
the Foreign Minister in his new function, and thanked GOS 
authorities for their cooperation and efforts in investigating the 
tragic deaths of two USG employees.  Post takes to heart the 
statements made by both Deng and Al Sammani that the GoS wants to 
improve relations and work to avoid the potential negative 
consequences of the Sudan Divestment Act, but time will show their 
seriousness. 
 
POWERS