08KHARTOUM705
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY REFUTES GOS IDP RETURN CLAIMS
Wed May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7434
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0705/01 1281327
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071327Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0761
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0204
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000705 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS, SE WILLIAMSON, PRM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PREF PHUM KPKO SOCI UNSC SU
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY REFUTES GOS IDP RETURN CLAIMS 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY. Recent local radio reports, based on a statement 
attributed to the Humanitarian Aid Commission (HAC) office in El 
Fasher, stated that as many as 4000 internally displaced persons in 
North Darfur were voluntarily returning to their villages. 
Separately, the North Darfur HAC commissioner claimed that as many 
as 61,000 IDPs may be returning throughout Darfur.  International 
Organizations and local NGOs working in and around Darfur IDP camps, 
however, dismissed these claims as propaganda, noting that seasonal 
agricultural movement is common, but rarely results in permanent 
resettlement.  In addition to the questionable veracity of such 
claims, conditions are not appropriate for return, and newly 
displaced persons continue to arrive at camps as violent attacks in 
Darfur continue to rise. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------------- 
HAC Claims Widespread IDP Returns 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to field FSN, recent radio reports, which were 
based on a statement issued by the Humanitarian Aid Commission 
(HAC), stated that 4000 IDPs were to return to their homes in North 
Darfur.  In an April 30 meeting, North Darfur HAC Commissioner 
Ibrahim Ahmed Hamid claimed that returns of this nature "are not 
news" and happen all the time, but specifically around this time of 
year as people return to sow their fields.  When asked whether these 
returns were permanent, Hamid snapped, "People return according to 
their interests, and I provide them with assistance.  I don't ask 
whether returns are final or sustainable - it is not the time.  It 
is only the time to help!"  He claimed that his office was providing 
resettlement assistance for these returnees, consisting of plastic 
sheeting, tents, and some food staples, and pointed to their return 
as proof that roads and villages were safe and secure. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Responding directly to news reports, Hamid repeatedly gave 
different answers as to the number of IDPs allegedly planning to 
return home.  At one point, he produced a report from the "field" 
stating that 6422 individuals had already returned to Haskanita.  He 
then explained that he did not know total figures, he could only 
account for those he had personally counted - 1127 families. 
Finally he said that 61,000 individuals had returned to the Dar 
Zaghawa area, a number he claimed had been given by the SLA/MM 
humanitarian coordinator.  Hamid could not come up with a final 
estimate of returns, declaring "they are happening everywhere in 
Darfur." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
International Community Sees No Signs of Returns... 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) OCHA Humanitarian Affairs Officer In North Darfur confirmed 
that seasonal movements from IDP camps to the fields are common each 
year before the planting season begins.  These movements are 
classified temporary returns, not permanent, and usually consist of 
1-2 members of each family only.  The motive for these movements is 
two-fold - families hope that a good harvest will provide extra food 
and earn extra income, but perhaps more importantly, OCHA Officer 
explained, they sow their land in order to retain ownership claims. 
The traditional land system in Darfur holds that land that goes 
unplanted for three straight years is forfeited.  More recently, a 
Sudanese Land Act passed in the 1970s allows the GOS to seize any 
unused land immediately. Anecdotal evidence collected by OCHA staff 
suggests that both systems continue to be used, usually to the 
benefit of the GOS.  While IDPs recognize that their villages are 
not safe for return, they also realize that they must sow the land 
in order to keep it.  Since they have to return either way, OCHA 
Representative said, many declare themselves "returnees" in the 
hopes of receiving GOS assistance, although they have no intention 
of staying past crop harvest.  (Note: Field Officers have also heard 
reports that returnees are often not IDPs, rather pro-government 
tribes allowed to occupy fertile lands. End Note) 
 
¶5. (SBU) Additional movements that have been documented by OCHA have 
involved IDPs from Chad crossing the border and making their way 
into North Darfur.  These movements should not be classified as 
returns either, OCHA cautioned, as they are generally undertaken by 
1-2 members of a family who return briefly to their village to 
assess the situation, reporting back to the rest of the family in 
the camp they previously left.  SLA representatives in North Darfur 
have confirmed this practice to OCHA, reporting that "returnees" 
have not yet permanently resettled. 
 
¶6. (SBU) International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
representatives explained that when reports of returns are received, 
there is an interagency committee, chaired jointly by IOM and OCHA, 
which looks at cases and decides on the level of assistance to 
provide. (Note: Much has been reported on the subject of what 
organizations can determine voluntary return based on agreements 
 
KHARTOUM 00000705  002 OF 002 
 
 
with the GNU. End note.)  They said the issue of returns has not 
been raised recently in the camps, but confirmed that, in 2007, 
nearly 8000 households had returned to their villages.  Most were 
Arab groups that returned to their lands near Kutum in North Darfur, 
and needs assessments revealed few needs that had not already been 
met.  The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), which in 
partnership with the World Health Organization (WHO), is tasked with 
conducting post-return reproductive health assessments, reported 
that it has not even been called upon to conduct any such 
assessments for any of these "new" households. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
... But Sees Continued GOS Pressure... 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Oxfam representatives said that, from their work in and 
around Kabkabiya and El Fasher, they were unaware of any IDPs 
returning to their villages.  However they did report an increase in 
the amount of pressure and compensation that the GOS was leveraging 
to influence returns, noting that in many camps the GOS had been 
paying the sheikhs and umdas to encourage returns.  Absent from 
government attempts to entice returns was any progress on the 
fundamental issues of safety and security, the most important issue 
to IDPs.  Oxfam reported it had engaged in contingency planning for 
a drastic deterioration in conditions in Darfur and further 
displacement, but had not considered nor planned for the possibility 
of improvement in conditions or widespread returns.  (Note: Other 
Organizations have reportedly developed similar 
contingency/emergency plans. End note) 
 
-------------------------------- 
... And Continued Displacement 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) UNFPA reported in late 2007 an influx of new IDPs to the 
already bursting Zam Zam IDP camp near El Fasher.  These new 
arrivals have reportedly settled in the Zam Zam IDP Camp, while 
debate continues with the HAC on whether to expand the camp or 
create a new IDP camp near El Fasher. 
 
¶10. (SBU) OCHA reps confirmed that Zam Zam IDP camp (built with 
services for 40,000 IDPs) is operating at maximum capacity, with the 
almost 9500 people that arrived in the camp between September 2007 
and March 2008 bringing the total estimated population to over 
50,000.  (Note: Zam Zam is the only camp in El Fasher to remain open 
for new arrivals, both Al Salam and Abu Shouk have reached capacity 
and are closed for new registrations. End Note)  These new IDPs are 
believed to be from the Sheiria region of South Darfur, and claim to 
have fled violence that peaked in September and October 2007 with 
attacks on Haskanita and Muhajariya.  IOM reported that it is also 
seeing an increase in movement of Zaghawa tribes from South to North 
Darfur. 
 
¶11. (SBU) COMMENT: GOS officials know that any current movement of 
IDPs is seasonal and not permanent.  Neither the international nor 
local communities appear to take the HAC's annual declaration 
seriously, despite the commissioner's repeated theatrical 
performances in support of his cynical claims.  Conditions are 
clearly inadequate for the debate on returns to resume, as camps 
scramble to accommodate new arrivals, and the issue will likely 
remain tabled until there is progress on the political and security 
fronts (including UNAMID deployment) but highlighting IDPs right to 
voluntary returns in safety and dignity, their right to their 
original land, and to compensation are all very much worth pushing 
with the Sudanese regime. 
 
FERNANDEZ