08KHARTOUM1171
Sudanese Banking Sector: Bad Loans Persist, but Foreign
Mon Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2771
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1171/01 2170810
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 040810Z AUG 08 ZDK CTG NUMEROUS REQUESTS
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1507
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001171 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/EPS, EEB/IFD/OMA, EEB/IFD/OIA 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN, TREASURY FOR OFAC 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN SU
SUBJECT: Sudanese Banking Sector: Bad Loans Persist, but Foreign 
Firms See Bright Future 
 
REF: KHARTOUM 1035 
 
KHARTOUM 00001171  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  On 17 July, local daily "Al-Rayaam" ran a story 
outlining problems of embezzlement and bad debts in the Sudanese 
banking sector, where an estimated 22% of all loans are deemed to be 
non-performing.  Despite successive economic reforms over the past 
two decades, the volume of non-performing loans has been a recurring 
issue for Sudanese banks, one which observers blame on long-standing 
political interference aimed at channeling financial resources 
towards affiliates of the ruling National Congress Party (NCP). 
Nevertheless, over the past several years, the sector has seen large 
inflows of foreign investment from the Middle East, as a result of a 
booming economy and strong support from the now independent Central 
Bank of Sudan.  Foreign investment is likely to continue, as foreign 
bankers report that the market is quite profitable and poised for 
continued growth and opportunity. END SUMMARY. 
 
ORIGINS OF THE MODERN BANKING SECTOR 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) On July 27, econoff met with Ali Abdallah Ali, a professor 
of economics at Sudan University for Science and Technology and a 
renowned banking expert, to discuss the development of the Sudanese 
banking sector.  According to Ali, the sector has undergone several 
evolutions since Sudanese independence in 1956.  First, upon 
inheriting a legacy of colonial-era foreign banks, President Nimeiry 
nationalized them in 1970.  Soon after, he granted permission for 
the establishment of the first Islamic bank, which opened the door 
for numerous others. (Note: In Islamic banking, the charging of 
interest is considered "riba" (usury) and is prohibited.  Instead, 
banking is conducted under various purchase and sale agreements or 
on the basis of profit/loss sharing contracts that determine ex-post 
rates of return. End Note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) Conventional (i.e. non-Islamic) banking endured until the 
1984 Civil Act, which required banks to be fully compliant with 
Shariah rules.  Ali stated that the emergence of Islamic banks was a 
welcome development to the banking system, as it attracted 
considerable deposits from customers who previously were reluctant 
to deal with banks they considered un-Islamic.  The complete 
"Islamization" of the banking sector was accomplished with the 
advent of the present government in 1989, he said.  (Note: In 
accordance with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, banking in the 
North is to remain Islamic while the South has adopted conventional 
banking.  End Note.) 
 
'POLITICAL' BANKS 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (SBU) Many banks were privatized during the liberalization 
program begun in 1992, but according to Ali, they remained organs of 
the state, specifically the NCP.  He alleges that the resources of 
the banking system were directed towards empowering certain 
businesses and clients, who in turn made payouts to the NCP.  To 
enable this system of patronage, banks were stocked with Islamic 
fundamentalists appointed not for their acumen but for their 
loyalty, and lending guidelines were kept loose and arbitrary.  But 
by allowing political considerations rather than sound lending 
practices to direct decision-making, banks soon became saddled with 
bad loans.  Ali observed that the accumulation of such loans 
continues to plague Sudanese banks and impedes efforts to clean up 
their balance sheets, despite an otherwise successful IMF reform 
program that went into effect in 1997.  In 2006, for example, severe 
liquidity problems as a result of mismanagement at Omdurman National 
Bank required significant government intervention.  According to 
Ali, Omdurman National Bank is "the army's bank." 
 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. (SBU) Despite these problems, over the past several years the 
continuation of the IMF reform program and a booming economy have 
attracted copious foreign investment in the sector from the Middle 
East.  In his April 2008 State of the Republic address, President 
Bashir asserted that foreign investment in the banking sector over 
the past two years approached $1 billion, according to a report in 
the daily "Sudan Tribune."  The most prominent foreign investors 
include Byblos Bank of Lebanon, Al Salam Bank of Bahrain, and Dubai 
Islamic Bank (DIB), which acquired 60% of Bank of Khartoum (BOK) 
from the Government of Sudan (GOS) in 2005. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Econoff recently spoke with Fadi Salim Al Faqih, General 
Manager of BOK, on the outlook for the Sudanese banking sector.  Al 
Faqih, a Jordanian brought in by DIB to run BOK, explained that the 
banking sector is expanding to meet the needs of the growing 
economy, and the Central Bank has been quick to adapt, encouraging 
reform as well as consolidation within the sector.  (Note: In 
January of 2008, BOK merged with Emirates and Sudan Bank, which was 
 
KHARTOUM 00001171  002 OF 002 
 
 
established in Sudan in 2005 by investors from the Gulf.  As a 
result, the GOS stake in BOK has been reduced to 10%. End Note.)  Al 
Faqih noted that despite the influx of foreign competition, profit 
margins remain high at 10-12%, compared to margins of 2-3% in mature 
markets.  He said that while BOK is principally engaged in 
commercial banking, it sees retail banking as an area of growth and 
has been offering new products such as home and auto loans. 
 
EFFECT OF U.S. SANCTIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (SBU) Since BOK is now 90% in private (mostly foreign) hands, Al 
Faqih is seeking to have it removed from the U.S. Treasury Office of 
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) list of Specially Designated Nationls 
(SDNs --see reftel).  He stated that while new foreign entrants 
cannot compete with BOK (and its 51 branches) as local banks, they 
are well capitalized and not designated as off-limits by OFAC, 
giving them an inherent advantage against BOK in dealing with 
multinational firms in areas such as trade finance. (Note: Based on 
guidance from OFAC, Post has provided BOK with information on how to 
initiate a formal request for delisting.  End Note.) 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶8. (SBU) Sudan's robust, oil-driven economic growth and the 
eagerness of Middle Eastern investors to invest capital in Islamic 
finance have been a boon for the country's banking sector, which 
after years of mismanagement is beginning to break free from 
government meddling.  While the experience of Arab investors in 
Sudan has been mixed overall, their experience in banking has been 
largely positive, as new foreign banks have avoided the pitfalls 
previously encountered by their domestic counterparts.  Other 
independent reports have also projected rapid growth for Islamic 
banking throughout much of Africa.  (See next para  for additional 
information.)  Though OFAC's designation has limited the growth of 
BOK, new foreign entrants to the banking sector remain unencumbered 
and appear to be thriving.  This seems to indicate that the primary 
effect that U.S. sanctions have in inhibiting the growth of the 
banking sector is by limiting the participation of large 
multinational corporations (and the financial services they require) 
in the Sudanese economy. 
 
REFERENCE 
- - - - - 
 
¶9. (SBU) For more on the growth of Islamic banking in Africa, see: 
Islamic Finance Explores New Horizons in Africa (Moody's, March 
2008.)  The report asserts that the market for Islamic finance in 
Africa has barely tapped its potential.  It states that 
"conservatively assuming that the banking entrenchment in Africa 
represents an average 50% of its total GDP, the Islamic finance 
market on the continent is potentially worth close to $235 
billion... [Whereas] the actual depth of Shari'ah-compliant 
financial intermediation in Africa was only $18 billion as of 
year-end 2007."  Sudan accounts for over half of Islamic finance 
assets in Africa, according to the report, and is on the cutting 
edge of Islamic finance there; in 2007, Berber Cement Co., based in 
Sudan, issued the first ever African sukuk (Islamic bond) in a $130 
million transaction for the financing of a cement project on the 
Nile. 
 
 
FERNANDEZ