08LEIPZIG20
EASTERN GERMANY HAS THE RIGHT CHEMISTRY
Tue Oct 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Leipzig
R 281657Z OCT 08
FM AMCONSUL LEIPZIG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0123
INFO USDOC WASHDC 0003
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMCONSUL LEIPZIGUNCLAS LEIPZIG 000020 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CE, EEB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIND ECON GM
SUBJECT: EASTERN GERMANY HAS THE RIGHT CHEMISTRY 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The chemical industry is one of eastern Germany's most 
successful retooled industry sectors.  Companies (including the 
U.S. firm Dow) invested in the region after the fall of the 
Wall.  They acquired state-owned facilities and capitalized on 
their proximity and historic ties to eastern European markets, 
and the region's qualified and motivated workforce.  Larger 
chemical companies have production facilities in the region, but 
keep their R&D facilities outside.  Small and medium-sized 
companies with fewer resources have joined with other chemical 
companies, research facilities, and universities to synergize 
R&D efforts.  Over the long term, it might be difficult to 
attract and retain qualified workers and expand production of 
specialty chemicals.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Chemical Industry Strong and Growing 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) The chemical industry is the fourth largest industrial 
sector in the Germany.  After reunification in 1990, the former 
East Germany's state-owned chemical plants were privatized and 
by 2007 had total sales of 18 billion euros and a 16.2 percent 
growth rate, far above the national average of 7.1 percent. 
This high performance is due to eastern Germany's central 
location, modern transportation infrastructure and highly 
trained and motivated workforce. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Chemical Parks and Clusters Emphasize R&D 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Most chemical companies are small or medium-sized and 
work in R&D clusters.  Six chemical parks provide infrastructure 
and utilities.  For example, 750 companies, 12 university 
research institutions and 9 associated institutes have formed 
the "Future Cluster Chemistry/Plastics Central Germany" (CPCG) 
to maximize R&D efforts and product development.  CPCG cluster 
spokesman Dr. Christoph Muehlhaus told Pol/Econ staff that this 
research emphasis developed only after privatization, as larger 
West German companies kept their R&D centers in the west and 
used eastern German facilities only for production. 
 
¶4. (U) In addition, eastern German chemistry parks, chemical 
companies, business associations and service providers joined 
forces to form the "Central European Chemical Network" 
(CeChemNet).  It hopes to create an innovation network 
integrating all aspects of chemical industry research and 
production.  Likewise, in 2003, Saxony-Anhalt integrated 18 
chemical regions from nine countries with German companies from 
the Central German Chemical Triangle into the "European Chemical 
Regions Network" (ECRN). 
 
---------------- 
Challenges Ahead 
---------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Despite these successes, the eastern German chemical 
industry faces two major challenges according to Harald Beer, 
manager of the Dow facility in Schkopau, Saxony-Anhalt. 
Economic migration to the west and a low birth-rate could 
deprive the region of qualified employees.  Second, eastern 
Germany's chemical companies produce large volumes of commodity 
chemicals (a partially processed product in high demand) which 
are distributed mostly in Russia and the Arabian Peninsula. 
Competition from chemical companies already established in those 
regions heightens the need for eastern Germany's chemical 
industry to diversify.  Beer noted that Eastern German companies 
hope to stayQmpetitive by expanding into specialty chemicals 
for the solar industry, new technologies, and products based on 
biomass. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (U) Eastern Germany's communist-era chemical industry has 
been successfully rebuilt and restructured.  The small and 
mid-sized companies that evolved from privatization had the 
foresight to pool resources and knowledge and create new 
technologies to stay competitive.  Continued growth in the 
sector could help drive eastern Germany's economy out of 
stagnation.  The chemical industry, however, must recruit and 
retain qualified employees and induce research and production 
facilities to stay in or move to eastern Germany.  End Comment. 
 
¶7. (U) This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BRUCKER