08LUSAKA412
ZIMBABWE: ZAMBIA PREPARES FOR SPECIAL SADC SUMMIT
Thu Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lusaka
VZCZCXRO8625
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHLS #0412/01 1011221
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 101221Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY LUSAKA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5680
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LUSAKA 000412 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR AF/DAS CAROL THOMPSON 
FOR AF/S MARY JO WILLS, STEVE HILL, MATT SHIELDS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SADC ZA ZI
SUBJECT: ZIMBABWE: ZAMBIA PREPARES FOR SPECIAL SADC SUMMIT 
 
REF:  A. LUSAKA 408 
 
  ¶B. LUSAKA 407 
  ¶C. 07 LUSAKA 963 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Zambian Foreign Ministry and cabinet office 
officials have confirmed that President Mwanawasa called a summit of 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) heads of state to 
discuss Zimbabwe for Saturday, April 12 in Lusaka.  The Ambassador 
and emboffs underscored USG messages on the Zimbabwean elections 
during April 10 meetings with key government officials.  We 
understand President Mugabe is on the invite list and opposition 
candidate Morgan Tsvangirai may add a Saturday stop in Lusaka to his 
southern African itinerary.  Post has commended the Zambians for 
taking this initiative and tried to "buck then up" as they prepare 
for what many anticipate will be intense closed discussions.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador Martinez spoke with Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Permanent Secretary Tens Kapoma at OOB on April 10, and Kapoma 
confirmed plans for a Saturday summit of Southern African 
Development Community leaders to discuss Zimbabwe.  He corroborated 
reports that Zimbabwean President Mugabe had been invited, but noted 
that the Government of Zambia was still awaiting replies from all 
SADC Heads of State.  Foreign Minister Kabinga Pande will return 
from India in time for the meetings, Kapoma told the Ambassador. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Ambassador welcomed the SADC Chairperson Mwanawasa's 
initiative, noting that the USG supports African governments' 
efforts to resolve African problems.  She also stressed the 
importance the USG places on the release of the Zimbabwean 
presidential election results, and underscored that the presidential 
vote tabulation must be seen by the citizens of Zimbabwe and the 
rest of the world as having been transparent and credible. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Later on April 10, DCM and Poloff called on Secretary to 
the Cabinet Joshua Kanganja - the highest ranking and most 
influential civil servant in government.  DCM praised President 
Mwanawasa for his statesmanship, and for "doing the right thing" by 
convening SADC leaders, noting Washington's support for the 
initiative.  Subtly challenging Zambia to show resolve during the 
weekend meetings, DCM discussed the already intense international 
media coverage of the summit, observing that the "world's eyes will 
be on Lusaka this Saturday."  DCM encouraged Zambia to call for the 
immediate release of Zimbabwe's election results.  Although Kanganja 
said Zambians "do not want to interfere" in another country's 
internal matters, in principle he supported the need for immediate 
release of the results.  "The voters have cast their ballots and 
they need to see the results," he said. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Kanganja balanced the urgency of resolving the Zimbabwean 
crisis with a need for prudence.  Citing the humanitarian, security, 
and economic impacts on neighboring countries that turmoil in 
Zimbabwe could have, Kanganja said Zambia "cannot afford to get it 
wrong."  He reminded Emboffs of the economic costs to Zambia of 
regional freedom struggles and southern and central African civil 
wars in previous years, and suggested that Zambia could not afford 
the consequences of civil strife in Zimbabwe. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) DCM said Zambia provided positive examples for its 
neighbors, including first President Kaunda's surprise at, but 
acceptance of, the results of the 1991 multiparty elections, 
Zambia's peaceful resolution of close polls in 2001, and the rapid 
release of election results in Zambia's 2006 tripartite election. 
Kanganja agreed and said "it was in the best interest of everyone" 
to help find a solution in Zimbabwe. 
 
¶7.  (U) Local independent daily The Post carried President 
Mwanawasa's comments at an April 8 press briefing where he announced 
his call for a summit on Zimbabwe, explaining "...because of the 
deepening problems in the country, I felt that this matter should be 
dealt with at the Presidential level." He reportedly said he called 
the extraordinary summit "to discuss the ways and means of assisting 
the people of Zimbabwe with the current impasse as well as adopt a 
coordinated approach to the situation in the country." He appealed 
to Zimbabweans for "peace and patience" amid the high tension in the 
wake of "inconclusive" presidential election results. 
 
¶8.  (U) PAO has heard rumors that Zimbabwean opposition presidential 
contender Morgan Tsvangirai, on a swing through SADC states this 
week, plans to stop off in Lusaka during the SADC summit.  Local 
media authorities confirm a flood of requests for international 
media to cover Saturday's SADC meeting. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  According to Dutch diplomats, EU ambassadors in Lusaka 
plan to meet in Lusaka on Friday, April 11 to confer on a 
coordinated response to the summit.  An Irish embassy official told 
Poloff that she expected low turnout at the Lusaka summit since so 
many SADC leaders were attending the Indo-African meetings in New 
 
LUSAKA 00000412  002 OF 002 
 
 
Delhi. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Comment:  We are not completely sure of the genesis of 
the call for the summit, but if Mwanawasa was indeed the catalyst 
(and given several opportunities, Kanganja did not deny this), it is 
a rather gutsy move for him, particularly after his experience at 
the SADC Heads of State meeting in August 2007 (Ref C).  Local 
observers believe that access to the summit will be limited; press 
conferences and diplomatic corps briefings (if held at all), will 
likely be tardy and anodyne.  Emboffs hope to leverage the visit of 
Zimbabwean civil society representatives and journalists and the 
presence of foreign press to drive home U.S. messages during the 
summit. 
 
MARTINEZ