08MOSCOW1278
MEDVEDEV TAKES PRESIDENTIAL OATH
Wed May 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO7374
PP RUEHBW RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #1278/01 1281242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071242Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7940
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 001278 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINR RS SOCI
SUBJECT: MEDVEDEV TAKES PRESIDENTIAL OATH 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Presidential power passed from Putin to Medvedev at 
the stroke of noon today.  The simple but majestic ceremony 
of oath-taking took place in the Kremlin's ornate 
Andreyevskiy Hall before two thousand of the political elite. 
 Putin gave his farewell address, using the occasion for a 
final victory lap that touted his accomplishments, publicly 
reminded Medvedev to stay the "already chosen course" for the 
country's development, and ambiguously pledged to "look out 
for Russia" for the "rest of his life." Medvedev's brief 
inauguration speech hit all the right notes, as he pledged 
himself to protecting the citizenry's rights and freedoms, 
providing security, and promoting respect for the law as the 
overriding goals of his presidency. Ultimately two images - 
that of Medvedev's solo triumphal march down the red carpet 
as Russia's new president and then of the "tandem" leadership 
receiving the salute of the Presidential guard - capture the 
innate tension in this period of transitional power, sending 
mixed messages to the population and the global audience 
about the shape of politics to come. 
 
Invitation Only 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Pomp and pageantry harkening back to an Imperial 
past exemplified Medvedev's inauguration, like that of 
Yeltsin and Putin before him. With a ceremony held in the 
magnificent Kremlin palace, bedecked with red carpet and 
ramrod-stiff sentries, Medvedev's "coronation"  boasted all 
of the symbols of traditional Russian power save the crown of 
Monomakh - 30-gun salute, a parade by infantry and cavalry 
soldiers, the ornate Presidential Seal, and the celebratory 
service at the Annunciation Cathedral. (We have not yet seen 
a public sign that the final symbol of power - the nuclear 
suitcase - has been passed to Medvedev as Commander in Chief. 
 In the previous transitions, television reports provided 
evidence that Gorbachev and Yeltsin had relinquished control 
within hours of the inauguration.) And, as in the imperial 
court, today's rituals were performed primarily for the 
political elite - indeed, the normally bustling Red Square 
and nearby thoroughfares stood eerily empty, as the 
authorities closed traffic in central Moscow for the event. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Approximately 2,000 members of the political class 
witnessed the handover of presidential power: legislators, 
judges, government bureaucrats, regional leaders, and the 
diplomatic corps.  For some, including then Premier Zubkov, 
the inauguration marked the end of their tenure in office - 
as required by the constitution, the entire government 
proffered their resignations as Putin left power. 
Presidential spouses played only a minor role, with a haggard 
Mrs. Putin and a beaming Mrs. Medvedev relegated to the 
sidelines. (A stately Mrs. Yeltsin was among the guests as 
well.) 
 
Medvedev: Protecting Freedom, Fighting Legal Nihilism 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) A confident Medvedev gave a short, two-minute 
inaugural address that hammered home his electoral platform 
of protecting the rights of the citizenry, promoting respect 
for the law, and facilitating economic innovation and growth. 
 Improving the effectiveness of Russia's legal system, he 
noted, would improve the country's economic and social life, 
allow for greater entrepreneurship, and strike a blow in the 
fight against corruption.  Moreover, Medvedev said that 
adherence to the rule of law would help to strengthen 
Russia's role in the international community - perhaps an 
implicit acknowledgment that Moscow's standing had been 
undermined by its failure to establish a more 
institutionalized legal system.  To achieve his ends, he 
committed himself to working with all "responsible" political 
forces, civil society organizations, and regional leaders. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Medvedev closed his speech with his personal 
commitment to protecting Russian interests, both at home and 
abroad, as a daily, even hourly responsibility. He promised 
that he would do "everything possible so that the security of 
our citizens is not just guaranteed by the law, but is really 
ensured by the state."  And lastly, he expressed his 
appreciation to Putin for his service as president and for 
his personal support over the years. 
 
Putin's Victory Lap 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) As expected, Putin played a prominent role today, 
reading his farewell address at the start of the ceremonies 
and afterwards standing alongside Medvedev as he received the 
 
MOSCOW 00001278  002 OF 002 
 
 
salute of the presidential guard on freedom square.  He read 
a short address to the nation, in which he patted himself on 
the back for leading Russia into a more stable and prosperous 
era and then offered his thanks for eight years of support 
and trust from the people. Press reports drew attention that 
unlike Yeltsin, who after resigning from his post months 
before attended his successor's inauguration as an ordinary 
citizen, Putin had a more auspicious role to play as 
president. Throughout the day, Putin struck a pensive pose, 
perhaps self-conscious of his role as the first "current 
president" to be present at an inauguration. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Putin called on the nation to support Medvedev, 
seeing his inauguration as an opportunity to unite the 
country's political leadership.  He charged his successor to 
continue  the same course of development that "had proven 
itself" and was guided by the interests of the citizenry - 
essentially a rejoinder for his successor to continue with 
"Plan Putin" and the vision of the Russia 2020 agenda.  In a 
final note that is sure to spark speculation about his plans 
for the future, Putin said that the obligation of "looking 
after Russia" was the highest civic duty (a probable 
reference to Yeltsin's charge to Putin to "look out for 
Russia") and promised he would continue to do so for the rest 
life. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Given the climate of anxiety about the transition, 
Medvedev's inauguration will provide grist for the mills of 
speculation about the ultimate course of events.  That Putin 
- a young, healthy, and popular leader - would step down 
willingly from the presidency seemed to some an unlikely 
scenario this time last year.  Today it is a reality. 
Putin's prominent role in the ceremony, his "charge" to 
Medvedev to stay the course, and the image of the tandem 
standing together only minutes after Medvedev's triumphal 
solo march as President are sure to feed the theories of 
those who see Putin as shifting power to the Premiership. 
Others, however, could argue that Putin is only doing what he 
promised to do - offering Medvedev the protected space to 
grow into the presidency during a period of benign regency. 
BURNS