08NAIROBI2555
SOMALIA:  SOMALILAND ADMINISTRATION REQUESTS
Wed Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO3666
RR RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2555 3101430
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051430Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7540
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDCUNCLAS NAIROBI 002555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL PGOV PTER SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA:  SOMALILAND ADMINISTRATION REQUESTS 
ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: NAIROBI 2527 
 
¶1. On November 4, Embassy received a letter from the 
Somaliland Administration President (text below) that 
requests international community assistance in the wake of 
the three October 29 suicide bombings in Hargeisa (reftel). 
The letter solicits assistance in fighting terrorism, 
including tracking and interdicting currency flows that 
support it; institution building; technical assistance to 
intelligence and law enforcement agencies; and information 
exchange. Embassy has had difficulty in the days since the 
attacks in establishing telephone contact with appropriate 
counterparts in the Administration, but plans to explore 
requests in more detail at earliest opportunity.  Text below: 
 
 
Your Excellencies, 
 
On Wednesday October 29, 2008, International Terrorism struck 
the heart and soul of our country, Somaliland.  Using at 
least three suicide car bombs, violent extremists attacked 
our innocent citizens, the symbols of our democracy, the 
United Nations offices and other key targets in our capital 
city of Hargeisa.  More than twenty innocent people of 
different nationalities were killed in these senseless 
terroristic attacks and dozens more were injured. 
 
Despite its limited resources and capabilities, our 
government immediately responded to help the victims and 
quickly took all the necessary measures to thwart any further 
attempts to destabilize our peace and stability. 
 
Clearly, the timing of these violent terroristic acts 
indicate that they were launched in order to disrupt and 
derail our on-going internationally observed National Voter 
Registration Process, a key democratic milestone achievement 
for our country.  But we, the government and people of 
Somaliland, are determined not to allow the actions of these 
terrorist thugs to defeat our infant democracy and stop our 
desire and inspiration for peace and stability. 
 
The tremendous outpouring of sympathy and solidarity from 
members of the International Community in our moment of 
national tragedy heartened our government and people.  For 
this, Somaliland is deeply grateful.  Indeed, our pain and 
tragedy is similar to the one inflicted upon the innocent 
citizens of Washington DC, New York City, London, Madrid, 
Bali and many other cities that fell victim to the violence 
perpetrated by the same violent extremists. 
 
It is, therefore, the conviction of the Government of 
Somaliland that the threat of International Terrorism should 
be addressed with full participation of all peace loving 
nations through effective international, regional and 
sub-regional cooperation.  Taking into account that the fight 
against terrorism takes place within the framework of respect 
for all the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United 
Nations, our government specifically appeals for your help 
and cooperation in the following areas: 
 
¶A. Mutual cooperation and legal assistance in order to 
detect, freeze, and confiscate the funds that finance 
terrorism and terrorism networks. 
 
B.Access to the sources of technical and financial assistance 
for institution building to meet the urgent need to combat 
and eliminate terrorism. 
 
C.Enhancing the readiness and capabilities of our first 
responders, emergency management teams, intelligence and law 
enforcement agencies through technical, financial and legal 
assistance. 
 
D.Exchange of information in order to find, deny safe haven 
to, and bring to justice any person who supports, facilitates 
and participates in acts of terrorism. 
 
In the Spirit of joint effort and cooperation let us work 
together to prevent and effectively defeat terrorism in all 
its forms and manifestations. 
 
Best regards, 
 
Dahir Rayale Kahin 
President, Republic of Somaliland 
End text of letter 
RANNEBERGER