08NDJAMENA136
UMMA PARTY ATTEMPTS TO RECONCILE CHAD, SUDAN
Thu Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO7236
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #0136/01 0941753
ZNR UUUUU ZZH ZDK CLEAR YOUR LOGS
P 031753Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6137
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 0464UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 000136 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF/SPG AND AF/C 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UN AU CD SU
SUBJECT: UMMA PARTY ATTEMPTS TO RECONCILE CHAD, SUDAN 
 
NDJAMENA 00000136  001.3 OF 002 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Ahead of Sadiq al Mahdi's upcoming visit to Chad, Sudan's 
opposition Umma Party is attempting to broker an agreement between 
Sudan and Chad for both governments to cease their support for rebel 
groups.  A member of Al Mahdi's advance party confirmed rumors that 
Umma is in "serious talks" with the ruling NCP to resolve the Darfur 
conflict by meeting some of the rebels' demands and then to 
establish a power sharing arrangement between itself, the NCP, and 
other opposition parties ahead of the Sudanese elections scheduled 
for 2009.  These developments give some credence to Darfurians' 
fears that they will be excluded from securing their own voice in 
political life because of back-room machinations.  End summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Striving for Chad, Sudan Agreement 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) As part of broader discussions with Sudan's ruling National 
Congress Party (NCP), Sadiq Al Mahdi's opposition Umma Party is 
attempting to broker an agreement between Sudan and Chad for both 
governments to cease their support for rebel groups in each country, 
Umma's chairman for Darfur told Poloff on April 1.  Confirming 
rumors circulating in Khartoum in recent weeks, Ismail Khitir 
Abdelkarim said that Umma is in "serious talks" with the NCP to 
resolve the Darfur conflict, claiming that the Sudanese Government 
realizes that it is losing control of events and does not want to 
risk the country's break-up.  "Time is not with them," said 
Abdelkarim, "and Umma's priority is for Sudan to remain united." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Abdelkarim traveled to N'djamena with an Umma party 
delegation to advance Al Mahdi's upcoming visit, scheduled for April 
¶12.  The delegation met with President Idriss Deby, who Abdelkarim 
characterized as responsive to Umma's plan to find a "common 
position" between Chad and Sudan and to establish a monitoring 
mechanism to verify the cessation of Chad and Sudan's support for 
rebel groups operating on both sides of the border.  Al Mahdi 
expects to table a written proposal when he arrives in N'djamena. 
Recognizing that the Chadian rebels will continue their attempts to 
overthrow Deby's government unless it shares power, Abdelkarim said 
that Deby agreed to direct negotiations with the Chadian rebels to 
prevent the outbreak of war. 
 
--------------------------- 
Meeting Darfurians' Demands 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The primary obstacle to a political settlement in Darfur 
remains the fragmentation of the rebel movements, said Abdelkarim. 
The solution, he proposed, is to demonstrate that the NCP is willing 
to compromise on Darfurians' key demands: unifying the three Darfur 
states into a single region, creating a vice presidency slot for a 
Darfurian in the national government, and specifying amounts for 
compensation.  Umma is working as an interlocutor between Sudan and 
the rebel movements to build consensus on these issues as a 
precursor to negotiations.  Umma then plans to convene a conference 
of the rebels and the NCP to "sit as Sudanese" and work out 
agreements on the details of power and wealth sharing. 
 
-------------------------- 
Delaying Census, Elections 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Abdelkarim stated that the elections cannot happen in 
Darfur--or in the rest of Sudan--until Darfur's "political problems" 
are resolved and suggested that both the census and elections be 
delayed.  "If not, the Darfur rebels will never stop and new 
factions will keep emerging because there is no political deal," he 
stated.  "We must tackle the relationship between the center and 
Darfur for elections to happen."  With regard to the census 
specifically, Abdelkarim predicted its results will be "unfair and 
illegitimate." 
 
------------------------------------- 
Dividing Power Between NCP, UMMA, PCP 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) After neutralizing the Darfur rebel movements by meeting 
some of their demands, Umma's goal is to conclude an agreement that 
divides political power in Darfur among itself, the NCP, and Hassan 
al Turabi's Popular Congress Party (PCP).  Asked what Sudan's 
interest is in concluding an agreement with the rebels or with the 
opposition parties, Abdelkarim claimed that the NCP is growing 
weaker and wants to shore up its own position by stabilizing the 
country.  Though power-sharing agreements with the opposition 
parties will lessen some of its influence, they will ensure that the 
 
NDJAMENA 00000136  002.5 OF 002 
 
 
NCP still holds sway throughout the country, which it will otherwise 
lose through competitive elections. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Umma has lost most popular support in Darfur, its 
traditional foothold in Sudan.  Given that Abdelkarim's assessment 
of the NCP's weakness and its willingness to meet Darfurians' 
demands is overstated, Umma's attempts to broker peace between Chad 
and Sudan as well as between Sudan and the rebel movements is both 
an attempt to regain the party's base in the region and to ensure 
itself an influential position irrespective of the 2009 elections. 
Abdelkarim's admission that discussions between Umma and the NCP are 
ongoing confirms Darfurians' fears that they will be excluded from 
securing their own voice in political life because of back-room 
machinations and underscores their lack of confidence in the 
elections.  As one key Darfur rebel leader told Poloff ironically 
during a recent conversation, cooperation between Umma and the NCP 
will mean that Darfur has "only one enemy instead of many."  End 
comment. 
 
¶8. (U) Tripoli minimize considered. 
 
TAMLYN