08NDJAMENA517
CHADIAN OPPOSITION PARTIES COMPLAIN GOC NOT
Fri Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO5598
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #0517/01 3121129
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071129Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6564
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 1022UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 000517 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON AND PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREF EU FR AU UN CD
SUBJECT: CHADIAN OPPOSITION PARTIES COMPLAIN GOC NOT 
IMPLEMENTING AUGUST 13TH ACCORD 
 
REF: A. NDJAMENA 000510 
     ¶B. 07 NDJAMENA 675 
 
 
----------- 
SUMMARY 
----------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  The main association of Chadian opposition 
parties, the CPDC, complained to the Ambassador that the GoC 
is not implementing the August 13 Accord (the electoral 
reform agreement signed in August 2007) in good faith, and 
that therefore credible elections could not be held in 2009. 
They made a pitch for the international community to pressure 
the Government to honor its agreements in order to avoid 
further conflict.  The Ambassador promised to consult with 
other like-minded countries to see what might be done.  The 
opposition representatives also expressed dissatisfaction 
with the results of the commission set up to investigate the 
aftermath of the February 2008 rebel attack on N,Djamena, 
and the death of CPDC leader Ibni Saleh. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  We agree that the CPDC,s concerns are real and 
that lack of political will on the part of the ruling party 
and the Deby Regime are retarding progress on the electoral 
process.  But EU Ambassador Desesquelles, the architect of 
the August 13 Accord and the prime mover behind the electoral 
reform process, believes that credible elections are still 
possible in 2009 or early 2010 (Ref A).  We will continue to 
consult with the EU and other supporters of the democratic 
transition in Chad to see how we can impress on the GoC how 
important credible elections are to the international 
community represented in Chad.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Salibou Garba, the Acting Spokesman for the main 
association of opposition parties, the CPDC (Coordination des 
Partis politique pour la Defense de la Constitution), 
called on the Ambassador on November 3 to complain that the 
GoC is not implementing the August 13 Accord (the electoral 
reform agreement signed in August 2007) in good faith.  Garba 
was accompanied by Ganghnon Mbaimbal, Deputy Spokesman of the 
CPDC,s Comite de Liaison.  Although Garba is also the 
Spokesman for the Comite de Suivi (Implementation Committee), 
he was clearly coming in his role as CPDC Spokesman.   A/DCM 
and A/PolOff sat in on the meeting. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
ALL SEVEN DRAFT LAWS STUCK IN CABINET 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Garba said none of the seven draft laws produced by 
the Comite de Suivi (Implementation Committee) have been sent 
to the National Assembly for approval.  Most importantly, the 
two draft laws that are key to holding democratic elections 
) those dealing with the electoral commission and the 
electoral code ) are still stuck in the Council of 
Ministers, although they were agreed by the Comite de Suivi 
(in which both the ruling party (MPS) and the GoC have 
representation) in January 2008.  Garba said the GoC wants to 
modify the drafts in ways that contradict the August 13 
Accord, and are therefore unacceptable to the opposition. 
Referring disparagingly to the appointment of a new cabinet 
under Prime Minister Youssuff Saleh Abbas in April of this 
year, which was supposed to bring good governance, Garba 
noted that in five months the GoC has not been able to 
finalize a draft. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
REFORM IS A PROCESS, BUT PROGESS IS ESSENTIAL 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Garba noted that the August 13 Accord envisioned 
holding legislative elections in 2009, but that is no longer 
feasible in his view.  The CPDC understands that reform is a 
process, and that it might take a few years, but there must 
be progress -- which the opposition doesn,t see.  He went on 
to say that good elections would require not only the right 
laws, but also the right environment; they could not be held 
in the current militarized atmosphere.  The opposition does 
not believe elections should be held just for the sake of 
holding them. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Garba said there was no news on the census; UNFPA 
might finish the overall enumeration in 2009.  He went on to 
underscore the importance of the census for the holding of 
fair elections, asserting that statisticians place the number 
of eligible voters between three and three and a half 
million, while the GoC estimate is close to six million. 
 
NDJAMENA 00000517  002 OF 002 
 
 
(NOTE:  In the 2006 presidential election, the GoC claimed 
the electorate comprised 5.8 million voters.) 
 
------------------------------------------- 
RESULTS OF COMMISSION D,ENQUETE UNSATISFACTORY 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The secondary issue the CPDC raised was its 
dissatisfaction with the Commission d'Enquete (Commission of 
Inquiry) to investigate the aftermath of the February 2008 
rebel attacks, and especially the disappearance of opposition 
coalition spokesman, Ibni Oumar Mahamat Saleh, now presumed 
dead.  Garba repeated the opposition,s demand for the return 
of Ibni,s body to his family for a proper burial, and for 
answers.  &We have a right to know who did what,8 he said. 
The opposition was dissatisfied with the Commission 
d,Enquete, as well as the follow-up mechanism controlled by 
the Presidency, which could not even trace the vehicle in 
which Ibni disappeared, although people identified the car 
that took him away.  Broadening the scope of his complaint, 
Garba added that war crimes and rape are difficult to accept. 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Salibou advised the Ambassador that the CPDC was 
going to the international community (he had already called 
on the EU, French and AU Ambassadors, and the UNDP Res Rep), 
rather than to the press, noting that the opposition parties 
had only entered into dialogue with the GoC due to the 
involvement of the international community.  Support was 
needed now more than ever to get the process back on track. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) A/DCM asked about allies within the current 
Government, but Garba dismissed them (including the President 
of the National Assembly and the Prime Minister), saying that 
even if their hearts are in the right place, they cannot do 
anything, as the GoC is a one-man show.  Unless President 
Deby wants something done, it will not be done. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) At that point, Garba,s companion, Mbaimbal, who 
had seemed disengaged until then, came to life. &People have 
lost confidence in Chadian democracy, which is why the rebels 
exist.  When they changed the Constitution, people got 
discouraged.8  Citing the Government,s reneging on its 
agreement with the World Bank as evidence that the GoC cannot 
be trusted, Mbaimbal emphasized that the opposition wants the 
 international community &with us8 in the Comite de Suivi. 
(NOTE:  the international community participates in the 
Comite de Suivi as observers.)  If the GoC doesn,t honor its 
agreements, war will come, Mbaimbal warned. 
 
¶11. (SBU)  Garba asserted that the Sirte agreement is a step 
backward, in that it bought off individuals and held no hope 
for widespread inclusion in the political process, and that 
the Dakar Agreement  (March 2008) is now dead. 
 
----------- 
COMMENT 
----------- 
 
¶12. (SBU)  We agree that the CPDC,s concerns are real and 
that lack of political will on the part of the ruling party 
and the Deby Regime are retarding progress on the electoral 
process.  But EU Ambassador Desesquelles, the architect of 
the August 13 Accord and the prime mover behind the electoral 
reform process, believes that credible elections are still 
possible in 2009 or early 2010 (Ref A).  We will continue to 
consult with the EU and other supporters of the democratic 
transition in Chad to see how we can impress on the GoC how 
important credible elections are to the international 
community represented in Chad. 
NIGRO