08PARIS341
FRANCE: INPUT FOR ENERGY REPORT TO CONGRESS
Tue Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #0341/01 0571656
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261656Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2086
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESUNCLAS PARIS 000341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/WE, EEB/ESC/IEC--GRIFFIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG SENV APER ABUD FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE: INPUT FOR ENERGY REPORT TO CONGRESS 
 
REF: STATE 10743 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) The following information provides input on post's 
energy-related activities per reftel. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Which section or sections of the Embassy handle energy 
matters?  What is the total number of staff in this section or 
sections? 
 
Environment, Science, Technology & Health (ESTH) 
5 staff 
 
Economics Section (ECON) 
11 staff 
 
Public Affairs (PA) 
27 Staff 
 
Political Section (POL) 
16 Staff 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Please identify the positions of employees that work on 
energy matters and specify the percentage of time that such 
employees devote to energy matters. 
 
1 ESTH Counselor - 55% 
1 ESTH Officer - 30% 
1 ESTH Officer - 15% 
1 OMS - 25% 
1 FSN - 30% 
 
1 ECON Minister Counselor - 10% 
1 ECON Counselor - 10% 
1 ECON Officer - 40% 
1 ECON OMS - 10% 
2 ECON FSN's - 10 and 25 % 
 
1 PA FSN 35% 
 
1 POL Officer 2.5% 
 
¶3. (SBU) Please provide a brief narrative description of the 
positions of employees that work on energy matters and the kinds of 
work they do. 
 
ESTH Counselor - Serves as the bilateral nuclear attach in the most 
advanced nuclear economy in Europe; advances thermonuclear 
experimental reactor (ITER), Global Nuclear Energy Partnership 
(GNEP), other advanced nuclear work, protection of nuclear 
facilities, carbon sequestration including in connection with Carbon 
Sequestration Leadership Forum (CSLF), biofuels, renewables, and 
energy efficiency (sustainable cities, green buildings, etc.) 
Advances U.S. positions on climate change (UN process, MEM process, 
U.S. policy).  Supports public affairs events promoting U.S. 
policies.  Promotes EPA's Methane to Markets Partnership.  Liaise 
with Dept of Energy and French nuclear authorities and French 
nuclear company, Areva.  Reports on French nuclear developments, 
e.g., w/regard to disposition of nuclear waste. Works with French 
government on protection of nuclear sites and transportation of 
nuclear materials. 
 
ESTH Officer - Promotes U.S. energy policies, promotes U.S.-French 
research collaboration in energy field.  Provides visit assistance 
to visits of French nuclear facilities, esp. nuclear waste 
retreatment; to French industrial and research facilities exploring 
biofuels and carbon sequestration; supports climate negotiations and 
public affairs work associated with same.  Prepares reports 
regarding French energy and climate policies. 
 
ESTH Officer - Assists in bilateral cooperation on topic of physical 
protection of nuclear sites and transportation of nuclear materials. 
Provides back-up assistance to ESTH Counselor and ESTH officer. 
 
ESTH OMS - Processes country clearance requests for 2500-3000 DOE 
visitors to France each year; organizes logistics for DOE visitors 
and Congressional visitors engaged in visits to French nuclear 
sites. 
 
ESTH FSN - Organizes, schedules and visits to French nuclear 
facilities, French government agencies which oversee nuclear energy 
production and energy and climate research and policy.  Assists ESTH 
Counselor and Officers in promotion of U.S. negotiating positions. 
Prepares reports regarding French nuclear and energy sector 
developments, particularly regarding technological and research 
developments. 
 
ECON M/C - Manages overall Embassy effort on energy and climate 
change, including coordination between ESTH, ECON and PA sections. 
ECON Counselor - Promotes U.S. energy policies, develops contacts 
with key members of relevant government agencies in the energy 
field. Responsible for engagement with France on energy-related G8 
issues. 
 
ECON Officer - Promotes U.S. energy policies, develops contacts with 
key members of relevant government agencies in the energy field. 
Encourages appropriate investment policies in Middle-Eastern energy 
sector.  Participates in public affairs outreach on energy and 
climate policy through speaking engagements.  Reports on French 
energy developments, energy security policy, and the international 
activities of French energy companies, as well as French 
implementation of European Union directives to open electricity and 
gas markets.  Identifies impact on US interests of growing 
convergence of French environmental and energy policies.  Encourages 
GOF cooperation with the US on energy security policy and programs, 
including product and geographical supply diversification. 
Organizes and manages senior-level official and congressional visits 
on energy issues. 
 
ECON OMS - Processes country clearance requests for energy-related 
visits. Assists with report preparation and other administrative 
tasks. 
 
ECON FSN - Provides scheduling and administrative support for 
section's energy-related work and for energy-related visits. 
 
ECON FSN - Assists ECON Officers in promotion of U.S. energy policy. 
Researches and prepares reports regarding French energy sector 
developments, particularly regarding deregulation of energy markets 
and mergers within the private and public sectors.  Assists section 
in ensuring energy is represented in PA programs such as 
International Visitors by meeting and recruiting potential 
candidates. 
 
PA FSN - Paris Public Affairs' Cultural Office has one Locally 
Engaged Staff member working exclusively on economic and 
environmental issues.  This employee provides advice on engaging the 
French public on energy and climate change; develops public affairs 
programming including identifying and managing speakers and 
conferences; develops and sustains contacts in the field; reports on 
energy developments and programs; and serves branch posts on energy 
issues. 
 
POL Officer - Discusses civil nuclear energy issues with French 
counterparts in the context of non-proliferation treaty provisions. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Budget: Please provide the amounts of State Department 
funds, including salary costs (prorated as applicable), spent by 
your post in FY 2007 on energy-related activities: 
 
--- personnel  $312,000.00 
--- programs     $5,500.00 
 
PEKALA