08STATE130459
GUIDANCE FOR DECEMBER 15 UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON
Thu Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO4203
OO RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHC #0459/01 3462307
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 112259Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 4126
INFO SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY 3234UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 130459 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM ZI XA ZU KDEM
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR DECEMBER 15 UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON 
ZIMBABWE 
 
  ¶1. (U) This is an action request.  USUN should draw from 
the talking points in para 2 during the UN Security Council 
consultations on Zimbabwe December 15.  USUN should also 
address the press after the UNSC briefing to summarize the 
key points from the U.S. statement. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin points: 
 
On behalf of the United States, I would like to thank 
(Assistant Secretary General Political Affairs Haile 
Menkerios)  for his briefings.  Today I would like to make 
five points. 
 
First, it is long past time for Robert Mugabe to go.  Across 
the continent, African voices are bravely speaking out to say 
it is time for him to step down.  These leaders share the 
desire of ordinary Zimbabweans for a return to peace, 
democracy and prosperity.  We urge others from the region to 
step up and join the growing chorus of voices calling for an 
end to Mugabe,s tyranny. 
 
Second, we urge the international community to re-double its 
efforts to provide resources to address the humanitarian 
crisis in Zimbabwe.  The people of Zimbabwe are suffering 
terribly.  Cholera deaths are on the rise.  People are dying 
in their homes, as hospitals are closed and no medicine is 
available.  The situation in Zimbabwe has become a threat to 
the health and security of other people in the region. 
 
At least four million people in Zimbabwe are food insecure, 
dependent on foreign assistance food to get by; that figure 
could rise to five million by January.  Life expectancy in 
Zimbabwe has dropped to 34 years. 
 
We look forward to the proposed visit by the UN Under 
Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs to Zimbabwe to 
focus attention on the crisis and develop plans for 
additional assistance. 
 
Third, we are deeply concerned with the increase of human 
rights abuses committed by the Mugabe regime.  At least 19 
Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) activists have been 
abducted. Some are believed dead and the whereabouts of the 
others remain unknown.  Police and military forces continue 
to violently break up peaceful demonstrations in recent 
months. 
 
Fourth, Zimbabwe,s Central Bank has fueled hyperinflation by 
uncontrollable printing of money and decimating the economy 
in the process. Virtually all industry has been wiped out, 
and little or no agricultural planting is taking place. 
Millions of Zimbabweans have left the country in a desperate 
attempt to survive and to support their families. 
 
Additionally, we encourage participants in the Kimberly 
Process Certification Scheme to redouble their efforts to 
intercept illicit diamond shipments from Zimbabwe, the 
proceeds of which may contribute to the heightening political 
turmoil and humanitarian crisis. 
 
Fifth, it is clear the Mugabe regime has failed to act in 
good faith to implement the September 15 agreement and accept 
the will of the people as reflected in the March elections. 
The regime - through both direct action and neglect - has 
decimated the country and set it back a generation or more. 
 
It is deplorable the Mugabe regime failed to allow the visit 
of the respected members of the Elders Group.  Refusal of the 
visit is indicative of the lengths to which the regime will 
go to prevent the international community from documenting 
abuses, corruption and mismanagement. 
 
The international community, including African nations, has 
expressed grave concern over the humanitarian situation, and 
has criticized the Mugabe regime for failing to negotiate 
with the opposition in good faith.  We hope others will speak 
up and work toward a resolution of the political impasse, and 
humanitarian crisis, and the investigation of human rights 
abuses in Zimbabwe. 
 
We appreciate regional negotiations to resolve this crisis. 
However, the U.S. believes this approach has failed not for 
want of effort on the part of Southern African Development 
Community (SADC), but lack of good faith and obfuscation by 
Mugabe.  We call on the SADC and the African Union to 
increase their efforts to address the humanitarian and 
 
STATE 00130459  002 OF 002 
 
 
political crisis in Zimbabwe, and support an increased role 
of the UNSC to help resolve the crisis. 
 
The United States will continue to work with our partners 
around the world to halt the violence and stem the 
humanitarian disaster the Mugabe regime is inflicting on its 
people.  We stand ready to help rebuild Zimbabwe once a 
legitimate government accountable to the will of its people 
has been formed and is working to restore peace and stability 
to Zimbabweans. 
RICE