08STATE58446
THE WAY FORWARD ON UNMEE
Fri May 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO7861
PP RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #8446/01 1520107
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 302320Z MAY 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS PRIORITY 0482
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 7736
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 1396
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 9197
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 1963
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 4997
RUEHAE/AMEMBASSY ASMARA 6295UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 058446 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO PBTS ET ER BE FR UK RS
SUBJECT: THE WAY FORWARD ON UNMEE 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  Department requests action 
addressees in London, Paris, Moscow, and Brussels, to 
approach host governments, as UN Security Council (UNSC) 
Members, to discuss our proposed way forward on the UN 
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) and a potential 
follow-on UN presence relating to the common border between 
Ethiopia and Eritrea.  Department requests USUN to do the 
same with appropriate UN Missions in New York.  Drawing on 
points below, Posts and USUN should emphasize that in its 
current form, UNMEE can not play an effective role in the 
region, while emphasizing that there is no prospect for the 
operation do so in the future given the current limitations 
imposed by Eritrea.  Posts and USUN should also underscore 
that the U.S. will continue to press for a UNSC resolution 
terminating UNMEE.  However, Posts and USUN should note that 
we are open to establishing a follow-on UN presence in the 
area if both parties agree to it, and if they demonstrate a 
serious commitment to actively cooperate and engage with such 
a presence.  See discussion elements in paragraph 2.   For an 
extensive background on the crisis, see paragraph 3. 
 
¶2. Posts and USUN should draw upon the elements below in 
discussions with host governments or UN Missions. 
 
Begin discussion elements. 
 
- Express our disappointment that the UNSC has not been able 
to move to a resolution terminating UNMEE.  Underscore that 
in its current configuration, UNMEE can no longer execute its 
mandate, and for all practical purposes is inoperable in 
Eritrea. 
 
-Highlight that the UN and troop contributing countries 
(TCCs) to UNMEE have been waiting for an affirmative action 
by the UNSC, and that in the face of abusive acts by Eritrea 
on UNMEE personnel, and the negative precedent Eritrea,s 
actions could have on other peacekeeping operations and 
countries, willingness to contribute to UN Missions in the 
future, it is irresponsible of the UNSC not to take quick 
action on UNMEE. 
 
-Emphasize that we will continue to press for a resolution 
terminating UNMEE.  Note that we are open to the idea of a 
follow-on UN presence, including a presence that would be 
only in the territory of one party, if it can legitimately 
serve a purpose and successfully execute the elements laid 
out in its mandate, and if the party/parties agree to fully 
cooperate and engage with a new UN presence. 
 
-Stress that the UNSC should also request the Secretary 
General to consult with Ethiopia and Eritrea on how the UN 
could most effectively support normalizing relations, 
facilitate implementation of agreements they have entered 
into (specifically the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and 
the Algiers Agreements), and what UN presence, if any, they 
would accept on their territory.  The UNSC should also be 
actively engaging in discussions on a potential follow-on 
presence, particularly consideration of a realistic 
configuration and mandate. 
 
-Stress that the UNSC must acknowledge that there can be no 
follow-on mission if the parties do not agree to fully 
cooperate with it.  Highlight that even if a follow-on 
presence is not immediately established after the termination 
of UNMEE, the option to create a UN presence in the future is 
still a possibility if the parties agree to it. 
 
-Emphasize that we do not believe that ending UNMEE would 
automatically terminate the Algiers Agreements, but that we 
understand the parties may point to UNMEE,s termination to 
justify claims that they are entitled to renounce their 
obligations under the Algiers Agreements.  Note that we will 
continue to urge them to respect their commitments in the 
Algiers Agreements, and will urge the UNSC to continue to do 
so as well. 
 
End discussion elements. 
 
¶3. Background 
 
UNMEE is a Chapter VI peacekeeping operation first 
established to monitor compliance with and facilitate 
 
STATE 00058446  002 OF 002 
 
 
implementation of the Agreement on the Cessation of 
Hostilities of June 2000, an accord between Ethiopia and 
Eritrea that ended the 1998-2000 war.  This agreement was 
followed in December 2000 by the Algiers Agreement, in which 
the parties agreed to several steps to resolve issues that 
divide them, including the boundary dispute.  The Agreement 
created a demilitarized zone in Eritrea close to its border 
with Ethiopia, commonly referred to as the Temporary Security 
Zone (TSZ)--most of UNMEE,s troops have been located there. 
The accord also established the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary 
Commission (EEBC) to delimit and demarcate the boundary.  The 
EEBC issued a delimitation decision on April 13, 2002, but 
was unable to demarcate the boundary due to lack of 
cooperation by the parties.  Eritrea subsequently 
re-militarized the TSZ, and for over two years Eritrean 
restrictions on UNMEE troops have hampered their movements 
and UNMEE,s ability to execute its mandate. 
 
Beginning in November 2007, Eritrea started refusing UNMEE 
permission to purchase or import fuel.  The critical fuel 
crisis forced Secretary General Ban to begin &temporary 
relocation8 of UNMEE from Eritrea in early February 2008. 
Eritrea subsequently complicated its efforts to temporarily 
relocate to Ethiopia (as originally planned), demanding that 
UNMEE personnel and equipment depart through the capital city 
of Asmara or through the port cities of Assab and Massawa, 
the same points where UNMEE entered the country.  Eritrea 
appeared to be holding UNMEE troops and equipment hostage in 
an attempt to force the UNSC to pressure Ethiopia to accept 
the demarcation decision by map coordinates made by the EEBC 
in November 2006, and made effective by its terms in November 
2007 (Ethiopia has rejected the EEBC,s approach as 
inconsistent with international law.  Eritrea has accepted 
it). 
 
Eritrea eventually allowed contractors to provide fuel 
shipments to the Mission, and at present, most UNMEE 
equipment and personnel have been withdrawn from Eritrean 
territory, with only a small civilian staff and rear guard 
remaining.  India, one of the largest troop-contributing 
countries (TCCs), has spoken out against the treatment of its 
forces, who are waiting in capital for further direction from 
the UN.  The UN claims it is waiting to for direction from 
the UNSC before it takes further action. 
 
Since temporary relocation began, Belgium, which has &the 
pen8 on UNMEE, has worked closely with the U.S., sharing 
multiple draft Presidential Statements (PRSTs) and 
resolutions on the situation concerning Ethiopia and Eritrea. 
 Despite U.S. urging, the UNSC never took strong action 
against Eritrea for its treatment of UNMEE.  On April 30, 
2008, the UNSC did finally issue a PRST, noting that &the 
continuation of Eritrea,s obstructions towards UNMEE has 
reached a level so as to undermine the basis of the Mission's 
mandate and compelled UNMEE to temporarily relocate.8  On 
May 8, 2008 during UNSC UNMEE consultations, Belgium 
circulated a non-paper on the way ahead and next steps on the 
conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea. 
 
UNMEE,s mandate will expire on July 31.  The UNSC has yet to 
move towards a resolution.  Belgium, France, Russia, the UK, 
and the U.S. are currently in expert-level consultations on a 
draft UNSC resolution on a way forward for UNMEE.  This same 
group is also negotiating the text of a letter from the 
President of the UNSC to President Isaias of Eritrea and 
Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia.  The letter outlines a 
potential UN follow-on presence, including military observers 
(MILOBs) on the Ethiopian side of the border and liaison 
offices in Addis Ababa and Asmara. 
RICE