08STATE94816
SOMALIA: INSTRUCTIONS ON PRST
Thu Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0013
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4816 2481734
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 041731Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 094816 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: INSTRUCTIONS ON PRST 
 
¶1.  USUN is authorized to join consensus on the following 
PRST on Somalia due to be adopted on September 4, 2008. 
 
Begin text: 
 
The Security Council welcomes the signing of a peace and 
reconciliation Agreement ("the Djibouti Agreement") between 
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the Alliance 
for the Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS) in Djibouti on 19 
August 2008, as well as the preliminary work undertaken by 
the High Level Committee and the Joint Security Committee set 
up under that Agreement, as well as recent political 
developments.  The Security Council expresses its 
determination that the Agreement should provide the basis for 
lasting peace, security and stability for the people of 
Somalia, including the ultimate withdrawal of foreign forces. 
 The Security Council commends the efforts deployed by the 
TFG and the ARS to this end and their commitment to peace. 
 
The Security Council reaffirms its respect for the 
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence 
and unity of Somalia. 
 
The Security Council extends its gratitude to the Special 
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr 
Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, and to the UN Political Office for 
Somalia for mediating dialogue between the parties and 
garnering their support for the political process.  The 
Security Council further expresses its gratitude to the 
Government of Djibouti for hosting talks between the parties. 
 
The Security Council calls on the parties to meet all 
elements of their Agreement in full.  In particular, the 
Council underlines the crucial importance of the parties 
taking all necessary measures to ensure, without delay, the 
unhindered humanitarian access and assistance to the Somali 
people, and of the parties and their allies terminating all 
acts of armed confrontation.  The Security Council states its 
support for the implementation of the Agreement and its 
intention to review that implementation continuously. 
 
The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the 
African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and urges again the 
international community to provide financial resources, 
personnel, equipment and services for the full deployment of 
AMISOM. 
 
The Security Council takes note of the parties' request in 
the Djibouti Agreement that the United Nations, within a 
period of 120 days, authorise and deploy an international 
stabilisation force.  The Council further notes, in this 
regard, communiqus by the Peace and Security Council of the 
African Union of 29 June 2008, 8 August 2008 and 20 August 
¶2008. 
 
The Security Council, acknowledging recent, positive 
continued political developments progress in the wake of the 
Djibouti Agreement as confirmed by SRSG Mr Ould-Abdallah, 
reaffirms its willingness, as set out in its resolution 1814 
(2008), to consider, at an appropriate time, a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation to take over from AMISOM, subject to 
progress in the political process and improvement in the 
security situation on the ground. 
 
The Security Council recalls the Secretary-General's 
contingency planning for a United Nations integrated 
peacekeeping mission in Somalia, which recommends that plans 
are put in place for the deployment of an international 
stabilisation force, in the framework of the approach 
presented by the Secretary-General in his report of 14 March 
2008 (S/2008/178). 
 
In this regard, the Security Council requests that the 
Secretary-General elaborate on his contingency plans and 
provide, in consultation with the parties and other relevant 
stakeholders, a detailed and consolidated description of a 
feasible multinational force, its mandate and derived tasks, 
to include inter alia the size and geographical scope of that 
force, progressively deployed, and, in this context, further 
provide a detailed concept of operations for a feasible 
United Nations peacekeeping operation. 
 
The Security Council further requests the Secretary-General 
urgently to identify and approach States that might 
contribute the financial resources, personnel, equipment and 
services required, stands ready to support the 
Secretary-General in this regard, and calls upon States to 
respond favourably. 
 
The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report 
on the implementation of the Djibouti Agreement by the 
parties, including an update on the conditions on the ground, 
as well as on his planning, including discussions with 
potential contributing States, within 60 days. 
RICE