08STATE66451
GUIDANCE FOR SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING ON ZIMBABWE
Fri Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO4284
OO RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #6451 1721308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 201308Z JUN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 2249
INFO SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY 2643UNCLAS STATE 066451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM ZI XA ZU
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING ON ZIMBABWE 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  USUN may draw from the 
talking points in para 2 below during the UNSC formal meeting 
on the situation in Zimbabwe.  USUN should also draw on these 
points in speaking to the press after the meeting. 
¶2.  Begin talking points: 
 
-- We appreciate (Under Secretary General Pascoe,s) briefing 
on the worsening situation in Zimbabwe.  We are appalled by 
the downward spiral in the welfare of the Zimbabwean people 
as a result of government-sanctioned violence against 
opposition leaders and supporters and the government 
restrictions on humanitarian operations.  With that in mind, 
I would like to make the following four points on the 
situation in Zimbabwe: 
 
-- First, the Government of Zimbabwe must immediately end all 
violence directed against opposition leaders and supporters 
so that the June 27 election can truly represent the will of 
the Zimbabwean people.  The escalating violence and 
intimidation is seriously jeopardizing any hope of free and 
fair elections.  Since the March 29 election, there have been 
at least 3,000 attacks, 54 murders, 200 missing people, over 
25,000 people displaced, and 3,000 injured victims who have 
required medical treatment. 
 
-- We are deeply concerned that the government,s crackdown 
is increasingly targeting opposition leadership.  On June 12, 
presidential candidate Morgan Tsvangirai was twice detained 
by police while attempting to campaign, bringing to four his 
total number of detentions in eight days.  On June 12, 
Movement of Democratic Change (MDC) Secretary General Tendai 
Biti was arrested upon his return to Zimbabwe from South 
Africa and charged with treason, in addition to the already 
pending charges against him of communicating statements 
prejudicial to the State.  He continues to be held 
incommunicado. We are greatly concerned about the poor 
conditions of Mr. Biti,s detention and urge his immediate 
release pending resolution of those charges. 
 
-- At least eight MDC Members of Parliament have been 
arrested or detained in the aftermath of the March 29 
national elections in which the combined opposition won a 
majority of seats in parliament.  Women, children, and the 
elderly relatives of MDC officials have also been singled out 
for beatings and even death in an ongoing attempt to 
intimidate would-be MDC voters and shake the foundations of 
the party's infrastructure.  Without an immediate, major 
shift in the current environment, chances for a free and fair 
June electoral contest are remote. 
 
-- We also note with grave concern statements by Robert 
Mugabe that he and his political party would not respect an 
opposition victory on June 27, instead promising even greater 
violence against the Zimbabwean people.  This threat should 
be retracted and the Government of Zimbabwe made to pledge to 
the Southern African Development Community, 
the African Union, and other observers that it will abide by 
electoral results counted in a transparent manner in the 
presence of electoral observers. 
 
 
-- Second, the Government of Zimbabwe should immediately lift 
its directive suspending the humanitarian operations of 
non-governmental organizations so that humanitarian aid can 
reach those in need regardless of their political views. 
Several million people, including orphans, vulnerable people, 
and those infected with HIV/AIDS, will suffer if emergency 
food distribution is suspended. 
 
-- Third, the crisis in Zimbabwe affects not only the welfare 
of the Zimbabwean people, but the well-being and stability of 
Zimbabwe,s neighbors.  The Zimbabwean government's economic 
and political decisions have caused an exodus of Zimbabweans 
fleeing economic collapse and political unrest.  People of 
Mozambican and Malawian origins living and working in 
Zimbabwe have in many cases been forced to return to their 
countries. 
 
-- Fourth, we support the efforts of the Southern African 
Development Community and African Union leaders, as well as 
the UN Secretary General to resolve the crisis in Zimbabwe 
during this critical transition period and beyond.  It will 
take the political commitment of the entire international 
community to help Zimbabwe,s people before and after the 
June 27 election so that, while they can take pride in their 
history, they can also begin to look forward to a better 
future. 
RICE