08STATE95569
UNMOVIC/UNSCR 1762:  MOVING FORWARD
Fri Sep 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0013
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5569 2492138
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 052135Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 095569 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL UNSC IAEA IZ
SUBJECT: UNMOVIC/UNSCR 1762:  MOVING FORWARD 
 
REF: A. 07 STATE 37753 
     ¶B. DANIEL-RIES EMAILS 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: In response to Iraqi Minister for Science 
and Technology Raad Fahmy's request to discuss the path to 
eventual normalization regarding Iraq's civil nuclear 
industry, including the ultimate lifting of relevant UNSCR 
obligations, this cable outlines the steps necessary for Iraq 
to undertake in order to meet the highest standards of 
international nonproliferation norms.  The United States is 
committed to actively assisting Iraq in meeting these 
objectives, and thereby establish international confidence in 
its civil nuclear plans.  Further clarifying Iraq's interest 
in civil nuclear applications will help frame discussion and 
facilitate consideration of potential future cooperation. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) BACKGROUND: While UNSCR 1762 terminated UNMOVIC and 
IAEA mandates under relevant resolutions, it did not relieve 
Iraq of its disarmament obligations under previous UNSCRs, 
including restrictions over Iraq's engagement in nuclear 
activities.  UNSCR 1762 also invited Iraq to report to the 
Security Council, within one year from the date of its 
adoption on June 29, 2007, on the progress it has made on 
nonproliferation.  Iraq was informed (ref A) that, while the 
U.S. understands Iraq has made progress on non-proliferation 
matters through its commitments to comply with its 
obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and 
its IAEA Safeguards Agreement, it is the USG view that Iraq 
must continue to take further steps to meet the highest 
standards of international nonproliferation norms, and 
participate in and fully support the international 
nonproliferation regime. 
 
¶3. (SBU) ACTION REQUEST: Embassy Baghdad is requested to 
convey to Minister Fahmy the list of actions in paragraph 
four needed to establish confidence in Iraq's support of the 
highest standards of international nonproliferation norms. 
The United States supports Iraq's desire to have all Chapter 
VII resolutions pertaining to it, including UNSCRs addressing 
arms control and nonproliferation requirements, lifted, but 
UNSC action will require members' confidence that the 
restrictions are no longer necessary.  Embassy Baghdad may 
wish to suggest Iraq produce public reports, where 
appropriate, outlining efforts concerning the following items 
to help the international community recognize the progress 
Iraq has made toward complying with international 
nonproliferation norms. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The United States is committed to actively assisting 
Iraq in meeting the following objectives, and thereby 
establishing international confidence in Iraq's civil nuclear 
plans.  The Department stands ready to discuss the following 
in greater detail should Iraq require assistance in achieving 
these aims: 
 
-- Sign and bring into force an Additional Protocol to its 
IAEA safeguards agreement; 
 
-- Develop export controls and practices in line with 
internationally recognized regimes such as the 
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), Australia Group, 
Nuclear Suppliers Group, and Wassenaar Arrangement; 
 
-- Strictly comply with its obligations under the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, its IAEA Safeguards agreement, the 
Biological Weapons Convention (including national 
implementing legislation), and the 1925 Geneva Protocol on 
Use in War of Poisonous Gases or Bacteriological Methods of 
Warfare; 
 
-- Adhere to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel 
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management; 
 
-- Comply with the Code of Conduct for Safety and Security 
for Radioactive Sources; 
 
-- Adhere to the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for 
Nuclear Damage; 
 
-- Subscribe to the International Code of Conduct Against 
Ballistic Missile Proliferation; 
 
-- Become a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention; 
 
-- Become a partner in the Global Initiative to Combat 
Nuclear Terrorism; 
 
-- Commit, if Iraq chooses in the future to pursue civilian 
nuclear power, to rely on existing international markets for 
nuclear fuel services as an alternative to the pursuit of 
enrichment and reprocessing; 
 
-- Report to the Security Council on nonproliferation 
progress as invited in UNSCR 1762. 
 
¶5. (SBU) ACTION REQUEST CONT: Department also requests 
Embassy inquire into the specific plans of the Ministry of 
Science and Technology with respect to future civil nuclear 
activities, as this will help guide U.S. consideration of 
future cooperation, including evaluation of relevant U.S. 
legal restrictions.  Post may note that current programs, 
such as the Nuclear Facility Dismantlement and Disposal 
Project, provide an opportunity for Iraq to develop important 
legal regimes and institutional frameworks that may be built 
on for future cooperation. 
RICE