08TELAVIV2201
ISRAEL AT A TURNING POINT IN ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Wed Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #2201/01 2681428
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241428Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8575
INFO RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0508
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 4790
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0283
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDCUNCLAS TEL AVIV 002201 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/ENV, EEB/EPPD-JMUDGE AND NEA/AIA 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL - METCALF 
USDA FOR FAS/ICD/RSED 
AMMAN FOR ESTH - BHALLA 
PARIS FOR USOECD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENRG TBIO IS
SUBJECT: ISRAEL AT A TURNING POINT IN ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
 
Ref: (A)Tel Aviv 195 (B)Tel Aviv 613 (C)Tel Aviv 1845 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Through sixty years of statehood, Israel has 
traditionally relegated environmental concerns towards the bottom of 
the agenda, with the predictable results.  Knowledgeable observers 
fault the government's pre-occupation with defense and growth and 
reliance on short-term tactical decisions for permitting Israel's 
environment to degrade.  Recently, however, Israeli society has been 
trying to address the legacy of benign neglect of its environment, 
evidenced by a raft of new environmental legislation passed in 2008 
after several years of effort, aiming at tougher regulation and 
better enforcement, and the start of a serious recycling program.  A 
number of factors account for this change of heart, including 
growing public environmentalism, political leaders willing to take 
up the issue, and several front page environmental news stories that 
energized both groups.  NGOs believe that enforcement of the laws 
now approved will reverse environmental decline, and both the GOI 
and NGOs are asking for training to better pursue enforcement 
responsibilities and strengthen their capacity to act on 
environmental defense issues.  GOI interest in upgrading its 
environmental performance is also generated by its desire to accede 
to OECD membership, which would commit Israel to certain core 
principles on environment and waste management.  End summary. 
 
 
The Tyranny of Tactics 
---------------------- 
¶2. (U) The Israeli state throughout its history has always been 
keenly aware of the challenges posed by its desert climate and its 
limited agricultural resources.  The ambition of its founders in 
1948 to "make the desert bloom" was as much a challenge to its 
immigrant population as a statement of national objectives.  The 
relationship between people and the land they inhabit was critical 
to the young state's leaders, as much of Israel's economy and export 
income at the time derived from agricultural output. In the 1960s 
agriculture accounted for over 30 percent of export earnings; today 
agriculture represents only 3.9 percent of export income. 
 
¶3. (U) However despite such sensitivity to Israel's natural resource 
endowment (and the lack thereof), Israeli governments have 
traditionally subordinated environmental protection to security, 
economic productivity, and development objectives.  In the rush to 
assure security and boost export earnings to pay for defense 
materiel, environmental protection was a secondary issue.  When 
environmental concerns did become national issues, they cast nature 
in the role of an adversary: swamps that must be drained, land that 
must be irrigated, inhospitable desert to be cultivated into a 
productive asset.  In the quest for physical and economic security, 
Israel opted for industry and output growth at the expense of 
pollution and depleted natural resources. 
 
¶4. (U) The head of Tel Aviv University's Porter School of 
Environmental Studies Arie Nesher believes that GOI decisions made 
on environmental issues - as on most issues - have been chiefly 
tactical.  This was understandable when the nation was young, when 
surviving the next war or embargo was the chief concern of the 
state's leadership. Such short-term thinking became the norm, Nesher 
believes. Israeli environmental policy continued to lack any 
strategic approach, any assessment of where the government wants 
Israel to be in 20 or 30 years in terms of its resource use, energy 
production, and environment.  Individual decisions made to solve 
discrete problems resulted in a patchwork of weak regulation with 
many gaps.  This tyranny of tactics incrementally led the country to 
high rates of air and water pollution, under-regulated waste 
dumping, and low corporate accountability for waste treatment. 
 
Turning a Corner 
---------------- 
¶5. (U) In the 1990s, environmentally concerned Israelis recognized 
that they had little voice or impact on the country's policies, and 
organized to take action. Several citizen action groups joined 
together in 1990 to create the Israel Union for Environmental 
Defense, now the chief lobby for environmental policy.  A few years 
later the Heschel Center for Environmental Education was created, 
stating in its mission that the single-minded dedication of public 
policy to economic growth and security had led to massive damage to 
Israel's physical environment and social fabric. 
 
¶6. (U) Recognizing that the government had few persons trained in 
environmental studies, activists pressed Tel Aviv University to fill 
the gap, resulting in the creation of the Porter School of 
Environmental Studies, an interdisciplinary program to educate 
 
future leadership.  The Porter School Director Nesher believes, ten 
years on, that these efforts are starting to bear fruit, citing the 
raft of environmental legislation recently passed by the Knesset, 
whose advisors include a number of graduates from the program.  In 
2006, the head of Life and Environment, an umbrella grouping of 95 
NGOs concerned with environment and community living issues, 
recognized the sea-change in Israeli attitudes toward 
environmentalism.  She wrote: "The main role of the environmental 
movement is to increase the involvement of the public in the 
decision making process on health and environmental issues. 
Therefore, the (Israeli) environmental movement has made a joint 
strategic decision to alter its position from a body that protests 
from outside of decision making processes, to a body that penetrates 
the centers of power and the places where decisions are made." 
 
The Sources of Change 
--------------------- 
¶7. (U) The rise of Israeli environmentalism derives from several 
sources.  First, citizens are more sensitized to pollution because 
they encounter it more.  Being slightly smaller than New Jersey in 
land area but holding 7.2 million people, Israel is ten times more 
densely populated than the United States, with 324 persons per 
square km compared to 31 persons per square km in the US.  The 
population has also increased rapidly in the last 20 years, growing 
from 4.4 million in 1989 to 7.3 million, partly due to waves of new 
immigrants from Eastern Europe and Ethiopia.  The urban sprawl has 
pushed Israelis to inhabit areas once far from the cities, in closer 
proximity to previous waste dumps.  This has resulted in pressure 
for change; Tel Aviv's previous landfill, for example, is now 
undergoing rehabilitation as a recreation area for the densely 
inhabited Sharon region, and the city's waste is hauled 100 km 
farther south. 
 
¶8. (U) The growth of environmentalism was also spurred by several 
high-profile ecological confrontations, and a growing realization of 
the health impact of pollution. These front-page news situations 
shocked Israelis into recognizing their degraded environment.  In 
August 1997 four members of a visiting Australian sports team fell 
into Tel Aviv's Yarkon River and died from exposure to chemicals in 
the water.  In 2006 air pollution made national news when a study 
revealed that an estimated 1,000 deaths per year in Tel Aviv are due 
to air pollution, twice the number attributed to auto accidents.  In 
2007, the planned construction of a new air force base in the Negev 
just a few kilometers downwind from Israel's only toxic waste 
treatment facility, provoked outrage from Israelis, a population 
where everyone has a family member or friend in the military or in 
the reserves.  A new awareness of vulnerability to pollution in 
their small country has penetrated the population. 
 
¶9. (SBU) One NGO director also credits the global climate change 
discussion with raising public awareness of environmental issues. 
In May 2008 Al Gore received the Dan David Prize at Tel Aviv 
University for his work on climate change.  In his acceptance 
speech, Gore challenged Israel to take the lead in developing clean, 
low CO2-producing alternative energy sources.  (Note: Israel signed 
the Kyoto Protocol and ratified it in 2004, but Israel is listed as 
a developing country, not bound by the emissions targets of 
developed countries.  Although the GOI has resolved to undertake 
activities to reduce emissions of greenhouses gases in accordance 
with UNFCCC objectives, there is no national plan to do so.)  A 
small but vocal percentage of Israelis are pressing to reduce 
Israel's carbon footprint; in fact, the government has supported the 
conversion of Israel's electric generation plants from coal to gas, 
a move responding to public health concerns more than climate 
imperatives. 
 
Towards More Aggressive Enforcement 
----------------------------------- 
¶10. (U) In response to mounting pressure from Israeli environmental 
NGOs and public demand for action, the Knesset passed a raft of new 
legislation during its last legislative session (noted ref C). This 
included Israel's first comprehensive Clean Air Act, and stronger 
sanctions on corporate polluters, with strengthened individual 
accountability.  Further legislation is in the pipeline, with first 
or second readings of bills already completed on banning plastic 
bags, mandating energy and water-saving devices in public buildings, 
enforcing water pollution laws, and cutting government assistance to 
companies that pollute. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Ministry of Environmental Protection officers participated 
in a State/USDA/EPA-sponsored workshop held in Istanbul on air 
pollution in August this year.  This was part of a Middle East Peace 
Process (MEPP) funded multilateral program combining Israeli, 
Palestinian and Jordanian government officials in shared resource 
management training.  Given the border-transcending nature of land, 
water and air pollution in the region, further programs of this sort 
will be planned.  GOI participants from the August air pollution 
workshop were keen for follow-on training.  GOI officials hope to 
establish a databank on air pollution, but the lack of monitoring 
capacity in the Palestinian territories is a major impediment.  This 
has led to the idea of a stock of mobile monitoring assets jointly 
used by the three governments, among other plans to assist the PA, 
and may be pursued with the donor community. 
 
¶12. (SBU) GOI environment officials admit to the need for further 
training for its own "green police."  This group of 45 persons 
within the inspection division faces a mounting workload as the new 
laws are implemented.  Israel's Environment Minister admitted he was 
hesitant to endorse the new Clean Air Law because he had no budget 
to hire the score of persons needed to uphold the ministry's 
statutory responsibilities.  In 2007, 245 smokestacks were inspected 
by authorities, but only 50 factories were visited and questioned 
about their compliance. 
 
¶13. (U) The Israel Union for Environmental Defense has also 
approached the Embassy about training to enhance NGO capacity. 
Under Israeli law, NGOs can function as "green police" and gather 
evidence and prosecute legal cases against polluters.  This holds 
the potential to greatly increase the enforcement capabilities of 
the country and improve implementation of legislation.  The NGOs, 
however, claim they need guidance on the mechanics of legal 
enforcement, such as rules for collecting evidence and conducting 
observations, to be effective in this role.  Such training would 
preferably be done in Israel.  Post would welcome Washington 
agencies' guidance on who within the USG might be able to provide 
training of this nature, and what source might fund it. 
 
¶14. (SBU) GOI concern about upgrading its environmental performance 
also stems from its interest in acceding to the OECD.  Among the 
criteria that applicant countries must satisfy are environmental 
policy principles and practices.  Management of hazardous and other 
wastes and controlling their transport across international 
boundaries are key components of these principles.  A recent GOI 
crackdown on illegal dumping in the West Bank may partly reflect the 
desire to ensure the government's compliance with OECD obligations. 
GOI environment officials hope that close cooperation with the USG 
will help them acquire the experience and technology to better 
manage waste and pollution remediation efforts. 
 
Cunningham