08TELAVIV1337
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1337/01 1751021
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231021Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7245
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 4021
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 0655
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 4319
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4826
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 4037
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 2333
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 4787
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 1654
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 2101
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 8643
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 6130
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 1034
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 5153
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 7110
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 9963
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001337 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz and other media reported that the deal between Hizbullah 
and Israel for the return of abducted IDF reservists Goldwasser and 
Regev will be delayed.  Ha'aretz quoted a political source in 
Jerusalem as saying that PM Ehud Olmert believes that as is the deal 
can not be brought to the cabinet for approval.  Ha'aretz reported 
that Mossad chief Meir Dagan and Shin Bet head Yuval Diskin are 
concerned that the deal would set a dangerous precedent that could 
put the life of Gilad Shalit, as well as the lives of any future 
Israeli soldiers captured, at risk.  Contrary to what had been 
previously reported, it appears that Hezbollah has revived its 
demand for the release of Palestinian prisoners as part of the 
exchange.  Ha'aretz quoted sources in Olmert's bureau as saying 
yesterday that the demand for the release of Palestinians is a major 
stumbling block.  However, security sources were quoted as saying 
that the Palestinian "element" was overplayed by Olmert's aides for 
reasons that are not clear to them.  Ha'aretz added that of senior 
figures in the defense establishment, only Chief of Staff Gabi 
Ashkenazi, who feels it is time to close the Goldwasser-Regev case, 
is in favor of the deal.  The media reported that Olmert is also 
considering proclaiming the two reservists dead. 
 
The media reported that yesterday the High Court of Justice has 
issued a temporary injunction barring the state from changing the 
status quo at the Gaza border crossings until noon on Monday, 
following a petition by Gilad Shalit's father, Noam.   Yediot 
reported that Noam Shalit was disappointed by Amos Gilad's 
explanation of why the cease-fire deal was struck without it 
involving Gilad's release.  Yesterday Ha'aretz reported that Israel 
intends to demand that Hamas alter significantly the list of 
Palestinian prisoners it is demanding for Shalit.  The dispute, 
according to Al-Ayyam, concerns 100 of the 350 prisoners that Israel 
is expected to release in the first phase of the deal.  Over the 
weekend media reported that Hamas PM Ismail Haniyeh denied on Friday 
that his organization had agreed to stop weapons smuggling from 
Egypt as part of the cease-fire with Israel.  The media repotted 
that yesterday Israel permitted the transfer of basic supplies into 
Gaza through the Sufa and Karni crossings -- but only those 
considered to meet humanitarian needs. 
 
The media quoted Labor Party Chairman Ehud Barak as saying yesterday 
he is determined that members of his party support the first reading 
of a bill on Wednesday to disperse the Knesset.  Prime Minister 
Olmert has threatened to kick Labor ministers who vote in favor of 
the bill out of the government.  The media reports a growing 
fracture in labor with ministers Yuli Tamir are Raleb Majadele 
against Barak's position while Amir Peretz and Nadia Hilou are in 
favor.  Labor is expected to hold a meeting of its MKs this 
afternoon to vote on a course of action. 
 
The media reported that yesterday Iran's defense minister, Mostafa 
Mohammad Najjar, warned of a "devastating" response to any Israeli 
attack on his country.   Najjar was responding on Iranian state 
television to a New York Times story that Israel had carried out 
large-scale military exercises over the Mediterranean.  Yesterday 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the IAF significantly increased the 
number of overseas drills it has participated in over the past two 
years. 
 
Media reported that visiting French President Nicolas Sarkozy told 
President Shimon Peres yesterday that "if we do not talk with 
[Syrian President Bashar] Assad, there will not be peace in the 
Middle East."  On Sunday Yediot reported that the plan to dedicate 
the Red Sea-Dead Sea canal in a ceremony attended by Sarkozy has 
been cancelled, because the Jordanians are angry over Israel's 
behavior on this matter.  According to Yediot, Jordanian official 
representatives recently contacted Israeli government officials 
asking whether Israel was still keeping its commitment to carry out 
the examination of the project before implementing it. 
 
On Sunday Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that statements made by 
Robert Kagan, a political adviser to the Republican presidential 
candidate John McCain, elicited furious responses in Jordanian 
political circles.  Kagan said that McCain believed that Jordan was 
the Palestinians' natural homeland and would serve as the best 
solution to the refugee issue 
 
Leading media reported that two police investigators will leave for 
the U.S. today for a judicial inquiry to probe the path of Morris 
Talansky's financial dealings.  They will be visiting New York, 
Washington, and Las Vegas. 
 
Over the weekend the media reported that three Israeli hikers were 
injured -- one seriously -- in a shooting attack in the West Bank. 
 
Yesterday Makor Rishon-Hatzofe quoted said sources in the 
Palestinian Interior Ministry as saying that 260 Arab security 
officials from Egypt, Jordan, and Morocco will shortly arrive at the 
PA's training bases in Jericho to train the Palestinian forces that 
are loyal to Abu Mazen,. 
 
Yesterday The Jerusalem Post reported that Nahum Liss, "Israel's top 
airport security official," will make periodic reviews of 
anti-terrorist measures at Los Angeles International Airport under 
an agreement signed last week during a visit here by LA Mayor 
Antonio Villaraigosa. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that yesterday PM Olmert extended the tenure of 
Mossad chief Meir Dagan for a second time. 
 
Yesterday The Jerusalem Post reported that former U.S. Ambassador to 
Israel Daniel Kurtzer has authored a new book, "Negotiating 
Arab-Israeli Peace: American Leadership in the Middle East." 
 
Globes quoted Arab journalists and viewers as saying that the 
U.S.-sponsored Alhurra-TV has a "basic problem: "It is boring." 
Investigative pieces are rare, and critics say the channel generally 
doesn't make waves. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Minister Ami Ayalon as saying yesterday that Israeli 
Arabs should be grunted "cultural independence." 
 
Over the weekend the media reported that UNICEF has severed ties 
with Israeli billionaire Lev Leviev over allegations that he helped 
fund construction in the West Bank. 
 
------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "There is only 
one correct way out of the entanglement Barak has got himself into: 
The Labor ministers must quickly resign collectively, on Wednesday, 
before the vote and the dismissals.  Only such a step will prod 
Kadima to demand that Olmert take leave on the grounds of 
incapacity, since he insists on refusing to resign." 
 
Dov Weisglass, who was former prime minister Ariel Sharon's top 
diplomatic advisor, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "A car has never been handed over in exchange for a 
promise by the buyer to come around one day and talk about the 
price.  Particularly an armed and masked buyer." 
 
Liberal columnist Yigal Sarna addressed Prime Minister Ehud Olmert 
in Yediot Aharonot: "The door of opportunity has opened for Gilad's 
return, and it must not be allowed to close with him behind it." 
 
Professor Eyal Zisser, the Chairman of the Department of Middle 
Eastern History at Tel Aviv University, wrote on page one of the 
independent Israel Hayom: "Those who believe that an attempt to 
appease Hassan Nasrallah's organization regarding the Lebanese 
prisoners or the Sheba Farms will quench its thirst and reduce the 
threat it represents against Israel. are wrong and deceitful." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "During a time when a new administration is 
set to assume power in the United States, Sarkozy's France can play 
the role of global superpower, and not just a temporary one." 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Threats and Deeds" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (6/23): "The 
only act Barak has taken is the vote for the Knesset's dissolution, 
but the significance of the preliminary reading is that there are 
least three more major steps necessary for a bill to become law, 
assuming it receives majority support.... The immediate question is 
how to deal with ministers who are in theory opposed to their 
government's continuation.  On this, Olmert draws the threat of 
dismissal.  He is threatening in order to defeat Labor, or because 
he wants to provoke a crisis whose resolution will require time -- 
that same amount of time he wants to gain while the criminal 
proceedings against him continue and the Knesset approaches the end 
of the summer session.  This is a game of minds and strength between 
Olmert and Barak.  So far, it seems that Barak is losing.  He 
selected an odd arena -- early elections -- which he definitely does 
not want.... Instead of Olmert having to justify every single day 
and every single hour why he is remaining in the prime minister's 
post, Barak will be forced to justify why he is eager to stay in the 
Olmert government.  There is only one correct way out of the 
entanglement Barak has got himself into: The Labor ministers must 
quickly resign collectively, on Wednesday, before the vote and the 
dismissals.  Only such a step will prod Kadima to demand that Olmert 
take leave on the grounds of incapacity, since he insists on 
refusing to resign." 
 
II.  "Don't Open the Crossings " 
 
Dov Weisglass, who was former prime minister Ariel Sharon's top 
diplomatic advisor, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (6/23): "Israel's consent to open the border crossings and 
(gradually) to renew the transfer of goods into Gaza, and only then 
-- if at all -- to renew the negotiations for the release of the 
soldier, is an act of folly, which is worse, as we know, than 
malice.  This will effectively prevent any possibility of releasing 
the soldier [Gilad Shalit] within a reasonable time span and under 
acceptable conditions. 
   Many months ago, Hamas presented Israel with a list of hundreds 
of the worst murderers, and made their release a condition for 
giving up the soldier.  It is almost impossible to accept this 
list.... Israel has great and understandable difficulty in meeting 
the extortionist release demands, and for this reason Gilad Shalit 
is wasting away in captivity.  The only way to force Hamas to 
discuss this issue quickly and efficiently is an ongoing and 
toughQas much as possibleQcontinuation of the blockade and economic 
siege.... This is how used cars are sold: The car key is handed over 
in exchange for cash or a certified bank check.   A car has never 
been handed over in exchange for a promise by the buyer to come 
around one day and talk about the price.  Particularly an armed and 
masked buyer.  Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit deserves treatment at least 
as good as a used car receives." 
 
III.  "No Excuses" 
 
Liberal columnist Yigal Sarna addressed Prime Minister Ehud Olmert 
in Yediot Aharonot (6/22): "Mr. Prime Minister, imagine that the 
kidnapped soldier held by the Gazans is your younger son, Shaul. 
Imagine that the woman mourning his fate who does not sleep at 
night, and when she does fall asleep she dreams of her son lying on 
the floor of a dark room, is [your wife] Aliza.  Think that Gilad is 
Shaul, who instead of looking for an apartment in Tel Aviv for his 
young family is being moved in Gaza from room to room, tied, bound, 
sometimes gagged, and always frightened. Waiting for the footsteps 
of the guard or those who have come to take him.... Like this 
country no longer cares for the elderly or for children, for the 
hungry or for workers, it also does not care enough, or as it has 
promised to do, for those who were kidnapped.  Now, in this moment 
of mercy in June 2008, when the air has calmed for a moment and 
[Lebanese terrorist Samir] Kuntar will return to his home that has 
waited for him as the Shalit home has done, the door of opportunity 
has opened for Gilad's return, and it must not be allowed to close 
with him behind it.  Gilad must be brought back as though he were 
Shaul or any other Israeli child whose loving parents delivered him 
over to the state so that he would guard it, and it will bring him 
back home during a time of distress and without excuses." 
 
IV.  "No Limit to Cynicism" 
 
Professor Eyal Zisser, the Chairman of the Department of Middle 
Eastern History at Tel Aviv University, wrote on page one of the 
independent Israel Hayom (6/23): "The lesson [that can be learned 
from the prisoner-swap contacts with Hizbullah[ is clear: Those who 
believe that an attempt to appease Hassan Nasrallah's organization 
regarding the Lebanese prisoners or the Sheba Farms will quench its 
thirst and reduce the threat it represents against Israel. are wrong 
and deceitful. Israel must understand and internalize who is the 
enemy facing it and how necessary it is to behave cautiously and 
considerate towards it." 
 
¶V.  "Parisian Option" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (6/22): "What does Sarkozy possess that 
justifies such excitement [in Israel]? First of all, the French 
President stresses his full commitment to Israel's security, to 
rooting out anti-Semitism in his country, and his opposition to 
Iran's attempts at nuclear armament.... Yet Sarkozy's love for 
Israel is not backed up by a coherent Mideast policy.... The lofty 
respect with which he received Libyan President Muammar Qadhafi 
during the latter's visit to Paris last December is a first 
indication that, much like his predecessors, there is a gap between 
Sarkozy's words and deeds.... [Still], during a time when a new 
administration is set to assume power in the United States, 
Sarkozy's France can play the role of global superpower, and not 
just a temporary one.  It can advance the Israeli-Syrian track and 
expedite the discussions over the question of Sheba Farms and the 
drawing of a permanent border between Israel, Syria, and Lebanon. 
France can also encourage the implementation of the Arab peace 
initiative and raise its voice fearlessly against the Iranian 
nuclear threat.  To assume the complex role that it has sought for 
itself in the Middle East, France will be required to stake out a 
position rooted in principle, moral legitimacy and strategic 
clarity.  This will require great courage on its part. Welcome to 
Jerusalem, Sarko." 
 
JONES