08TUNIS1213
CODEL HASTINGS PRESSES GOT ON 2009 ELECTION
Wed Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #1213/01 3451306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 101306Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5808
INFO RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 7711
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE PRIORITY 0005
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITYUNCLAS TUNIS 001213 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/MAG (SWILLIAMS, MNARDI, MHAYES) 
STATE ALSO FOR H - PLEASE PASS CODEL HASTINGS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP PGOV PREL TS
SUBJECT: CODEL HASTINGS PRESSES GOT ON 2009 ELECTION 
OBSERVERS 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU)  In December 3 meetings with Tunisia's Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and six parliamentarians, Representative 
Alcee Hastings pressed the importance of credible 
international election observers for Tunisia's 2009 
presidential and parliamentary elections.  He discussed 
increased multilateral engagement and potential policies of 
the incoming US administration.  Congressman Hastings also 
invited the Tunisian Parliamentarians to participate in an 
upcoming OSCE parliamentary meeting he is organizing in 
Washington and to put an intern in his Washington office. 
End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Credible Election Observers Encouraged 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  During his December 3 meeting with Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Abdelwaheb Abdallah, Representative Alcee 
Hastings inquired about plans for international election 
observers for Tunisia's 2009 presidential and legislative 
elections.  Noting that he had been responsible for 
persuading then-Secretary Colin Powell to accept 
international election observers for US elections in 2004, 
Hastings made the case that Tunisia also accept international 
election observers.  Abdallah noted that during the 2004 
elections Tunisia hosted observers from the African Union, 
Arab League, and select members of the European Union.  He 
added that President Ben Ali has publicly stated that both 
international observers and journalists will be invited to 
observe the 2009 elections.  Representative Hastings offered 
that OSCE observers were well known for their excellent work. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  In a later meeting with Chair of the Committee on 
Political Affairs and Foreign Relations Salah El Tabarki, 
Chair of the Tunisian-American Friendship Caucus El Tijani 
Haddad, Reporter of the Committee on Political Affairs and 
Foreign Relations Abdelatif Ben El Makki, Secretary General 
of the Socialist Democratic Movement Ismail Bou Lahia, 
Popular Union Party representative Hichem El Hajji, and the 
General Director of Foreign Relations for the Chamber of 
Deputies Ahmed Labidi, Representative Hastings again queried 
about plans for international election monitoring.  While the 
majority of the parliamentarians repeated that President Ben 
Ali has publicly endorsed the notion, one parliamentarian 
opined that international observers would not be necessary in 
2009, suggesting that Tunisia could handle its own affairs. 
Interjecting, Representative Hastings reminded him that 
international observers are essential for establishing 
legitimacy. 
 
-------------------------- 
Multilateral Participation 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU)  When asked by Representative Hastings about 
Tunisia's stance on the Barcelona Process compared to the 
Union for the Mediterranean, Minister Abdallah noted that 
Tunisia viewed favorably regional efforts.  He noted that 
Tunisia had initially been a strong supporter of the 
Barcelona Process.  With respect to the UPM, Abdallah 
cautioned that Tunisia has become less enthusiastic as 
cultural differences with "the Nordic countries of the 
European Union" have created an "imbalance" and suggested 
that the focus of future efforts should be regional, offering 
Mediterranean depollution as a tangible example.  Abdallah 
noted that some problems, such as the situation in Iraq, may 
take more than four years to resolve.  In response, 
Representative Hastings asked how long it will take to 
resolve the situation in Western Sahara, receiving a reply of 
"two generations". 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The Tunisian parliamentarians predicted failure for 
any Mediterranean Union proposal, if societal issues are not 
placed above economic concerns.  Blaming the failure of the 
Barcelona process on a lack of social emphasis, the 
parliamentarians said that a successful, sustainable process 
would focus on education and culture.  Offering a concrete 
proposal for cross cultural exchange, Representative Hastings 
then offered to host a Tunisian intern in his office after 
reminding the parliamentarians of the need to work together 
to solve regional problems, including the issue of Western 
Sahara, about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and the 
 
situation in Iraq.  Noting that OSCE's Mediterranean partners 
could provide needed substantive political direction on 
regional issues, Representative Hastings invited the Tunisian 
parliamentarians to participate in an upcoming parliamentary 
meeting in Washington.  Separately, Tijani Haddad told the 
Ambassador that he hoped to bring a Tunisian delegation to 
Washington and would consider doing so concurrent to the OSCE 
parliamentary meeting. 
 
------------------ 
New Administration 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Both Abdallah and the Members of Parliament offered 
their congratulations on the election of President-elect 
Barack Obama.  Representative Hastings indicated that future 
high level visits may be possible, an idea that elicited 
delight among his Tunisian interlocutors.  Abdallah said that 
the world's attention has been grabbed and there is now an 
opportunity to introduce new policies, while the 
parliamentarians expressed optimism that the United States 
would lead by example.  They also said that they would like 
to have a closer relationship with the US Congress, 
expressing interest in the Tunisia Caucus. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Congressman Hastings' interlocutors seemed to be 
genuinely enthusiastic about increased engagement in their 
meetings with Representative Hastings.  Congressman Hastings' 
gentle encouragement on election observers was effective and 
useful.  Abdallah's expressed dissatisfaction with the Nordic 
influence on the UPM is the clearest he has been recently in 
relating GOT views on this new entity.  End Comment. 
 
¶8. (SBU)  CODEL Hastings did not have the opportunity to see 
this cable before their departure, but concurred with its 
issuance. 
Godec