08USUNNEWYORK614
SETTLEMENTS UNSCR: ARABS NOW UNSURE IF THEY HAVE
Thu Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3320
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0614/01 1920217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 100217Z JUL 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4577
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000614 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
PLEASE PASS TO THE PARTY FOR S, DEPT FOR P, IO AND NEA 
FRONT OFFICES 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KWBG KPAL UNSC IS PA
SUBJECT: SETTLEMENTS UNSCR: ARABS NOW UNSURE IF THEY HAVE 
NINE VOTES 
 
REF: USUN 610 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Libya convened a UNSC experts meeting on July 9 to 
solicit comments on its draft resolution condemning Israeli 
settlements.  France spoke first, emphasizing that the 
Council has a unique opportunity to adopt a comprehensive 
resolution on the Middle East peace process, and that experts 
should focus on how to reach such a consensual outcome.  The 
French expert then read off several amendments to the 
preambular paragraphs of the Libyan draft as well as the 
additional "elements" that would need to be included in a 
comprehensive resolution, including a condemnation of all 
attacks targeting civilians, including acts of terror, as 
well as a call on the Palestinian Authority to fulfill its 
commitments to fight terrorism.  (Note:  USUN e-mailed IO and 
NEA the French elements on July 9.  End Note.)  The Libyan 
expert interrupted France to argue that the meeting was meant 
to focus on the settlements resolution, and that it was 
useless to pursue a comprehensive resolution, because the 
Council would never be able to come to agreement.  He 
complained that experts had the same discussion about a 
comprehensive text vs. a settlements-focused text on July 2, 
and that continuing that discussion would be a waste of time. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Poloff then intervened based on guidance from Amb 
Khalilzad.  Noting that the Council had not adopted a 
comprehensive resolution on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict 
for five years, he said it now had the opportunity to do so 
in a constructive way.  It would be important to welcome the 
positive developments of the past few months -- continuing 
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, Israeli-Syrian talks, the 
Doha Agreement on Lebanon -- as well as address the 
challenges that remain before us.  Expansion of settlements 
is one such challenge, but we must not be selective in 
identifying these challenges, and should address Roadmap 
obligations on all sides.  Such a comprehensive effort could 
support the peace process and urge the parties to make 
further progress.  The current Libyan text would not meet 
that criteria and would not be adopted by the Council. 
Recalling that most experts had spoken in favor of a 
comprehensive resolution during the July 2 experts meeting, 
Poloff said the U.S. was now willing to propose elements to 
that end, and circulated copies of the draft elements 
previously cleared by the Department.  He said USUN was ready 
to work constructively in any way towards this outcome.  One 
option would be to form a small drafting group to continue 
talks on a comprehensive resolution.  Such a group could 
include Libya, European countries, members of the NAM, and 
other interested states. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Although five countries said explicitly that they 
could support the Libyan draft as is or with minor amendments 
(Russia, South Africa, Panama, Indonesia, and China), all 
experts said they would be prepared to work towards a 
comprehensive resolution on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
 Although Panama said the UNSC should be able to adopt a 
resolution on settlements, an issue that enjoyed 
international consensus, it urged Libya to listen to those 
members that wanted a broader text in the interest of 
achieving consensus.  Russia said it could support the Libyan 
text with one minor amendment (to change the OP 3 call on 
Israel to "dismantle settlements" to a call to "dismantle 
outposts"), but said it would prefer a comprehensive 
resolution.  Russia also said it would join a drafting group 
to produce such a comprehensive resolution.  South Africa, 
Indonesia, and China suggested working on a comprehensive 
resolution while keeping the draft Libyan resolution in 
reserve.  Six experts (UK, France, Belgium, Italy, Croatia, 
Burkina Faso) joined the U.S. in arguing for a comprehensive 
resolution.  Costa Rica and Vietnam did not speak.  Libya 
concluded the meeting by saying that it would consult again 
with the Arab Group, and consider the idea of working with 
select delegations on a broader text, but one that still 
focuses on settlements.  The Libyan expert warned, however, 
that Libya would not be able to accept a resolution that 
contains references to terrorism.  After the experts meeting, 
the Libyans cancelled the Ambassadorial-level consultations 
they had called for July 10.  They also assured USUN that 
they would not/not call for a vote on their draft resolution 
on July 10. 
 
¶4. (SBU) COMMENT:  The bottom line from the experts meeting 
was that it is not clear that the Arabs have nine votes for 
their text.  They can count six votes for sure, and if 
pressed, we assess that Costa Rica and Vietnam would probably 
support the draft resolution.  That leaves Burkina Faso in 
play for the ninth vote.  We believe the best way to ensure 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000614  002 OF 002 
 
 
Burkina Faso refuses to support the Arab text -- and to put 
pressure on Costa Rica, Vietnam, and Panama as well -- is to 
hold out hope for a viable alternative by convening the small 
drafting group USUN proposed during the experts meeting.  We 
could invite the UK, France, Russia, Libya, Burkina Faso, and 
possibly Indonesia to join the group.  If Libya refuses, we 
could ask Panama or South Africa to join in its place.  This 
would at least delay action until probably next week, by 
holding out the possibility that the drafting group could 
reach agreement. 
Khalilzad