08USUNNEWYORK1145
U/SYG HOLMES ON HUMANITARIAN SITUATION IN SUDAN
Sat Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO0001
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #1145/01 3410015
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060015Z DEC 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5484
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 1330
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA 0357UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001145 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPKO PREF PREL PHUM UNSC CD CT SU
SUBJECT: U/SYG HOLMES ON HUMANITARIAN SITUATION IN SUDAN 
AND CHAD 
 
¶1.  Summary: On December 3, UN Under Secretary General for 
the Office of Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
John Holmes briefed the Security Council on his recent trip 
to Chad and Sudan (November 21 - 30).  Holmes said that he 
left Chad with more optimism than expected, but claimed that 
the situation in Darfur has deteriorated.  He touched briefly 
on Southern Sudan issues, including lack of progress in Abyei 
and insufficient development aid outside of Juba.  The 
Chadian Perm Rep welcomed normalization of relations with 
Sudan, and noted that resolving the conflict in Darfur would 
improve this relationship.  Security Council members 
expressed concern over decreasing access to populations in 
need and the politicization of camps.  End Summary. 
 
Chad 
---- 
 
¶2.  Holmes said that the situation of conflict-affected 
populations in Eastern Chad remained fragile, and he 
envisioned no immediate large-scale return of refugees to 
Sudan as long as the conflict in Darfur continues.  (Note: 
According to OCHA estimates, there are currently 263,000 
Sudanese refugees in Eastern Chad, 57,000 refugees from the 
Central African Republic and 180,000 IDPs.  End Note.) 
Holmes expressed greater hope for the return of IDPs, 
particularly if local reconciliation efforts receive adequate 
support.  According to Holmes, rampant banditry in the 
region, combined with politicization of IDP camps by rebel 
groups (particularly the JEM,) contribute to a lack of 
security.  Holmes asserted that the deployment of MINURCAT II 
and the Chadian police,s Integrated Detachment for Security 
(DIS) would be vital to the protection of all civilians and 
aid workers in Eastern Chad. 
 
Sudan 
----- 
 
¶3.  Holmes observed that, while the humanitarian operation in 
Darfur is the largest in the world, with an annual budget of 
$1 billion, the situation in Darfur continues to deteriorate. 
 He said that in the first 11 months of 2008, 325,000 
individuals were displaced, and growing insecurity and 
attacks against aid workers have reduced delivery of 
assistance, forcing some NGOs to close.  Holmes described 
growing frustration among IDPs in camps as the conflict drags 
on and prospects for return to their homes remain bleak. 
 
¶4.  Turning to Abyei, Holmes said that very few IDPs have 
returned to the town after clashes between security forces 
belonging to the GoS and the government of Southern Sudan 
(GOSS) earlier this year.  Holmes mentioned progress in a 
number of areas in Southern Sudan, including the return of 
2.4 million IDPs to the south as well as the demining of 
12,000 kilometers of roadway.  However, Holmes noted that 
reconstruction primarily has taken place in the capital, 
Juba, and that the GOSS must allocate resources for the 
extension of essential services to areas outside of Juba. 
Holmes concluded by saying he had taken every opportunity in 
Sudan to remind the government that it must safeguard 
humanitarian workers and aid operations regardless of the 
ICC's decision. 
 
Chadian Perm Rep Responds 
------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The Chadian Perm Rep stressed that the situation in Chad 
has improved within the last year, and said that his 
government would fully cooperate with MINURCAT, noting 
positive discussions with the UN Secretariat regarding the 
deployment of MINURCAT II.  The Perm Rep further asserted 
that Sudanese rebel recruitment in refugee camps is not the 
sole responsibility of Chad, arguing that the international 
community has not provided any proof that Chad supports these 
rebels.  He concluded by welcoming normalization of relations 
with Sudan, but indicated that this would be difficult so 
long as the conflict in Darfur remains unresolved. 
 
Security Council Debate 
----------------------- 
 
¶6.  All Council members voiced concern over increasing 
attacks against humanitarian workers.  Ambassador DiCarlo 
asserted that the primary responsibility for protecting both 
civilians and humanitarian workers lies with the governments 
of Sudan and Chad, and she called on those governments to 
prevent future attacks, a call echoed by most other members. 
Russia asserted that the overall coordination of humanitarian 
actions is the prerogative of the receiving country's 
government, underlining that host country sovereignty must 
always be respected. 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001145  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶7.  Regarding the militarization of camps, France made a 
clarification that was echoed by U/SYG Holmes in his closing 
remarks:  while it is unacceptable for armed groups to 
recruit within refugee camps, this in no way justifies 
attacks against these camps, as was the case in Kalma camp. 
Pointing out the centrality of the peace process to resolving 
the conflict in Darfur, Libya said that all parties must 
respond swiftly to peace initiatives and urged rebel factions 
to participate in the political process.   Nearly all members 
emphasized the importance of normalizing relations between 
Chad and Sudan for solving the regional crisis.  Several 
countries also called for the speedy deployment of MINURCAT 
II as critical for the stabilization of Eastern Chad. 
Wolff