08USUNNEWYORK559
SYG BAN AND UNSC MEMBERS DISCUSS SOMALIA, SUDAN,
Tue Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2367
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0559/01 1762316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 242316Z JUN 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4487
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON IMMEDIATE 0254
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK IMMEDIATE 0590
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE IMMEDIATE 1958
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR IMMEDIATE 0691
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI IMMEDIATE 2222UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 000559 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV PTER KPKO KHUM SU BM AF
SUBJECT: SYG BAN AND UNSC MEMBERS DISCUSS SOMALIA, SUDAN, 
BURMA, AND ZIMBABWE 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  As President of the UN Security Council 
for June, Amb Khalilzad hosted SYG Ban Ki-Moon for the 
monthly lunch with UNSC Ambassadors on June 23, for a 
discussion that focused mostly on Zimbabwe, Somalia, Sudan, 
and Burma.  Based on his conversations with African leaders, 
Ban said it was no longer possible to hold a fair and 
credible election in Zimbabwe and that the upcoming run-off 
elections should be postponed for at least month.  He 
strongly welcomed the agreement recently reached in Djibouti 
between Somali factions and urged the creation of a new 
self-deploying multi-national force to Somalia led by a 
strong "anchor" country that could create the conditions for 
a peacekeeping operations.  On Sudan, Ban said he had 
selected as joint UN-AU mediator for Darfur the current 
Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso, Djibril Bassole.  He 
outlined a plan to achieve 80 percent UNAMID deployment by 
the end of the year, but said he would need more cooperation 
from Sudan and flexibility from troop contributors -- 
including provision of helicopters and heavy equipment -- to 
meet that goal.  Ban shared concerns about the failure of 
UNMIS to protect civilians in Abyei and pledged that DPKO 
would investigate and take "corrective action."  Ban said he 
was "cautiously optimistic" about improvements in relief 
operations in Burma, and said he would dispatch Special Envoy 
Gambari "as soon as possible" to the region to resume talks 
on the political process.  Ban also appealed to member states 
for support in making sure the UN mission in Afghanistan gets 
the necessary resources to attract qualified staff. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary, cont'd.  Amb Khalilzad and European 
PermReps welcomed Ban's comments on Zimbabwe, but China and 
others argued the UNSC should support regional efforts to 
resolve the situation and refrain from "taking sides." 
Several member states wondered whether any country would 
volunteer to lead a new multi-national force in Somalia.  Amb 
Khalilzad argued for immediate steps to improve the 
humanitarian and security situation in Sudan, while China 
urged the international community to focus on supporting the 
political process and ensuring that Sudan does not split 
apart.  Amb Khalilzad and the UK also welcomed Ban's pledge 
to investigate UNMIS's response to the recent violence in 
Abyei.  On Burma, delegations generally welcomed the recent 
improvement in the humanitarian situation, but were split on 
the future of the political process and the role of the 
Security Council.  Amb Khalilzad argued there had been no 
progress on the political track and that the referendum on 
the constitution was deeply flawed.  China urged the UNSC to 
be "very cautious" about engaging on the political process 
and to focus on supporting Ban and Gambari's efforts.  On 
Afghanistan, member states welcomed pledges made at the 
recent Paris conference and committed their full support for 
Kai Eide and UNAMA.  End Summary. 
 
Zimbabwe: Situation Unacceptable 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) SYG Ban emphasized that it is no longer possible to 
hold a fair and credible election in Zimbabwe, given the 
climate of violence and intimidation over the past few weeks, 
and that the best way forward would be to postpone the 
election for one month or so.  He said he would release a 
statement to the press to this effect following the lunch and 
that he planned to increase his personal engagement on the 
issue and encourage African leaders to do the same.  Ban 
reported that in the past week, he had consulted with several 
African leaders about Zimbabwe, including the Zambian and 
Kenyan Presidents, former SYG Kofi Annan, and AU Commission 
Chair Jean Ping.  He was also trying to reach the Angolan 
President and had received a message from South African 
PermRep Kumalo on behalf of SAG President Mbeki.  All African 
leaders had agreed that the situation in Zimbabwe was 
unacceptable. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Amb Khalilzad argued that while the international 
community had to focus on the violence in Zimbabwe and the 
effect on the political process, it was also important to 
focus on the dire humanitarian situation in the country.  It 
is unacceptable that the Zimbabwean Government blocked NGOs 
from distributing aid to the needy.  France expressed hope 
that UNSC members who had objected to its invocation of the 
"responsibility to protect" with regard to Burma -- because 
that situation involved a natural disaster -- would not shirk 
from applying the principle in Zimbabwe given that events 
there are entirely man-made.  China agreed that the situation 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000559  002 OF 004 
 
 
in Zimbabwe was "very difficult," but urged support for 
regional efforts through SADC to mediate between the two 
sides, and cautioned against "taking sides."  Vietnam urged 
the UNSC not to politicize the issue but instead to focus on 
helping the Zimbabwean people. 
 
Somalia: Need a New Multi-National Force 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Ban strongly welcomed the agreement recently reached 
in Djibouti between Somali factions and urged the 
international community to move quickly to support it.  He 
reported that during his recent visit to Saudi Arabia, King 
Abdullah voiced strong support for the Djibouti Agreement, 
and pledged his full cooperation to implement it.  Ban said 
the task before the international community now is to send a 
self-deploying multi-national force (MNF) led by a capable 
"anchor" country to Somalia, and once that force has 
established basic conditions of security, a UN peacekeeping 
operation could take its place.  The nature and composition 
of such an MNF are not yet clear, Ban said.  DPKO U/SYG 
Guehenno acknowledged that there was yet "no sign" of a 
country coming forward to serve as an "anchor" for this 
force, but he expressed hope the international community 
would meet its obligations in Somalia. Before the MNF is 
assembled, Ban argued to strengthen the African Mission in 
Somalia (AMISOM), including by increasing planning and 
technical support to the African Union.  He said he planned 
to co-host a donors conference with the AU to increase 
support for AMISOM. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Several member states expressed skepticism about 
Ban's suggestion to send a multi-national force (MNF) to 
Somalia.  The UK sought advice from DPKO in framing the 
options before the Council -- has security on the ground 
improved to the point that an MNF would be able to deploy? 
Russian PermRep Churkin, noting Guehenno's admission that no 
country had yet volunteered troops, suggested that the 
Secretariat's proposal for an MNF might be "wishful 
thinking."  Italian PermRep Spatafora asked why the 
Secretariat was proposing a new MNF when AMISOM was 
originally supposed to be a stabilization force that would 
pave the way for a UN peacekeeping operation in Somalia. 
Turning away from AMISOM towards a new MNF, Spatafora argued, 
could be seen as a setback for the AU.  Ban replied that 
AMISOM was intended to be a stabilization force, but because 
of a lack of support from the international community, it had 
not been able to be effective.  Of the 8,000 troops mandated 
for AMISOM, he complained, only 2,000 had been provided. 
Financial assistance to AMISOM from the EU and others was 
uneven, despite the Secretariat's repeated requests.  Given 
AMISOM's limitations, therefore, a new MNF would eventually 
be needed. 
 
Sudan: Disappointed with UNMIS in Abyei 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Ban informed Council members that he had selected a 
joint UN-AU mediator for Darfur, the current Foreign Minister 
of Burkina Faso, Djibril Bassole.  Both the President of 
Burkina Faso and AU Commission Chair Ping had welcomed the 
selection.  Once the Secretariat had informed the Darfur 
rebels, Ban said, Bassole would depart as soon as possible 
for the region and remain there on a full-time basis (which 
Ban made clear would mean Bassole would relinquish his duties 
as Foreign Minister).  Noting that the selection was not yet 
official, Ban asked Council members to keep the appointment 
confidential until the UN made its announcement. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Turning to UNAMID, Ban said he has a plan to achieve 
80 percent deployment by the end of the year.  But achieving 
this goal would require "active support" from the Government 
of Sudan, which heretofore had maintained an "inflexible" 
attitude, as well as "increased flexibility" from troop 
contributors.  The focus of the effort would be the six new 
UNAMID battalions, including two from Egypt, one from 
Senegal, and one from Thailand.  Ban urged UNSC members to 
press Sudan to support this plan and said that he planned to 
convene troop contributors to discuss the needed helicopters 
and heavy ground transport equipment.  Ban complained that 
all TCCs say their assets are otherwise occupied, but in 
order to improve the situation in Darfur, they must fulfill 
their collective responsibility to support UNAMID deployment. 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000559  003 OF 004 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) On North-South issues, Ban said the situation in 
Abyei was "serious" and threatened to unravel the entire 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).  He said he "shares 
concerns" regarding UNMIS's response to the recent violence 
in Abyei, and suggested that the peacekeepers may have failed 
to fulfill their mandate to protect civilians from harm.  Ban 
pledged that DPKO would investigate the incident and take 
"corrective action."  The focus now should be on restoring 
security in Abyei and "robust action" to support the Abyei 
roadmap.  He predicted that the situation would remain 
volatile until progress was achieved on the boundary issues, 
DDR, and elections. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Council members generally welcomed Ban's comments 
on Sudan.  China said the political process remains 
fundamental to successful implementation of the CPA and DPA 
and to ensuring Sudan does not split apart.  China also 
welcomed Ban's appointment of a joint UN-AU mediator.  Amb 
Khalilzad agreed the political process remains important, but 
he argued it is essential in the meantime to improve the 
humanitarian situation in Sudan and ensure security, because 
the political process will take time to resolve itself.  He 
and UK PermRep Sawers also welcomed Ban's comments about 
UNMIS's performance in Abyei and said they would look forward 
to the results of DPKO's investigation.  Italy asked whether 
UNMIS's failure to act was a result of the inadequacy of its 
mandate or its rules of engagement (Note: Ban did not respond 
specifically to Italy's question.  End Note.). 
 
Burma: Cautious Optimism on Aid 
------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Ban said he was "cautiously optimistic" about the 
humanitarian situation in Burma, given the recent increase in 
relief operations there.  He reported that relief workers 
were now able to stay in the country longer because the 
regime had issued longer-duration visas, that helicopters are 
now reaching the most vulnerable, and that the tripartite 
UN-ASEAN-GOB mechanism was functioning well.  Ban said the UN 
would launch a revised humanitarian appeal for Burma in early 
July and that he would remain personally involved through his 
Special Envoy Gambari, who would travel back to the region 
"as soon as possible."  He cautioned member states that it is 
"not time to politicize" the issue of humanitarian access, 
but underscored his commitment to use his good offices to 
bring an early democratization of Burma, including the 
release of ASSK.  He said he had raised ASSK's fate with 
Senior General Than Shwe, but Shwe declined to comment.  Ban 
said specifically that the regime's seven-step plan offered 
an opportunity to move forward, but that the process must be 
"inclusive and credible," and he expressed concern that the 
constitution the regime recently put forward in a referendum 
enshrined the military as the supreme decision-maker in the 
country. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Delegations generally welcomed the recent 
improvement in the humanitarian situation, although some 
noted the changes came two months after the cyclone hit, but 
they were split on the future of the political process and 
the role of the Security Council.  Amb Khalilzad argued there 
had been no progress on the political track and that the 
referendum on the constitution was deeply flawed.  He urged 
Ban to give Gambari a specific mission to accomplish on his 
next visit to Burma.  France, recalling that it had been 
accused of "politicizing" the Burma issue during the cyclone, 
noted that the regime's decision to proceed with a referendum 
during the immediate aftermath of the cyclone was much more 
of a political decision.  The UK suggested that OCHA give 
occasional briefings about the humanitarian situation to 
interested countries, and argued that the political process 
was going "backward" and that the Council should take up the 
issue again soon.  China urged the UNSC to be "very cautious" 
about engaging on the political process and said it should 
focus on supporting Ban's efforts through his envoy Gambari. 
China expressed hope that ASEAN would play its role in 
supporting the process, but cautioned that there can be "no 
quick solution." 
 
Afghanistan: Getting Kai Eide Resources 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Welcoming the results achieved at the recent Paris 
conference on Afghanistan, Ban said he told Afghan President 
Karzai that success would be measured not by the amount of 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000559  004 OF 004 
 
 
aid disbursed, but whether Afghanistan made progress in 
fighting corruption and eradicating drugs.  Karzai reportedly 
pledged to focus on those issues, and Ban said that UN SRSG 
Kai Eide would help wherever possible, with a special focus 
on support for the elections in 2009-2010.  He also said 
UNAMA would soon open four new sub-regional offices.  Ban 
appealed for support of member states to harmonize UNAMA's 
service contract to ensure smooth operation of the mission 
and to maintain morale.  With UNAMA's vacancy rate at 30 
percent, Ban said it was necessary to offer UN staff extra 
benefits to entice them to serve in Afghanistan.  Member 
states supported Ban's views on Afghanistan and pledged their 
full support for Kai Eide. 
 
West Africa: Reinforce Fragile Progress 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Reporting on his recent visit to West Africa, Ban 
warned Council members that the entire region faces major 
challenges from arms trafficking, drugs, terrorism, and 
climate change.  These challenges could undermine recent 
gains in countries like Sierra Leone, Liberia, and the Ivory 
Coast.  Ban said he had dispatched his envoys Menkerios and 
Egeland to work with these states to devise solutions and 
urged the international community to show increased political 
support for these countries and to adopt longer-term 
strategies rather than to try to put out fires when they 
erupt. 
Khalilzad