08USUNNEWYORK13
CUBANS PROTEST DEMONSTRATION AGAINST MISSION
Mon Jan 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0013 0071708
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071708Z JAN 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3496
INFO RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0246UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR IO/UNP AND DS/DSS/DO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OFDP CU UN
SUBJECT: CUBANS PROTEST DEMONSTRATION AGAINST MISSION 
 
 
¶1.  USUN has received a diplomatic note (No. NV-6237 of 
12/19/07) from the Cuban Mission protesting a demonstration 
that occurred on December 10 directly across the street from 
that Mission.  The note, text of which appears in paragraph 3 
below, notes that the demonstration took place in an 
unauthorized area after NYPD fixed post protection was 
removed on November 30, 2007. 
 
¶2.  USUN has also received a NYPD report that a Hispanic 
male, later identified as Ivan Dambreville, a Cuban migr, 
threw a rock through one of the Mission's windows on December 
¶26.  Dambreville, who remained in front of the Cuban Mission 
after the incident, was arrested by the NYPD and charged with 
felony criminal mischief.  A copy of the police report is 
being faxed to IO/UNP- Edmondson.  USUN has not/not yet 
received a protest from the Cuban Mission on the December 26 
incident. 
 
¶3.   BEGIN TEXT OF CUBAN NOTE of 12/10:  Complimentary 
salutation....and has the honor to inform that on last 10 
December 2007, a demonstration against Cuba of about 22 
people took place in front of the Cuban Mission to the United 
Nations. 
 
The Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations noticed 
that, among the demonstrators, there were persons wearing 
military uniforms bearing the banner of the US-based 
terrorist organization Alpha 66, which has a long record of 
criminal actions against Cuba, an event that sets a serious 
precedent of hostile actions against our Mission. 
 
The Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations 
reiterates the responsibility and commitment that the 
relevant US authorities have toward the protection of 
Diplomatic Missions and requests the United States Mission to 
take the necessary steps to prevent actions such as the above 
mentioned from repeating and so that these measures 
contribute to the good development of this Diplomatic 
Mission's functions, especially after police protection of 
our Mission was unilaterally removed. 
 
The Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations would 
like to inform that the aforementioned manifestation was set 
on the west side of Lexington Avenue, stretching from the 
corner of 38th street up to the front of the Missions 
entrance, using loudspeakers, producing excessive noise which 
disturbed the Mission's orderly work, all of which is a 
violation of procedures established on Note No. HC-33-95 of 9 
June 1995, from the United States Permanent Mission to the 
United Nations, to eliminate potential clashes and conditions 
considered as interference with the performance of the 
Mission's functions. 
 
After telephoning the Diplomatic Security Service of the 
Department of State and the New York Police Department to 
inform about this action, the relevant authorities failed to 
take the corresponding measures to move the demonstration to 
the place established in the aforementioned Note, according 
to which such demonstrations shall be carried out "... on the 
south-east corner and the intersections of E39th street and 
Lexington Avenue.  The authorized area may extend to the 
south along the west side of Lexington Avenue until the north 
limit of the Permanent Mission in such a way that 
demonstrators stay on the opposite sidewalk to the Cuban 
Mission but not in front of it..." 
 
The Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations would 
like to reiterate the United States authorities, 
responsibility toward actions of this nature which attempt 
against the security and normal work of the Permanent Mission 
of Cuba to the United Nations. 
 
The Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations avails 
itself of this opportunity to renew to the United States 
Permanent Mission to the United Nations the assurances of its 
highest consideration. END TEXT 
Wolcott