09ALGIERS1049
TITLE III OF THE LIBERTAD ACT: ALGERIA
Wed Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Algiers
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAS #1049/01 3291311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251311Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY ALGIERS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8155
INFO RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS ALGIERS 001049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CCA JHILLSMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ETTC PREL CU AG
SUBJECT: TITLE III OF THE LIBERTAD ACT: ALGERIA 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Algeria does nothing to promote democracy and 
human rights in Cuba, or to help Cuban civil society. 
Algeria's commercial relationship with Cuba is focused on 
health care, pharmaceutical production, and energy. End 
summary. 
 
Democracy, Human Rights, Civil Society 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Algeria has done nothing to promote the advancement of 
human rights in Cuba.  It has made no statements nor 
supported any UN resolutions condemning human rights abuses 
in Cuba, nor undertaken any action in support of Cuban civil 
society.  This stance stems from Algeria's close relationship 
with Cuba, which dates from the early days of Algeria's 
independence. 
 
Algerian/Cuban Diplomatic Engagement 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Raul Castro made a three-day state visit to Algeria in 
February, at the conclusion of which he and President 
Bouteflika stated that relations between the two countries 
were "clear and satisfactory."  Discussions focused primarily 
on bilateral efforts in the medical and agriculture sectors. 
 
¶4. (U) President Bouteflika met with Raul Castro again in 
Algiers July 12-13.  They discussed ongoing bilateral 
cooperation and their participation in the non-aligned 
movement (NAM) meetings, which took place that same week in 
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt.  The Algerian Prime Minister, 
Minister-delegate of Defense and Minister of 
Telecommunications also participated in Bouteflika's meeting 
with Castro. 
 
¶5. (U) President Bouteflika visited Cuba for three days in 
late September/early October following his participation in 
UNGA and the Latin America-Africa summit in Caracas, 
Venezuela.  He met with Raul and Fidel Castro. 
 
Algerian Investments in Cuba 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Post knows of no direct Algerian investment in Cuba, 
but a number of pharmaceutical agreements may have an 
investment component. 
 
Algeria/Cuba Bilateral Trade and Cooperative Agreements 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶7. (U) Bouteflika's September-October Cuba visit saw the 
signing of a memorandum for the facilitation of travel and 
visas/residence permits for communities of the two countries, 
and a consular convention.  In the context of that visit, 
Algerian Foreign Minister Medelci stated that bilateral 
cooperation would extend to agriculture, restoration of old 
housing, training in different sectors, and unspecified 
Algerian refining, petrochemical, and oil exploration 
projects with Cuba.  Post believes that a 2001 agreement 
covering the delivery of Algerian oil and oil derivatives to 
Cuba in exchange for medicines, vaccines, machinery, and 
sugar is still in effect. 
 
¶8. (U) The principal areas of Algeria-Cuba trade and 
cooperation are the health and pharmaceuticals sectors. 
Algeria has a health cooperation agreement with Cuba that 
covers the presence of a number of Cuban doctors in Algeria. 
The two countries are expanding cooperation on production of 
pharmaceuticals.  A delegation from the state-owned Algerian 
pharmaceutical company Saidal visited Cuba the week of 
October 3 and signed three agreements.  The first was between 
Saidal and the Cuban companies Heber Biotec, Cimab, Vacunas 
Finlay, Cenpalar, and Damler.  It covers the transfer of 
technologies to Algeria for the production of vaccines and 
biopharmaceutical products, as well as Cuban assistance in 
the construction of production facilities in Algeria.  The 
second was between Saidal and Quimefa and covers the 
production and commercialization of generic drugs in Algeria. 
 The third agreement was between Saidal and Medicuba for the 
sale of Algerian drugs in the Cuban market.  In the context 
of President Bouteflika's fall 2009 visit to Cuba, Algerian 
Foreign Minister Medelci explained that health cooperation 
would also focus on ophthalmology, podiatry, neurology, 
general surgery, and radiotherapy. 
 
¶9. (U) Cuba has already built an ophthalmology hospital in 
Djelfa and is building three similar hospitals in Bechar, 
el-Oued, and Ouargla (all in the South of Algeria).  These 
will be operational toward the end of 2009.  There are plans 
to build three more in Setif, Tlemcen, and Tamanrasset. 
Algeria/Cuba Exchange Programs 
------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (U) The above-mentioned health cooperation agreement 
covers the presence of Cuban doctors in Algeria.  A certain 
number of Algerian nationals and Western Sahara refugees 
resident in Algeria study in Cuba.  Cuban doctors and other 
advisers regularly visit Sahrawi refugee camps near the 
Algerian city of Tindouf. 
PEARCE