09ANKARA1367
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8020
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1367/01 2601334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171334Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0799
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0045
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6278
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4164
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7564
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7454
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4037
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001367 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan-Assad Meet in Istanbul 
Media outlets report that on Wednesday's meeting between Prime 
Minister Erdogan and visiting Syrian Head of State, Bashar Assad, 
came together in Istanbul.  All media report that Turkey and Syria 
have agreed to remove visa requirements between the two countries; 
tractor-trailers will be exempt from taxes, and a council of 
ministers meeting will be held once a year under the leadership of 
Turkish and Syrian prime ministers.  Media also report that Foreign 
Minister Davutoglu on Thursday will bring together the Iraqi and 
Syrian foreign ministers in an effort to help relieve the tensions 
between the two countries over bombings in Baghdad earlier this 
month that Iraq claims was instigated by Syria.  The meeting will be 
held with the participation of Turkish, Syrian, Iraqi and Arab 
League representatives.  Mainstream Hurriyet says Turkey will 
suggest the establishment of a three-side border security mechanism. 
 The meeting will correspond with Thursday's Turkey-Iraq Strategic 
Cooperation Council meeting on economic integration. 
 
Atalay:  Cross Border Extensions and New Letters for the Turkish 
Alphabet 
Media outlets report that following a meeting on Wednesday with 
Parliament Speaker Mehmet Ali Sahin, Interior Minister Besir Atalay 
told the press that the Council of Ministers would be discussing 
renewing the motion authorizing the Turkish military to carry out 
cross-border incursions into northern Iraq -- but has yet to do so. 
Atalay stressed that not renewing the extension has never been 
discussed by the government.  In denying widespread media 
speculation that the government would not seek an extension as part 
of its democratic initiative on Kurdish issues, Besir said that "the 
press is creating scenarios, we haven't finalized any of the efforts 
contained in the democratic initiative and (this issue) wasn't on 
the agenda.  When the time comes, we will evaluate at the Council." 
(Sabah) 
 
Atalay also rejected Wednesday's media reports that there were plans 
to add new letters, Q, W and X, to the Turkish alphabet.  The 
opposition has harshly criticized the alleged move.  Hakki Suha 
Okay, deputy parliamentary group leader of the CHP, told reporters, 
"According to our Constitution and existing laws, it's impossible to 
include such letters in the alphabet." MHP's Oktay Vural said, "This 
is betrayal, and an attempt to erode Turkish." 
 
Cicek: PKK Militants Won't be Penalized If They Surrender 
Mainstream Milliyet reports deputy PM Cemil Cicek has signaled that 
the PKK terrorists in Kandil Mountains would be given no penalties 
if they surrender to Turkish security forces.  "At least 1,500 of 
the 4,500 militants in the mountains are not Turkish nationals.  A 
great majority of the rest are fit to take advantage of article 221 
of the Penal Code if they return to Turkey," said Cicek.  Cicek 
noted militants who have not committed any murders are released in 
line with article 221.  Cicek added most of the PKK militants have 
not committed any crimes, except for participation in a terror 
organization. 
 
Baykal Reluctant to Discuss Turkey's 'Kurdish Initiative' with 
Talabani 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that in October, CHP leader Deniz 
Baykal is expected to pay a visit to Iraq and meet with President 
Talabani.  Talabani wants to tell Baykal his views about the Turkish 
government's Kurdish "democratic initiative," but the CHP is 
reluctant to discuss the issue, saying that the Kurdish question is 
Turkey's "internal problem."  Baykal will reportedly not go to Iraq 
if Iraqi officials do not accept to not raise this sensitive issue, 
according to Zaman. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Kurdish Initiative 
 
Okay Gonensin wrote in mainstream Vatan: "Serious mind confusion 
continues as far as the government's initiative is concerned. The 
 
ANKARA 00001367  002 OF 004 
 
 
government seemed determined about the idea even though content was 
never made to public.  The later content is revealed, the worse the 
mind confusion will be.  The only success story for this initiative 
requires if the ruling AKP can formulate this as an effort for most 
progressive rights for all citizens of Turkey." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal Radikal: "The government is working on 
two parallel levels by focusing on democratic steps to take while 
not avoiding fight against PKK at the same time.  Turkey, in this 
regard, is waiting for even more cooperation from the U.S. regarding 
efforts to eliminate PKK presence in northern Iraq.  Interior 
Minister Atalay was denying some reports in the press that Turkey 
will not seek for renewal of cross border operation mandate as well 
as denying plans regarding some more letters to be added in Turkish 
alphabet.  On the other hand, there will be some other tangible 
steps about the democratic process may be coming out from PM Erdogan 
after his trip to the U.S." 
 
Babacan Announces Medium-Term Economic Program 
Media outlets report State Minister Ali Babacan has announced the 
ruling government's medium-term economic program in Ankara, 
emphasizing that from now on, talks with the IMF will proceed based 
on this program.  Babacan said Turkey doesn't need the fund's cash 
and hasn't included it in fiscal projections.  The program made 
public by Babacan projects 6 percent contraction in 2009, and 3.5 
percent growth in 2010.  Turkey's economy contracted 7 percent in 
the second quarter of the year after slumping 14.3 percent in the 
first three months.  The 2009 budget deficit is expected to stand at 
TL 66 billion by the year's end.  Unemployment is estimated as 14.8 
percent, and no tax hikes were foreseen. 
 
According to Islamist-oriented Zaman, the program indicates that the 
government will proceed without seeking a new deal with the IMF. 
Business daily Referans, however, stresses that the success of the 
program depended on making a new deal with the IMF.  A commentary in 
Referans says that the government hardly could reach the target of 
3.5 percent growth in 2010 without IMF funds.  Mainstream Aksam 
reports Babacan as saying that talks with the IMF were advancing 
smoothly and that the parties were "close to a deal." 
 
Zaman Interviews Professor Phillips 
In an unusual twist, Islamist-oriented Zaman and Today's Zaman both 
carry a full-page interview with Professor David Phillips, the 
author of the Atlantic Council's "Confidence Building Between Turks 
and Iraqi Kurds" report.  In addition to his views on the Turkish 
government's Kurdish initiative, Phillips commented extensively on 
Armenia-Turkish rapprochement noting that "compromise between the 
Turks and Armenians will be a long process which requires lots of 
contacts."  Phillips said that "Turks and Armenians will come 
together when the border is opened, and it will deepen mutual 
understandings.  This, however, doesn't mean that Armenians will 
abandon their claims of 'genocide.'"  In addition, he noted that 
"the Minsk process is expected to be finalized with an agreement 
which will return the majority of territories affected by war to 
Azerbaijan.  There is, however, no connection between a settlement 
between Turkey and Armenia and Azerbaijani lands.  I believe the 
normalization of Turkey-Armenia relations will support a great 
extent the talks on Nagorno Karabakh." 
 
Barroso Will Be a Balancing Factor for Turkey (Sabah) 
All papers report on the European Parliament's election of Jose 
Manuel Barroso for a second five year term as president of the 
European Commission.  Mainstream Hurriyet headlines, "EU: Continue 
with Barroso," and reports, "Jose Manuel Barroso got the EU top job 
with the support of 382 votes to 219 against, from among the 718 
lawmakers." Mainstream Sabah writes, "Barroso Will Be A Balancing 
Factor for Turkey," as saying, "Barroso will balance Christian 
Democrats who are divided against Turkey's membership." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines, "Barroso Who Supported Turkey is 
At It for Five More Years," reporting, "Despite French leader 
Sarkozy and German leader Merkel, EU Commission chief who didn't 
 
ANKARA 00001367  003 OF 004 
 
 
hesitate to support Turkey's accession, is elected again." 
Meanwhile, leftist Taraf writes in, "The Left Couldn't Defeat 
Barroso," that, "the European Parliament gave Barroso, who takes 
nationalism and racism as threat, one more term presidency despite 
the opposition of liberal and socialist groups." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "European Right Wins One 
More Time." 
 
Editorial Comment on Iran and 5+1; Turkey's Potential Patriot 
Missile Purchase 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The restart of nuclear 
talks with Iran gives hope for establishing regional stability and 
at the same time, rises Turkey's profile to interact.  Given 
post-election events in Iran, the Mullah regime feels more pressured 
more than ever before both coming from outside and inside.  Turkey 
on the other hand is presenting an inspiration to Iran with its 
secular and democratic structure.  The days of Iran were exporting 
its ideology in the 80s are well over.  And also countries in the 
region, not only Western powers, are very displeased by the ongoing 
instability caused by Iran.  All of these factors are leading Iran 
to work for reconciliation and being more stable." 
 
Hadi Uluengin wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The debate over missile 
purchase should be on the need for open and free discussion. 
Turkish armament needs and upgrade of military systems, including 
purchase of Patriots or others, should be an extensive discussion by 
civilians not by military.  In addition to that, Turkey has to focus 
on its urgent need for professional army as well." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "It will be a 
mistake to present our border neighbor Iran as a direct threat to 
Turkey.  Turkey and Iran are having a good cooperation and dialogue 
while Ankara is already working on Tehran regarding to address 
nuclear issues.  Purchasing missiles and treating Iran as a threat 
to Turkey only helps for disqualifying all possible peaceful ways to 
deal with the problems." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) Domestic 
 
Q The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), in 
a letter to Foreign Minister Davutoglu, expressed concern for the 
heavy tax fine imposed on the Dogan Media Group (DMG). 
Q On Thursday, Prime Minister Erdogan will host an Iftar 
fast-breaking dinner for the chief editors of newspapers and TV 
channels. 
Q Pro-Kurdish DTP MP Hamit Geylani describes army chief General 
Ilker Basbug, CHP leader Deniz Baykal and MHP leader Devlet Bahceli 
as "three menaces" for Turkey and denounces their opposition to the 
ruling government's Kurdish democratic move. 
Q Six al-Qaeda members are arrested for involvement in bomb attacks 
in Istanbul in November 2003. 
Q The foreign ministers of Turkey, Iraq and Syria and Arab League 
Secretary General Amr Moussa are expected to meet in Istanbul to 
discuss the tensions between Baghdad and Damascus over bomb attacks 
in Iraq earlier this month. 
Q President Gul will visit Saudi Arabia from September 20-24. 
 
World 
 
Q Prime Minister Erdogan will visit the US from September 21-26 to 
join UN General Assembly meetings in New York and the G-20 summit in 
Pittsburgh. 
Q Iran builds a wall at "strategic points" along its border with 
Turkey to prevent smugglings and the infiltrations of PJAK 
terrorists. 
Q Afghan President Hamid Karzai reportedly secured over 54 percent 
of the votes in last month's presidential election. 
Q European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso has won a second 
term of office in a vote at the European Parliament. 
Q The Obama administration sets objectives for countering al-Qaeda 
 
ANKARA 00001367  004 OF 004 
 
 
in Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
Q Al-Qaeda has called on the Taliban to kidnap more foreign 
civilians in Afghanistan so they can be used in prisoner swap deals. 
 
 
JEFFREY