09ANKARA1707
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4009
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1707/01 3351303
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011303Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1345
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0160
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6585
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4296
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7661
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7568
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4162
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001707 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2009 
 
Media Highlights: 
 
Davutoglu: Integration with Europe Key Aspect of Turkish Foreign 
Policy 
Tuesday papers report extensively on Foreign Minister Ahmet 
Davutoglu's interview with Newsweek, trumping coverage of Newsweek's 
foreign policy analysis in  "Triumph of the Turks."  Mainstream 
Aksam says Davutoglu, a moderate, believes claims that Turkey has 
shifted Eastward had been spread by those who were jealous of 
Ankara's expanding role in its region and underlines Newsweek's 
claim that "even his own country did not know Davutoglu well 
enough."  In "With America Our Agenda is the Same," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet highlights that Davutoglu said the 
ties between Turkey and the US were now "much better" as compared to 
the times of the Bush administration.  Cumhuriyet reports Davutoglu 
as telling Newsweek that Turkey was both "European and Asian," and 
therefore it needed a "multi-dimensional foreign policy."  In 
"Turkey Won't Wait till 2023," Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports 
Davutoglu said Turkey would be a member of the EU before 2023, 
adding it would also be among the 10 leading economies around the 
world.  Mainstream Milliyet emphasizes that Davutoglu said the 
histories of 20 countries in the Middle East and the Balkans cannot 
be written without using Turkish archives, and that  "NATO is 
Turkey's strongest alliance, and integration with Europe is the main 
objective of Turkish foreign policy.  But it doesn't mean that 
because of these strong ties, we can ignore the Middle East, Central 
Asia, North Africa or Africa." 
 
Erdogan's Washington Mission 
Turkish media coverage of US-Turkey relations ahead of the PM visit 
varied greatly during the long Kurban Bayram holiday, with most news 
reports predicting that Iran, Cyprus and terrorism would top the 
agenda while commentary focused on Turkey's East/West orientation as 
played out in Western media.  On 11/30, mainstream newspapers, web 
news sites and Turkish television gave wide play to Newsweek's 
analysis "Turkey Is the Real Winner of the Iraq War," and played up 
the magazine's observation on the rising brash reputation of PM 
Erdogan in the West.  In other coverage, media carried Turkish 
language translations of  New York Times  commentary by Alistair 
Crooke, stating that the US, Turkey and Iran should be mindful of a 
new equilibrium,  and the Foreign Affairs article on "How the West 
Lost Turkey."   In substantive reporting over the holiday, 
Islamic-oriented Today's Zaman headlined that "US Praises Turkey's 
Role Amid Axis Shift," and in citing recent remarks by State 
Department Spokesman Ian Kelly, concluded that "the United States 
has appeared to dismiss concerns that Turkey's foreign policy 
orientation is shifting away from the West, saying Ankara stands out 
as a democratic model for its region."  Citing the recent Washington 
Post editorial in "Turkey and West Are Condemned To Each Other," 
mainstream Milliyet said  "the scathing commentary" reflects a 
stereotypical approach by Western observers, who are "basically in a 
state of panic because Turkey, free from the pressures of the Cold 
War, has started acting too independently for Western comfort." In 
"Murky American Minds, Murky Turkey," Zaman opines that "there is 
great congruence" between the WP article and the Obama 
administration's private concerns when it comes to the Erdogan 
government's democratic credentials and observes "timing of such 
pieces is particularly advantageous . . . because it will put the 
Turkish government on the defensive" and enable the US 
administration to "hide behind" public opinion when pressing for 
changes in Turkish policies.  In "Another Critical US Trip" 
mainstream CNNTurk TV reported the irony that, despite the passage 
of two years, the main issue between the US and Turkey remains 
terrorism but predicted that the GoT will also press for the naming 
of a US Cyprus special envoy. 
 
In continuing coverage on December 1, leftist Taraf headlined that 
"Israel and Iran Issues Will be in PM Erdogan's Briefcase" and adds 
that the US, in order to lower the pressures from the Armenian lobby 
in Washington, will pressure Turkey to pass the protocols signed 
with Armenia in the parliament.  Citing a high-level government 
 
ANKARA 00001707  002 OF 003 
 
 
source, the paper also claims that Turkey is "upset" with Washington 
pressure to normalize relations with Israel and rejected press 
reports that Turkey had cancelled any civilian or military projects 
with Israel.  Friday's mainstream Hurriyet quoted FM Davutoglu 
saying that "Erdogan will give three messages to President Obama 
regarding Iran:  Everybody has the right to acquire nuclear 
technology for peaceful means; nuclear weapons are a big threat for 
the world and for the region; diplomacy and dialogue are needed to 
solve problems."  Liberal Radikal columnist Cengiz Candar writes 
under the headline "While the Winner of Iraq War is Going to 
Washington" and refers to Newsweek's "Triumph of the Turks" article 
and says "recently Turkey gained respect for its international 
profile.  The biggest credit in this gain should be given to AKP 
government and the architecture of the government's foreign policy, 
Ahmet Davutoglu.  Now, the most important thing is to get Obama's 
support for this new profile.  This will be the vital mission for PM 
Erdogan during his US visit."  In "Suspicious Support,"  maintstream 
Vatan observes that Western laudatory commentary regarding Turkey's 
expanding foreign policy profile as flawed as "Western countries are 
expressing concern whether Turkey is trying to become a leader in 
the region for its own interests or for an Islamic regime." 
 
Minaret Ban: A Storm of Anger (Sabah) 
Turkish media across the political spectrum denounced the 
controversial Swiss decision to ban minarets in front page news and 
commentary.  Mainstream Vatan headlines "Europe is Ashamed," liberal 
Radikal blasts "Reaction Showered on Switzerland," Haberturk TV 
Online  headlines "Saying No to Minarets Causes Disillusionment," 
while Islamic-oriented Zaman claims "Minaret Banning Leaves 
Switzerland Alone in the World."  In a "Storm of Anger" mainstream 
Sabah points to the Vatican's denouncement of the move as a blow to 
religious freedom and says that the referendum was a mistake as 
"Minarets are only symbols, just like churches having bells."  Sabah 
columnist Mehmet Barlas quips that, in any case, "Muslims will not 
miss anything - they will look at their Swiss made watches and know 
it's time to pray."  In "No to Minarets, Yes to Guns" mainstream 
Hurriyet news and commentary also takes aim, noting "this kind of 
democracy, never mind be able to bring freedom, will limit basic 
human rights." 
 
More Troops to Afghanistan (Haberturk) 
Media outlets today carry straightforward coverage on President 
Obama's speech today in which he's expected to outline his new 
Afghanistan war strategy.  In an exclusive feature, pro-government 
Haberturk headlines "More Troops to Afghanistan," predicting that 
President Obama will say that "it's getting more and more dangerous, 
and that "in order to finish our job in Afghanistan and leave the 
country as soon as possible, we must send more troops to prevent 
Taliban and Al Queda getting control."  In "US Expects NATO Members 
to Send 10,000 More Troops to Afghanistan," Islamist-oriented Zaman 
notes, "Obama administration emphasized that US involvement in 
Afghanistan is not an open-ended period and will last only until the 
target is reached."  CNNTurk TV online writes in "Clinton Calls 
Davutoglu on Afghanistan," that, "as President Obama is expected to 
detail a new strategy on Afghanistan in his address today, Secretary 
Clinton made several calls to a series of FMs including Turkish FM 
Davutoglu." 
 
"Iran Mocks the World" (Radikal) 
 Liberal Radikal in "Iran Mocks the World," reports "Iran announced 
that its decision to build ten new nuclear plants is in retaliation 
to IAEA's resolution condemning Iran for building a new uranium 
enrichment site. Even Russia voices its concern and new sanctions 
are on the way."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines "New 
Sanction Warning to Iran," highlighting "the reactions of the world 
leaders including British, German, French and Russian FMs following 
Iran's statement that it'll build ten more nuclear plants." 
 
YouTube Ban Taken to European Court 
Papers report on Monday that Turkey's Internet Technologies 
Association has applied to the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) 
 
ANKARA 00001707  003 OF 003 
 
 
seeking the annulment of a ban imposed on access to YouTube since 
May 2008 over video clips insulting Ataturk, the founder of modern 
Turkey.  The association said the ban on YouTube has also restricted 
the right to education, noting that the educational content 
available on the site makes it a resource for universities and 
international organizations. 
 
Genetically Modified Organisms in Turkey 
Mainstream Aksam reports the Turkish government has changed the 
related regulations November 20, and brought a condition that 
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) will be indicated on the 
package of food products.  Information released by the Turkish 
Farming Ministry said contrary to the public-wide claims, production 
of GMOs was not allowed in Turkey.  The ministry said the countries 
that produce GMOs were the US, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, India, 
China, Paraguay, South Africa and the EU.  It also said GMOs were 
not allowed in infant food products in Turkey, adding that Turkey 
was far ahead of the EU countries regarding GMO usage. 
 
Upcoming events: 
 
Q December 1: President Gul will pay an official visit to Jordan 
from December 1-3. 
Q December 1: Foreign Minister Davutoglu will join an OSCE meeting 
in Athens on December 1-2. 
Q December 1: Turkish Cyprus 'President' Mehmet Ali Talat and 
'Foreign Minister' Huseyin Ozgurgun will visit Ankara to meet with 
President Gul and Prime Minister Erdogan. 
Q December 1: Energy Minister Taner Yildiz will join a luncheon of 
the American-Turkish Business Council. 
Q December 4: High Military Council (YAS) will hold its regular fall 
meeting. 
Q December 7: Prime Minister Erdogan will visit the US. 
 
TV News  (NTV) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q A 16 year-old teenager was shot dead during violent demonstrations 
in the city of Mersin marking the 31st founding of the PKK.  Police 
broke up a demonstration by young Kurds in Istanbul, and violence 
flared in other Turkish cities with large Kurdish populations. 
Q The death toll in the swine flu outbreak in Turkey climbs to 195. 
 
Q Turkey's Alevi Bektasi Federation is expected support a new party 
to be founded by Independent MP Ufuk Uras in 2010. 
Q Financial Times says the fact that Turkey has finally broken free 
from the IMF's tutelage is a source of pride for Turkey. 
 
World 
 
Q 20 Turkish pilgrims have died in Saudi Arabia during Hajj. 
Q  The head of Iran's Atomic Energy Organization, Ali Akbar Salehi, 
said Iran does not want to leave the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). 
 
Q British PM Gordon Brown announced an additional 500 soldiers would 
be deployed in Afghanistan in December. 
Q Stocks in Dubai plunged more than 7 percent on Monday, the first 
day of trading after the Persian Gulf state's debt problems rocked 
financial markets around the world. 
 
JEFFREY