09ANKARA1253
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0410
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1253/01 2371032
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251032Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0632
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0274
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6197
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4112
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7516
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7404
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3988
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001253 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, AUGUST 25, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Political Turmoil in Ankara Over Kurdish Initiative 
All papers and TV Channels:  Today's papers report that the AKP 
government's Kurdish initiative created heated debates between the 
government and the opposition parties.  Mainstream Sabah reports 
that last week the NSC released a supporting statement to 
government's efforts to solve the Kurdish issue.  The opposition 
party MHP leader Devlet Bahceli strongly denounced the NSC 
statement.  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye reports that AKP deputy 
Bekir Bozdag responded to Bahceli's criticism,  who had described 
the democratic move as disloyalty, and said "Desiring to put an end 
to the ongoing bloodshed cannot be called disloyalty."  Bozdag also 
said the signatures of Bulent Ecevit, Devlet Bahceli and Mesud 
Yilmaz, leaders of three party coalition government then, had saved 
PKK leader Ocalan from execution.  Bozdag also noted that the MHP 
was betraying Turkish interests by supporting fighting which would 
lead to more deaths of Turkish soldiers.  MHP officials responded to 
AKP criticism by saying that Bozdag was nobody, not worth answering 
since he did not have the capacity to understand MHP.  Liberal 
Radikal reports that at a press conference in his party 
headquarters,  CHP leader Deniz Baykal said that the Kurdish move of 
the government was a dangerous project and Turkey would be like 
Lebanon, Yugoslavia or Iraq, at the end of this process.  Baykal 
added that the claims to the effect that the Kurdish initiative is a 
US project are accurate and the Prime Minister has been trying to 
put an end to these claims by scolding the opposition.  NTV reported 
that speaking to Roj TV, DTP chairman Ahmet Turk said that he 
believes in the sincerity of PM Erdogan regarding the Kurdish 
initiative.  He said that the issue is not the problem of the Kurd 
but the problem of the whole of Turkey and criticized the attitude 
of MHP and CHP. 
 
Phillips: Kurdish Initiative Erdogan's Own Idea (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet says David L. Phillips, the author of reports 
cited by MHP's Oktay Vural to prove that the AKP government's 
Kurdish initiative was "an American project," has sent a letter to 
daily Hurriyet, saying the initiative was PM Erdogan's own idea. 
Phillips acknowledged he penned two reports for the National 
Committee for American Foreign Policy (NCAFP) and the Atlantic 
Council (ACUS) on the PKK, Turkey and the Iraqi Kurds, but stressed 
that neither Americans, nor the Turkish officials tried to influence 
the reports.  Phillips stressed that the Kurdish initiative was 
Erdogan's own idea.  "He wouldn't take my advice -- Erdogan's idea 
is built totally on Turkey's national interests.  The AKP's Kurdish 
initiative is a change of system which will render Turkey secure, 
free and integrated with Western institutions.  Erdogan, with his 
vision and leadership, deserves credit," emphasized Phillips. 
 
U.S. Embassy: The Kurdish Issue Is Turkey's Internal Issue 
Papers report that when the U.S. Embassy was asked by ANKA news 
agency about claims the Kurdish opening launched by the AKP 
government was an "American project," the Embassy responded by 
saying, "We support the democratization of Turkey, but this plan is 
a Turkish plan," and, "The Kurdish issue is an internal issue for 
Turkey to resolve."  Two weeks ago, Ambassador Jeffrey told Utku 
Cakirozer of Aksam, "This is clearly a Turkish plan. We have our own 
views as I said. We have over the years provided these views to 
Turkey, but this is not something that is made in the United States, 
this is something that is made in Turkey. It's the Turkish 
Government that is in charge of this, I have no idea what the 
details are just like you. I'm waiting for the specifics to come 
out." 
 
Editorial Debate on Kurdish Initiative 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "It is an absolute 
disrespect to Turkey's self confidence as well as to its internal 
dynamics to say that foreign hands have devised this important 
effort.  Turkey should have been overcome this complex by now. There 
are plenty of factors which have led the government to work on an 
 
ANKARA 00001253  002 OF 003 
 
 
action plan for the Kurdish initiative.  It is interesting to see, 
on the other hand, there are some in Turkey who still prefer to 
explain this initiative as only the result of foreign pressure.  " 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "For the first 
time in this country's history the settlement process for an 
important problem, i.e. the Kurdish issue, has moved to a democratic 
platform.  This initiative is an effort to embrace differences in a 
unified democracy by using dialogue, consensus and reconciliation. 
All of this will lead to a more free Turkey." 
 
Rusen Cakir wrote in mainstream Vatan: "Given the current harsh tone 
on debates between political parties, there is a potential danger to 
face with a deadlock in the Kurdish initiative process.  The 
government should be very careful not to mount the already high 
tension and do its best to include CHP as well as MHP in this 
process.  Any mismanagement of this crisis will ruin the entire 
effort otherwise." 
 
PKK Leader Duran Kalkan Demands an End to Turkish Military 
Operations 
Mainstream dailies Milliyet and Sabah report that one of the PKK 
leaders Duran Kalkan reminded Turkey that the PKK's unilateral 
ceasefire expires on September 1.  Kalkan said, "If Turkey's 
military operations do not end, the PKK will launch new attacks 
after this date." 
 
'Friends of Pakistan' Gather in Istanbul 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports the "Friends of Democratic 
Pakistan" meeting started in Istanbul on August 24.  Richard 
Holbrooke, the U.S. Special Representative for Pakistan and 
Afghanistan, will join the meeting which is hosted by Foreign 
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu.  Islamist-oriented Zaman says the meeting 
focuses on the fight against terror, moves for stability, and steps 
for assisting Pakistan in education, health, energy, economy and 
local administration.  Cumhuriyet says the Istanbul meeting will 
also prepare for another Pakistan gathering to be held in New York 
on September 24, with the participation of President Obama. 
 
"The U.S. Tested A Ballistic Missile" (Cumhuriyet ) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports the U.S. Air Force tested a 
ballistic intercontinental missile "after North Korea and Russia 
performed similar missile tests."  The paper also notes, "The U.S. 
Air Force announced the successful launch of 'Minuteman 3' missile 
from a base in California.  Russia did a similar test yet 
unsuccessfully.  North Korea meanwhile was criticized by the UN and 
many countries for causing security threats due to such ballistic 
missile tests." 
 
Admiral Mullen: "Al-Qaeda still have the Power to Attack U.S." 
(Milliyet) 
Mainstream dailies Milliyet and Sabah report that in an interview 
with CNN International, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
Admiral Mike Mullen expressed deep concern over the ongoing war in 
Afghanistan.  Sabah headlines, "The Situation in Afghanistan is 
Deteriorating" and reports that Admiral Mullen voiced deep concern 
regarding Taliban activities in Afghanistan.  Mullen said "The 
Taliban insurgency has become more sophisticated and their biggest 
aim is to kill more U.S. troops."  Milliyet notes that Mullen was 
concerned that even eight years after the September 11 attacks, the 
Al-Qaeda terrorist organization still has enough power to attack the 
U.S. and he added that this is Al-Qaeda's biggest aim. 
 
Obama Limits the Power of the CIA (Sabah) 
Papers carry a Washington Post (WP) report which says President 
Obama has approved a new elite team to question key terror suspects, 
and signed off last week on the unit, named the High-Value Detainee 
Interrogation Group (HIG).  The HIG will be overseen by the National 
Security Council, giving the White House direct oversight.  Under 
new guidelines, interrogators will abide by the Army Field Manual 
when questioning suspects, which means certain techniques such as 
 
ANKARA 00001253  003 OF 003 
 
 
playing loud music or depriving prisoners of sleep, will not be 
allowed.  Members of the new interrogation unit will have the 
authority to travel around the world to talk to suspects and will be 
trained to handle certain high-interest people, such as al-Qaeda 
leader Osama bin Laden, Turkish papers cite WP. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Nine PKK defectors who surrendered to Turkish officials at Habur 
border crossing were released by the prosecutor in Diyarbakir, 
benefiting from the 'Repentance Law.' 
 
- The Council of Ministers has discussed Monday a judicial reform 
bill, which is a critical part of the EU process. 
 
- On Tuesday evening, President Abdullah Gul will host a Ramadan 
fast-breaking dinner for the relatives of martyred soldiers. 
 
- Chief EU negotiator Egemen Bagis and minority representatives will 
come together tonight at a Ramadan fast-breaking dinner in Istanbul. 
 
 
- Experts say cuts in interest rates for housing loans continue, and 
add that it was the right time to buy a new house. 
 
World 
 
- Thousands flee their homes as blazes sweep through forests and 
burn down houses near Athens.  PM Erdogan phoned Greek PM 
Karamanlis, and told him that Turkey was ready to extend any kind of 
assistance to fight against ongoing wildfires. 
 
- Hamid Karzai is reelected President in Afghanistan, winning 68 
percent of the vote in last week's elections, says Afghan Finance 
Minister. 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Demetris Chistofias says they will have to 
say "no" to Turkey's EU entry if Turkey doesn't change its Cyprus 
stance. 
 
- Twenty people are killed and 10 wounded in two roadside bombs in 
Iraq. 
 
- Russia says Ukrainian troops and volunteers fought for Georgia in 
its war with Russia last year. 
 
- The Gaza government has decided to impose Islamic clothing on 
female students at Gaza Strip governmental schools. 
 
 
JEFFREY