09ANKARA1357
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Sep 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9166
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1357/01 2591228
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161228Z SEP 09 ZDK CTG MULTIPLE SVCS
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0787
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0042
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6272
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4160
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7560
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7450
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4032
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 2009 
 
ANKARA 00001357  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Ambassador Jeffrey Received by Parliament Speaker Sahin 
Under the headline, "U.S. Supports Turkish Government's Armenian 
Initiative," leftist-nationalist reports Ambassador James Jeffrey 
was received Tuesday by Parliament Speaker Mehmet Ali Sahin.  "We 
support the Turkey-Armenia process, and hope that it will continue," 
Ambassador Jeffrey told the press after the meeting.  Jeffrey said 
the process was ongoing between Turkey and Armenia, and that Turkey 
would decide about it.  On a question whether the U.S. would provide 
concrete support to the process, Jeffrey said the U.S. wanted peace 
and stability across the entire Caucasus. 
 
Erdogan Continues Meetings Re Kurdish Initiative 
Media outlets report that on Tuesday, Prime Minister Erdogan held a 
meeting with his cabinet ministers who are also the members of the 
Turkish National Security Council (MGK) to discuss the Kurdish 
'democratic initiative.'  The gathering described the recent PKK 
attacks as an attempt to sabotage the Kurdish opening.  Mainstream 
Sabah notes the gathering also discussed the closure of Makhmur Camp 
in northern Iraq.  Sabah says the meeting raised the issue of Syrian 
and Iranian nationals in the PKK.  According to Sabah, intelligence 
reports show there are around 12,000 people in Makhmur camp in 
Northern Iraq.  Around 7,000 of them want to return to Turkey, while 
the rest want to stay in the camp or to go to Syria and Iran. 
 
The AKP Government's 'Kurdish Package' 
Mainstream Haberturk report the ruling AKP government's Kurdish 
'democratic initiative' package comprises the following items: PKK 
militants who were not involved in crimes will be released after a 
three-month rehabilitation period; the militants involved in crimes 
will be held under surveillance for five years; Kurdish will be 
elective course in elementary and high schools; new letters of Q, W 
and X will be included in the Turkish alphabet; the Turks living in 
Makhmur Camp in northern Iraq will be brought to Turkey; place-names 
which were changed into Turkish will be given their original Kurdish 
names; the state will support publications in Kurdish; Turkey's 
state theatres will stage the famous Kurdish play, 'Mem-u Zin,'; the 
state will print a translation of the holy Quran in Kurdish; Kurdish 
interpreters will be hired in state institutions; the oath which 
elementary school children take every morning, in which the virtues 
of 'being a Turk' are praised, will be removed; and Kurdish signs 
will be set up on state motorways. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Kurdish Initiative 
 
Bejan Matur wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Success for the 
initiative requires an opening in the mentalities as well.  The 
state may be making certain decisions but the actual implementation 
comes from bureaucrats.  There will be no progress as long as the 
old fashioned mentality prevails in bureaucracy.  Since bureaucrats 
are encouraged by politicians, a courageous political vision will 
help bring forth courageous steps." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "The Turkish 
Intelligence Organization hosted a meeting for the secret service 
heads of Syria and Iraq.  This shows Ankara is doing its best to 
eliminate tension between Baghdad and Damascus not only at the 
foreign ministry level but also between the intelligence units.  The 
more tension between Iraq and Syria is eliminated, the better 
opportunities for regional cooperation against the PKK will 
increase." 
 
Assad Due in Istanbul on Wednesday 
Media outlets report Syrian President Bashar Assad will pay a 
one-day working visit to Istanbul on Wednesday to discuss the issues 
of Syrian-heritage PKK militants, the ongoing tensions between 
Baghdad and Damascus regarding the bombings in the Iraqi capital 
earlier this month, talks between Israel and Syria, and Turkey-Syria 
ties as well as the water problem between the two countries.  Assad, 
together with PM Erdogan, will reportedly join a fast-breaking Iftar 
 
ANKARA 00001357  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
dinner tonight that will be hosted by the AKP's Istanbul provincial 
branch. 
 
Iraq-Syria Delegations Meet in Ankara 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Iraqi and Syrian delegations met Tuesday 
in Ankara over the recent bomb attacks in Baghdad, of which Iraq 
accuses Syria.  The sides will continue meetings tomorrow in 
Istanbul.  Syrian President Assad, due in Istanbul today, will 
reportedly join tomorrow's talks between the two delegations, 
according to Hurriyet. 
 
The Address for Peace in the Middle East Is Turkey (Sabah) 
Following wire reports of Javier Solana's comment that P5+1 talks 
with Iran are "likely to be held in Turkey," most media hail 
Turkey's role as a host as an indication that the country  is 
mediating between Iran and The West.  Mainstream pro-government 
Sabah reports in, "One Year Later Iran Is Sitting at The Table," 
that, "A year after Iran closed the door to dialogue regarding its 
nuclear program, Turkey's surprising mediation starts again," as, 
"Diplomatic circles in Brussels say that the fact the talks are 
taking place in Turkey shows the important role Turkey is playing in 
the process,"  as "The address for peace in the Middle East is 
Turkey," and, "Turkey is taking one more step toward being a 
regional power."  Leftist Taraf headlines, "Iran And The West Will 
Meet in Turkey."  Islamist-oriented pro-government Yeni Safak 
headlines, "The Bridge Between East and West Will Be Established in 
Turkey."  Islamist-oriented pro-government Zaman headlines, "Iran 
and The West Will Sit At The Table in Turkey For Nuclear 
Bargaining," and the paper reports, "Ankara wants a diplomatic 
solution to the nuclear crisis between Iran and The West," as, "The 
sides are preparing to meet in Turkey." 
 
Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "Turkey Will Host Critical Talks," 
but columnist Sami Kohen notes in "A New Dialogue With Iran," that, 
"It's good news that a year after the group of six and Iran reached 
a stalemate in nuclear discussions that they are all coming to the 
table for talks," and, "It is seen as a very positive development 
that Istanbul is likely to be chosen as the location for the talks," 
but "while Turkey is contributing to these efforts, Turkey is not 
acting as a mediator but instead is acting as a facilitator in this 
situation." 
 
Editorials on Iran and The P5+1 Talks 
 
Yasemin Congar wrote in leftist Taraf: "FM Davutoglu is pursuing a 
multi-faceted diplomacy in protection of Ankara's interests, which 
is the normalization of ties between Washington and Tehran. It is 
not in Ankara's interest either to be in the middle of this tension 
or to be forced into being a part of the sanctions regime against 
Iran.  At this point the announcement of the October 1 meeting is 
important progress by itself which gives a dim hope for nuclear 
dialogue on the eve of the UNGA meetings.  The more Iran stays away 
from the negotiation table the more suspicion arises about its 
hidden intentions to develop atomic bombs.  That suspicion is a 
source of constant tension between the West and Israel and Iran.  " 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "It's good news that a year 
after the group of six and Iran reached a stalemate in nuclear 
discussions that they are all coming to the table for talks.  It is 
seen as a very positive development that Istanbul is likely to be 
chosen as the location for the talks. While Turkey is contributing 
to these efforts, Turkey is not acting as a mediator but instead is 
acting as a facilitator in this situation." 
 
VOA Voices Concern Over Press Freedoms in Turkey (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that a commentary broadcast by the Voice 
of America (VOA) Radio said the USD 2.5 billion of tax fine levied 
on Turkey's leading media conglomerate, Dogan Media Group, had risen 
concerns over the future of press freedoms in the country.  'Signed' 
by Dorian Jones, the commentary warned the fine could jeopardize 
Turkey's drive to become a full member of the EU.  It also noted the 
 
ANKARA 00001357  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
fine came after the DG published accusations regarding alleged ties 
between a 'fraudulent' Germany-based Turkish charity, Deniz Feneri, 
and the governing party in Turkey. 
 
The UN Weighs In On War Crimes Allegations in Gaza 
Liberal Radikal notes in "The UN: Israel Committed War Crimes in 
Gaza," that "Following Amnesty International, the UN has released a 
report stating that Israel committed war crimes and crimes against 
humanity during its 22-day operation in Gaza."  Meanwhile, 
mainstream Hurriyet headlines "The UN: Both Sides Were Guilty in 
Gaza."  Mainstream Milliyet reports "The UN report indicates that 
both Israel and Palestinian forces were guilty of committing war 
crimes in Gaza." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey's Potential Patriot Missile Purchase 
 
Lale (Sariibrahimoglu) Kemal wrote in leftist Taraf: "Does Turkey 
need Patriot missiles?  It is hard to understand why Turkey's 
purchase of new arms is not scrutinized through a democratic 
civilian filtering process while the country itself goes through a 
deepening economic crisis.  In democracies, the political authority 
makes the threat assessment and parliamentary commissions make the 
final decision.  Turkey is too dependent on purchasing arms 
technologies from foreign sources, which brings into question the 
strength of Turkey's military." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk)  Domestic 
 
-Diyarbakir prosecutor demands 138 years in prison for six children 
who participated in illegal protests and threw stones at the police. 
 
-On September 17-18, Turkish and Iraqi officials will come together 
in Istanbul to discuss preparations for a high-level meeting of the 
Strategic Cooperation Council set up by Turkey and Iraq.  Turkish 
and Iraqi Foreign Ministers will join the meeting. 
-President Gul will visit Saudi Arabia from September 20-24. 
-On September 17, Prime Minister Erdogan will host an Iftar dinner 
for chief editors of newspapers and TV channels in Istanbul. 
-AK Party has hosted a Ramadan Iftar dinner in Diyarbakir in which 
prayers were made in Kurdish. 
 
World 
 
-Missile attack on Baghdad's Green Zone during Vice President 
Biden's surprise visit to Iraq. 
-EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said the October 1 meeting 
between the 5 members of the UNSC plus Germany and Iran was likely 
to take place in Turkey. 
-UN Special Representative Alexander Downer said both parties in 
Cyprus must be ready to make concessions to resolve the conflict on 
the divided island. 
-Children and Armed Conflict says about 250,000 children were 
recruited as soldiers by armed forces and insurgents worldwide. 
 
JEFFREY