09ANKARA127
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5142
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0127/01 0261447
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261447Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8581
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9429
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5289
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3561
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7076
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6934
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3520
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JANUARY 26, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
U.S. Ambassador:  'Today Turkey is better prepared to face an 
economic crisis' 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Vatan and Taraf reported Saturday the 
U.S. Ambassador to Turkey, James Jeffrey, said Turkey is "better 
prepared to face the global economic crisis today, thanks to the 
structural reforms introduced following the economic crisis in 
2001." 
Addressing a luncheon hosted by the Foreign Economic Relations Board 
(DEIK) in his honor, Ambassador Jeffrey said the 2001 crisis was 
internal whereas the current situation is global.  "Because the 
Turkish economy is export-driven, it will undoubtedly face 
difficulties as international demand drops," he emphasized.  Jeffrey 
underlined the importance of striking a deal with the IMF, and 
pledged the U.S. would help Turkey in the negotiations. 
 
During the luncheon, Ambassador Jeffrey also said Turkey played a 
key role in Gaza, adding the U.S. was in touch with Turkey, Egypt, 
Jordan, UAE, and Israel in efforts for a long-term ceasefire. 
Papers also report that Ambassador Jeffrey also praised Turkey's 
contributions to the evolution of democracy in Iraq. 
 
PM Erdogan Interview with Al-Hayat Newspaper 
Mainstreams Milliyet and Vatan report that PM Erdogan gave an 
interview to London - based Arabian Al-Hayat newspaper.  Erdogan 
said "Hamas has emerged from an occupation.  Hamas has the 
confidence of Palestinian people and won the elections in 2006.  As 
a principal, we approach all Palestinian groups equally and we 
defend that Hamas should not be excluded from talks and should be 
treated equally with Fatah.  We must not forget that Israel did not 
meet the cease-fire conditions while Hamas abided by the conditions 
for six months.  Israel provoked Hamas by implementing the blockade 
and by putting so much pressure on Gaza.  I am not against the 
Israeli people but their political leaders."    Today's Milliyet 
reports that former Ambassador to Washington Faruk Logoglu said, 
"Erdogan's harsh statements against Israel damaged Turkey's role as 
a mediator."  Milliyet also reports, "Foreign experts say that 
Turkey has lost its chance to mediate between Palestine and 
Israel." 
 
Meanwhile, Sunday's Milliyet reported that the Jewish organization 
B'nai B'rith's deputy chair Dan Mariaschin asked for a gesture from 
Ankara to ensure the safety of Jews in Turkey.   Sunday's Hurriyet 
report that an anonymous representative of an American-Jewish 
organization said, "Statements from Erdogan and other Turkish 
officials have contributed to the escalation of tensions.  Jews in 
Turkey are scared and some are even considering leaving Turkey." 
The same person also said that, under these conditions, Turkey can 
no longer expect support from Jewish lobbies against the Armenian 
genocide lobbies in the U.S. 
 
PM Erdogan's Message to President Obama 
Sabah, Yeni Safak, Milliyet, Zaman and others:  Today's papers 
report that PM Erdogan sent a congratulatory message to U.S. 
President Barack Obama.  In his message, Erdogan highlighted 
importance of the strategic partnership between Turkey and the U.S. 
for stability and invited Obama to the Alliance of Civilizations 
meeting to be held in Istanbul on April 6-7.  Meanwhile, at a 
press-conference at the airport yesterday, FM Babacan said "I talked 
to Secretary Clinton on the phone on last Friday and she told me 
that she wants to send her special envoy George Mitchell to Turkey 
as part of his upcoming Middle East tour." 
 
In a related story, mainstream Hurriyet reports U.S. Ambassador to 
Turkey James Jeffrey "sent important messages to Turkey" at the 
Duatepe Memorials in Sakarya.  Columnist Fatih Cekirge writes, "Past 
US Ambassadors have visited places like the southeast, but 
Ambassador Jeffrey drew attention by visiting memorials to the great 
battle of Sarkarya."  Cekirge says Jeffrey's message was "The U.S. 
 
ANKARA 00000127  002 OF 003 
 
 
will not bow to manipulations from anti-American circles in Turkey," 
whether these circles are "within the Islamists or the secularists." 
  In addition, the columnist notes that Jeffrey praised the Prime 
Minister's foreign policy advisor, Ahmet Davutoglu, for "playing a 
key role in peace in the region." 
 
Yasin Aktay wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak: "The Jewish 
organizations in the U.S. are criticizing Turkey's stance on Gaza, 
calling PM Erdogan's remarks anti-Semitic, and blackmailing Turkey 
by threatening to cancel their opposition to the Armenian Genocide 
Resolution in the U.S. Congress. It makes me so sad that these 
statements from Jewish organizations make no mention of Israel's 
brutality in Gaza.  The U.S. Jewish lobbies overestimate their power 
and they will not change Turkey's determination to stand up for the 
oppressed." 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Turkey is losing the 
support of the Jewish lobby in the U.S. while the annual Armenian 
Genocide Resolution crisis is around the corner.  The Armenian lobby 
has made significant progress toward the passage of a genocide 
resolution.  If that happens, Ankara will face a serious blow to 
Turkish-American ties on the eve of the local elections.  Ankara 
must immediately think outside the box for solutions." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet (1/25): "Prime Minister 
Erdogan supports Hamas; at times he even acts like a spokesman for 
Hamas.  Erdogan's approach (to the Israeli/Palestinian conflict) 
comes from his philosophy of political populism.  But, because 
Erdogan sought to shore up domestic political support by making 
anti-Israel remarks and by choosing to support Hamas over 
Palestinian President Abbas, Turkey has lost its credibility as a 
mediator in the Middle East.  Fortunately, President Gul has 
appropriately emphasized the role of Palestinian President Abbas in 
the bid for seeking solutions to the conflict.  Gul's recognition of 
President Abbas brings balance back to Turkey's foreign policy 
trends." 
 
Turkey-Iraq-U.S. to Set Up 'Joint Command Center' in Erbil 
Media outlets reported Saturday that Turkey, Iraq and the U. S. will 
establish a "joint anti-terror center" in Erbil to ensure border 
security.  This effort seeks to secure the border region so the 
Turkish military will no longer need to carry out air strikes 
against PKK terrorist camps in northern Iraq.  Iraqi Foreign 
Minister Hosyar Zebari visited Ankara Friday; during his joint press 
conference with Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, Zebari said, "Erbil 
will be an important tripartite center for coordination in the 
field."  Babacan announced the "high-level strategic cooperation 
council" between the Iraqi and Turkish governments will hold its 
first ministerial-level meeting in Istanbul in a few weeks. 
 
Turkish Actor Draws Harsh Reaction over Cyprus Remarks 
Media outlets reported over the weekend that popular Turkish actor 
Attila Olgac (of "Valley of the Wolves" fame) told a Kanalturk 
television program Thursday night that he shot dead 10 Greek 
Cypriots soldiers, including a prisoner of war, during his 1974 
military service in Cyprus. Olgac's remarks were strongly criticized 
in the local media; mainstream Hurriyet called Olgac, "The Tactless 
Wolf." "This Was All We Needed," said mainstream Milliyet, lashing 
out at the actor for causing a crisis with Greece and Greek Cypriots 
at an already turbulent time.  On Friday, Greek Cypriot government 
spokesman Stefanos Stefanou said Olgac's statements were "shocking," 
adding it was the first time anyone had made such an admission. 
"Olgac's account is a stunning confession," said Greek Foreign 
Ministry spokesman George Koumoutsakos, urging Turkey to cooperate 
to ensure that all the "missing" during the war are fully 
investigated.  Riza Turmen, Turkey's former judge at the ECHR, said 
"This act resembles a war crime," adding that "states have the power 
to put its citizens on trial for committing such crimes."  Olgac, 
however, publicly retracted his statement on Friday, "My words that 
I killed 10 people, including a prisoner, were untrue; they were 
 
ANKARA 00000127  003 OF 003 
 
 
said simply to attract attention to the brutality of war." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- An avalanche kills ten mountaineers on Zigana Mountain in the 
Black Sea province of Gumushane. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan, Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, State 
Minister Mehmet Simsek and Central Bank Governor Durmus Yilmaz will 
attend the World Economic Forum meeting in Davos from January 
28-February 1. 
 
- On Monday, Energy Minister Hilmi Guler will participate in a 
summit meeting on Nabucco pipeline in Hungary. 
 
-Turkish Central Bank Governor Durmus Yilmaz said that an 
announcement for a loan deal with the IMF was "close."  He noted the 
assistance should help the government repay debts and should assist 
companies who are coping with slowdown in demand. 
 
International News 
 
- World leaders and policymakers will gather at the annual World 
Economic Forum talks in Davos from January 28-February 1 to discuss 
how to overcome the global economic crisis. 
 
- Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki and Kurdish leader Massoud 
Barzani charge each other with "tyranny" and "separatism." 
 
- The Vatican has condemned President Obama's move to restore U.S. 
funding for family planning clinics abroad that carry out abortions. 
 
 
JEFFREY