09ANKARA1290
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5997
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1290/01 2441207
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011207Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0682
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0009
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6221
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4130
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7532
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7420
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4004
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001290 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey-Armenia Reach 'Historic Consensus' to Normalize Ties 
Papers report a joint statement issued Monday by Turkey, Armenia, 
and Switzerland said Turkey and Armenia have decided to begin a 
"six-week negotiations process" which will lead to establishment of 
diplomatic ties.  The agreement was reached through the 
intermediation of Switzerland.  At the end of six-weeks, a deal 
reached on two protocols will be submitted to the parliaments of 
both countries for ratification.  The protocols are related to the 
establishment of diplomatic relations and the development of ties 
between the two countries.  The two protocols outline a framework 
for the normalization of bilateral relations "within a reasonable 
time."  Turkey and Armenia will open diplomatic representations in 
each other's capitals and also take steps for the normalization of 
relations. 
 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says Turkey and Armenia have made a 
"historic consensus" regarding the improvement of bilateral 
relations.  Zaman speculates Armenia will recognize Turkey's 
borders, and all problems between the two countries, including the 
events of 1915, will be discussed by bilateral commissions.  The 
paper says the opening of the border was not on the agenda.  An 
unidentified source in Ankara told Zaman the opening of the border 
required improvements in the region.  Zaman says the pace of the new 
process depends on developments in Nagorno Karabakh.  Mainstream 
Haberturk says the border will be opened when Armenia withdraws from 
the occupied territories in Karabakh.  The six-week period for the 
domestic consultations expires just before the soccer teams of the 
two countries meet in the city of Bursa on October 14 for a World 
Cup qualifier.  Sargsyan said he would come to Turkey in October 
only if the border was opened. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "A warm period has begun in relations 
between Turkey and Armenia" as, "after a series of secret talks that 
were initiated in Switzerland, Turkish and Armenian authorities 
decided to sign a new protocol." The protocol is expected to be 
signed two days before the football match to be played on October 14 
in Turkey. Commenting on the new era to begin between the two 
countries, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said that "No 
steps could be taken against Azerbaijan." Davutoglu also said that 
borders would be recognized, diplomatic relations would be 
established and if everything goes well, embassies could be opened. 
 
Mainstream Milliyet reports, "A concrete step to re-establish 
relations with Armenia that broke 16 years ago was taken 
yesterday." 
 
The U.S. Supports Turkey-Armenia Rapprochement 
Milliyet, Hurriyet, HaberTurk carry reports  Foreign Minister 
Davutoglu had phone call with Secretary Clinton prior to yesterday's 
announcement of the Turkey-Armenia protocol.  They add, "meanwhile 
Turkish Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Sinirlioglu went to Baku to 
brief Azeris about the process." 
 
Several Turkish television outlets, NTV, CNNTurk and Kanal 24 also 
report as of this morning the support for the rapprochement protocol 
from Washington by carrying Spokesman Ian Kelly's remarks. 
Highlights mostly are "The United States warmly welcomes the joint 
statement made today by Turkey and Armenia, with Swiss 
participation, outlining further steps in the normalization of their 
bilateral relations.  We urge Armenia and Turkey to proceed 
expeditiously, according to the agreed framework as described in 
today's statement." 
 
Editorials on Turkey-Armenia 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The most recent 
rapprochement protocol as detailed by Foreign Minister Davutoglu is 
a very important development regarding the future ties between 
Ankara and Yerevan. There is an important detail however in the road 
 
ANKARA 00001290  002 OF 003 
 
 
map.  The deadline for six-weeks of internal political consultancy 
process ends right before the football match between Turkey and 
Armenia.  Therefore the attendance of the Armenian president at the 
October 14 match is now even more important than before.  If he does 
not attend, the whole process will likely be on hold." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "This is a brave step for 
establishing diplomatic ties. The whole process will likely end up 
opening the borders. Even though we have no information at this 
point regarding Ankara's approach vis-`-vis Baku, but in any case 
the current rapprochement will positively contribute the Karabakh 
process." 
 
Atalay: "We Will Announce Our Assessments Regarding the Kurdish Move 
in the Parliament" 
All papers and TV Channels:  Interior Minister Besir Atalay held a 
press conference yesterday on the progress in the "Democratic 
initiative."  Atalay said that there were no concrete projects at 
hand however, the AKP government wanted to find a common ground in 
their meetings with various parties and develop it from there on. 
Atalay added that they would announce their proposals at the 
parliament and a constitutional amendment was not on their agenda, 
reports Sabah.  Islamist-oriented/intellectual Zaman quotes Minister 
Atalay as saying "Everybody wants higher democratic standards.  All 
segments of the society should take responsibility.  A wide social 
compromise is needed for the success of the activities carried out 
within the scope of democratic move."  Mainstream Hurriyet reports 
that Atalay noted that there was no amnesty on their agenda, first 
arms should be laid down. 
 
Meanwhile, the opposition parties were not satisfied with Atalay's 
statements.  Sabah reports that main opposition CHP deputy Mustafa 
Ozyurek said "My party did not see any light of hope.  There is no 
proposal to be discussed."  MHP deputy Osman Cakir said "It doesn't 
eliminate the threats when Atalay says there is no threat to state's 
unitary structure."  Mainly Kurdish party DTP leader Ahmet Turk said 
that the press conference failed to meet the expectations and added 
that the opening will not realize without a new constitution. 
 
Editorials on Government's Kurdish Initiative 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Along with 
Turkey's domestic efforts, the relationship between Iraq and Syria 
is also very important regarding the cooperation against terrorism. 
Baghdad believes that recent terrorist attacks in the country stem 
from Iraqi Baath groups stationed in Syria.  Therefore Minister 
Davutoglu has given a major focus on eliminating problems between 
the regional neighbors.  Once all is well, Minister Davutoglu's goal 
is to establish a regional economic cooperation zone." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Minister Atalay in his 
press event emphasized the importance of Turkey's unitarian state 
structure and Turkish as an sole official language of the country. 
All of this indicates that within a month the government's and 
army's red lines have come to the same phrasing." 
 
Davutoglu Visits Iraq, Syria 
Media outlets report that on Monday, Foreign Minister Ahmet 
Davutoglu met with Syrian President Bashar al-Asad in Damascus. 
Speaking after the meeting, Davutoglu expressed optimism to ease 
tensions escalated between Iraq and Syria after attacks that 
targeted the finance and foreign ministries in Baghdad.  "Syria and 
Iraq are our neighbors and this is a problem inside the family.  We 
will we do anything in our power to settle this problem and 
strengthen relations between brothers," Davutoglu told reporters. 
Earlier in the day, Davutoglu met Iraqi President Talabani and PM 
al-Maliki in Baghdad, and proposed the establishment of a tripartite 
mechanism between Turkey, Iraq and Syria in order to fight against 
terrorist attacks. 
 
General Mc Chrystal: "The Taliban is a Matador, The U.S. Military is 
 
ANKARA 00001290  003 OF 003 
 
 
a Wounded Bull" (Sabah) 
Mainstreams Sabah and Milliyet note that the BBC reported the 
commander of U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan, General Mc 
Chrystal, has written a long-anticipated report saying that the U.S. 
strategy in Afghanistan is not working.  Milliyet headlines, "The 
U.S. Strategy in Afghanistan has collapsed."  Sabah notes that 
General Mc Chrystal, suggested in his report that creating jobs for 
Taliban militants could resolve up to 60 percent of the insurgency 
problems in Afghanistan.  Sabah also notes he compared the U.S. 
military to a bull charging at a matador, but the bull is getting 
weaker with each cut from the matador. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Trial of suspects charged with the killing of 44 people in Bilge 
village in the province of Mardin starts tomorrow in the city of 
Corum. 
 
- On September 2, army chief General Ilker Basbug will host Ramadan 
fast breaking dinner for 800 relatives of martyred soldiers. 
 
- On September 3, President Abdullah Gul will host Ramadan fast 
breaking dinner for the representatives of different Iraqi Turkmen 
groups. 
 
- The IMF analysts say in a report economic openness may speed up 
recovery for large non-African developing countries including 
Turkey. 
 
- Turkey's foreign trade deficit climbs to USD 3.4 billion in July. 
 
 
- Turkish officials make preparations for tax probes into "secret 
accounts" in Swiss banks. 
 
World 
 
- Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu will join a meeting of EU Foreign 
Ministers in Stockholm on September 4-5. 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Christofias visits Damascus and meets Syrian 
Head of State Assad to discuss ferry services between northern 
Cyprus and Syria. 
 
- Iraq has delayed by a year a plan to hold its first nationwide 
census in two decades. 
 
- Suspected militants have blown up more than 20 vehicles carrying 
NATO supplies from Pakistan's Karachi port to Kandahar in 
Afghanistan. 
 
- Iraqi authorities say they are negotiating the return of 19 
fighter jets sent to the former Yugoslavia in the 1980s for repairs. 
 
 
JEFFREY