09ANKARA1139
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Aug 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6213
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1139/01 2181135
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061135Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0437
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0230
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6119
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4065
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7474
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7359
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3944
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, AUGUST 6, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan Meets with DTP Leader Ahmet Turk 
All papers and TV channels:   Prime Minister Erdogan received DTP 
leader Ahmet Turk yesterday at the parliament as a first step in the 
Kurdish initiative, reports Hurriyet.  Following the one-hour 
meeting PM Erdogan announced to the press, "The meeting inspired 
great hopes for the future.  We are happy and hopeful."  Mainstream 
Vatan headline reads "Hope Inspiring Remarks" and reports that the 
two decided that further talks between the two parties will be 
carried out by Interior Minister Atalay, who would keep in touch 
with DTP officials.  Vatan notes Erdogan told press after the 
meeting, "Our mothers do not want to shed more tears.  They want the 
bloodshed and killings to end."  Ahmet Turk said they were pleased 
that dialogue was established between the two political parties, 
adds Vatan.  Reactions to the meeting of the two leaders came from 
the opposition parties.  Vatan reports that main opposition party 
CHP leader Baykal said "The PKK is the counterpart of this meeting", 
and MHP leader Bahceli said "I am sure we will hear the details of 
the meeting from "12 bad men" soon, referring to 12 journalists who 
expressed their support for the government's initiative at a meeting 
at the Ankara police academy last week. 
 
Domestic Reactions to Erdogan-Turk Meeting 
Media outlets report the main opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal 
slammed Prime Minister Erdogan for meeting with the pro-Kurdish DTP 
leader Ahmet Turk.  "Conditions have forced the PM to come together 
with the DTP leader," said Baykal, adding, "This meeting clearly 
addressed the PKK."  Opposition MHP leader Devlet Bahceli has also 
denounced the meeting, saying Erdogan's aim had been acquiring 
information about the "roadmap" prepared by the PKK's imprisoned 
leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
Meanwhile, Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Ankara has begun work to 
bring back home the 'Turkish citizens' from the Makhmur Refugee Camp 
in northern Iraq.  The Turkish Interior Ministry has sent to the 
camp a team to assess camp residents' expectations.  Since 1993, 
11,000 people have been living in the camp.  Ankara will issue ID 
cards for the children and other camp dwellers who don't have legal 
Turkish identification documents, according to Zaman.  Leftist Taraf 
claims Ankara has also asked Damascus to make preparations and allow 
for the return of 2,000 PKK militants of Syrian origin to their 
homes. 
 
Editorials on the Meeting Between PM Erdogan and DTP Leader Turk 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The meeting is 
important, but concrete results won't come about due to the 
government's evasive attitude.  There is a critical turning point 
ahead of us, and PM Erdogan must make a clear decision about whether 
to act with courage to resolve the Kurdish issue or to be listed as 
another leader who talked the talk but did not walk the walk." 
 
Yasin Dogan wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Prime Minister 
Erdogan has demonstrated leadership in this very difficult process. 
The efforts to address the Kurdish issue have been going on for a 
year and these efforts are now moving forward with political 
determination.  This success requires everyone's cooperation." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan: "Efforts to address the 
long-standing Kurdish issue are good developments, but government 
has to be very careful in keeping a balanced approach regarding the 
sensitivities of the Kurds and the Turks.  There seems to be no 
concrete strategy so far.  In any case the current attitude deserves 
to be given a chance for success.  Meanwhile, main opposition CHP's 
attitude is equally important in the process.  CHP leader Baykal was 
very right to ask for details regarding the government's intentions, 
however he does not have any right to equate a political party (DTP) 
with a terrorist organization (PKK)." 
 
Oktay Esi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "It looks like the process 
 
ANKARA 00001139  002 OF 003 
 
 
has started, but the government should be careful not to burn any 
bridges with the CHP and the MHP." 
 
Putin Coming to Turkey for 'Signature of the Century' (Sabah) 
Media outlets report that Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin is 
coming to Turkey today to sign 15 agreements on "strategic energy 
projects."  Sabah says that "giant energy projects" such as 
Samsun-Ceyhan pipeline, Blue Stream-II and the construction of a 
nuclear power plant will be discussed during the meeting between 
Putin and Prime Minister Erdogan.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports that among the agreements would be a cooperation agreement 
on the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, the agreements 
on early warning for nuclear accidents as well as information 
exchange on nuclear facilities.  Sabah, Radikal, and Cumhuriyet also 
note that Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi is also expected to come 
to Ankara today for the signing ceremony.  Papers comment Russia 
expects Turkey to also agree to the South Stream pipeline project 
implemented by Russia and Italy, and Turkey is expected to give 
official permission for the sea ecological research work along the 
gas pipeline route.  Mainstream Hurriyet says Russia wants Turkey to 
join the South Stream Project for the shipment of Russian natural 
gas via the Black Sea and Bulgaria to Austria and Italy. 
 
New Parliament Speaker is Mehmet Ali Sahin 
All papers:  The AKP's candidate, former justice minister Mehmet Ali 
Sahin, was elected the new parliament speaker with 338 votes in the 
third round of voting on Wednesday.  Sahin delivered a speech and 
said that he would be impartial during his office.  Sahin is the 
24th speaker of the parliament and will assume duties officially on 
August 9, notes mainstream Milliyet. 
 
The West Boycotts Ahmedinejad's Inauguration by not Congratulating 
Him 
Media outlets report that Iranian leader Ahmadinejad was sworn in 
for his second presidential term on Wednesday amid protests in the 
streets.  Hurriyet notes that the opposition parliamentarians, who 
claimed massive fraud in the June 12 elections, did not attend the 
swearing-in ceremony.  Hundreds of protesters chanted "Death to the 
dictator" outside the parliament, and they later beaten by riot 
police.  10 of the protesters were detained.  Milliyet reports that 
Iranian state TV channel Press TV announced yesterday that "The U.S. 
and the major Western countries joined Germany in refusing to 
congratulate President Ahmadinejad."   In his inaugural address, 
Ahmadinejad stressed that some Western countries did not 
congratulate him on his election win and added that he "doesn't need 
anyone's congratulations."  Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines, "A 
Congratulations Gamble to The West at the Swearing-In Ceremony," and 
the article also notes Ahmadinejad said "I don't need anyone's 
congratulations."  Hurriyet notes that the U.S. backed off by 
saying, "Ahmadinejad is the elected leader of Iran and the U.S. is 
ready for negotiations with him." 
 
Survey: 51 Percent of Turks Support ICC Arrest Warrant for Sudan's 
al-Bashir 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports World Public Opinion, an 
international public opinion survey network, conducted an 
international poll regarding views on Sudan's President Omer 
al-Bashir and the Darfur problem.  In Turkey, 51 percent of those 
polled "approved of the ICC's arrest warrant for al-Bashir," while 
only 22 percent opposed it.  In addition, 42 percent of Turks said 
they do not trust al-Bashir at all, while a mere nine percent said 
they trust or "partly trust" the Sudanese president. 
 
"The Return of Bill Clinton: He Went There and Set Them Free" 
(Hurriyet) 
Major media outlets continue to highlight the release of two 
American journalists jailed in North Korea after former U.S. 
president Bill Clinton's visit.  Mainstream Hurriyet says "The event 
marks the return of a powerful Bill Clinton."   Hurriyet also notes 
that Secretary Clinton decided to send her husband to talk with 
North Korean leader instead of Al Gore "Despite the fact  that this 
 
ANKARA 00001139  003 OF 003 
 
 
decision overshadowed her Africa trip."  Liberal Radikal takes a 
different angle by noting, "Bill Clinton's visit has been planned 
for the last four months.  The North Korean dictator first arrested 
the journalists and then invited President Clinton to visit the 
country."  Radikal also says, "Dictator Kim had to make this happen 
anyway because he was really cornered by the international community 
and their sanctions." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- A court in Istanbul approved the third indictment about 52 
suspects under the 'Ergenekon' lawsuit, of which the first hearing 
will take place on September 7.  Suspects including retired general 
Tuncer Kilinc, former chairman of Higher Education Board (YOK) Kemal 
Guruz and former police chief Ibrahim Sahin are charged with crimes 
that include "forming an armed terrorist organization" and 
"overthrowing the government." 
 
- Dogan Holding Group of Companies kicked off talks with Austria's 
OMW for the sale of its 54.17-percent share in fuel oil retailer 
Petrol Ofisi. 
 
- Artuklu University in Mardin is preparing to file a request to 
open a Kurdish language department.  If the Higher Education Board 
(YOK) approves it, five academics from the universities in northern 
Iraq will be transferred to Turkey. 
 
- Some businessmen and shop owners in Istanbul campaign to make the 
government ease smoking restrictions in restaurants and bars. 
 
World 
 
- The U.S. said two nuclear-powered Russian attack submarines have 
been patrolling in international waters off the Eastern Seaboard of 
the U.S. in a mission tracked by Washington. 
 
- On Thursday, the Iraqi Islamic Party leader Osama Tikrit and the 
former Iraqi Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari will visit Ankara to 
be received by President Gul. 
 
- NATO Secretary-General Andres Fogh Rasmussen will visit Turkey at 
the end of August. 
 
- The Turkish Cypriot Tourism and Travel Agencies Association 
(KITSAB) is considering launching legal proceedings against Greek 
Cyprus for what it sees as harassment of their business partners 
abroad. 
JEFFREY