09ANKARA747
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2906
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0747/01 1461415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261415Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9735
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0053
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5782
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3868
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7319
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7198
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3781
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000747 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, MAY 26, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
North Korea Defies the World Again (Sabah) 
Media outlets note the global shock that North Korea's nuclear 
missile test caused yesterday.  Mainstream Vatan headlines, "He (Kim 
Jong Il) Doesn't Take the World Seriously,"  as "despite 
international pressure, he tested and exploded a nuclear bomb the 
size of the bomb that hit Hiroshima."  Mainstream Haberturk reports 
in "Kim's Bomb Explodes," that "the bomb rocked the region with a 
4.7 magnitude earthquake as the test also struck an earthquake in 
the world's reactions to the test."  Mainstream Hurriyet headlines, 
"An Atomic Surprise," and reports, "A surprise came from North Korea 
as the Obama administration is working to dissuade Iran from its 
nuclear program."  Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "A Nuclear 
Earthquake," and reports, "Alarms rang out across the world 
yesterday as North Korea launched a nuclear test," and "informed the 
U.S. one hour before the test."  Liberal Radikal writes in 
"Pyongyang's Nuclear Gamble," that, "South Korea, Japan, and the 
entire international community is on alert," and, "Obama calls for 
action."  Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines, "North Korea's Second 
Nuclear Test Incites The World," and the paper reports, "Several 
countries, with the U.S. in the lead, condemned the test."  Leftist 
Taraf headlines, "The Whole World Set Their Eyes on North Korea." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak notes, "U.S. President Barack Obama 
called the test 'an act of defiance.'"  NTV reports "North Korea is 
not heeding the world's condemnation" as "North Korea fired more 
test missiles today." 
 
Sami Kohen writes in Milliyet in "The World's Nuclear Impasse," that 
"The international community is facing an impasse given North 
Korea's nuclear test.  The Kim Jong-Il regime apparently considers 
nuclear weapons as an insurance to its power as well as its 
security, and is willing to pursue this approach at all costs.  The 
international community has tried both negotiations and sanctions, 
but neither worked.  This time, once again, the UNSC may issue a 
resolution and North Korea will once again ignore it.  Because all 
possible methods have been used so far and there are not many 
options left, the world is facing an impasse and North Korea is 
moving toward joining the Atomic Club."  Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in 
mainstream Hurriyet, "North Korea, despite all the international 
efforts, is moving toward being a nuclear power.  And, this recent 
development will encourage Iran even more than before.  At this 
point, Israel's concern about Iran's nuclear capacity is 
justifiable. Israel was arguing that Iran continued to work toward 
its nuclear ambitions while pretending to be a part of nuclear 
talks.  It looks like North Korea was doing the same." 
 
Editorial Commentary on North Korea 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "North Korea, despite 
all the international efforts, is moving toward being a nuclear 
power.  The recent development will encourage Iran even more than 
before.  At this point, Israel's worry about Iran's nuclear power 
becomes justifiable. Israel was claiming that Iran continues to work 
for nuclear power while pretending to be a part of nuclear talks. 
It looks like North Korea was doing the same." 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The international 
community is facing an impasse given North Korea's nuclear test. 
The Kim Jong-il regime apparently considers nuclear weapons as an 
insurance to its power as well as its security, and is willing to 
pursue this approach at all costs.  International community tried 
both negotiations and sanctions which none worked.  This time, once 
again, UNSC may issue a resolution and North Korea will once again 
ignore it.  Because all possible methods are used so far and not 
many options left, the world is facing an impasse and the North 
Korea is moving toward joining the Atom Club." 
 
Davutoglu Visits Baku 
Media outlets report Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, in Baku for a 
 
ANKARA 00000747  002 OF 004 
 
 
two-day official visit, will discuss bilateral issues relations and 
regional cooperation.  Mainstream Hurriyet reported Monday FM Ahmet 
Davutoglu as saying late Sunday that the OSCE Minsk Group has failed 
to make progress toward a solution of the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute. 
Davutoglu added it was hard to disagree with Azerbaijani President 
Aliyev, who recently criticized the performance of the Minsk Group. 
"The records show there has been no progress.  It's time to revive 
this process.  Turkey will continue its efforts," Davutoglu said. 
Davutoglu also said Aliyev and Armenian President Sargsyan would 
meet on numerous occasions over the coming period.  Davutoglu went 
to Baku on Monday to meet Aliyev and Azerbaijani FM Elmar 
Mammadyarov. 
 
'Landmines on Turkey-Syria-Iraq Border' Controversy Grows 
Media outlets report the parliament will continue this week debating 
a controversial draft bill on the "demining" of Turkey's border 
areas with Syria.  The ruling AKP government wants the sweeping to 
be done by private companies whereas opposition CHP and MHP want the 
Turkish military to handle it.  Over the weekend, opposition parties 
spoke against the "lease" of the swept areas "for 44 years" to the 
company that removes the landmines.  MHP deputy group chief Oktay 
Vural said yesterday his party was not against the removal of 
landmines, but only opposed the lease of the territories to 
foreigners.  Vural said the swept lands should be given to local 
people who are in need. 
 
Military spokesman General Metin Gurak said last week the vast 
border area could not be cleared with the Turkish military's 
equipment alone, adding modern mine clearance equipment as well as 
specially trained personnel was needed.  Gurak said NATO's 
Maintenance and Supply Agency (NAMSA) could be considered for the 
sweep.  Government officials say landslides and floods invalidated 
the old maps showing landmine locations -- one of the reasons why 
the reason the military cannot do the job.  Last week, Prime 
Minister Erdogan told deputies that the government was working in 
coordination with the TGS and said a bidding process for the sweep 
would begin only after the law was passed by the parliament.  The 
"landmine zone" begins in Hatay in the south and extends through 
Kilis, Gaziantep, Sanliurfa and Mardin before ending at Sirnak in 
the mainly Kurdish southeast.  The 178.5 square-kilometer area 
stretches for 510 km in length, and is estimated to have around 
600,000 landmines.  Turkey is obligated to have all landmines 
cleared by 2014, according to a 1993 international accord signed in 
Ottawa. 
 
Erdogan's Remarks on 'Ethnic Identities' Draw Support, Criticism 
Media outlets report minorities and several communities in Turkey 
"reacted positively" to PM Erdogan, who has stated over the weekend 
"In the past, people who come from different ethnic identities were 
banished from Turkey; this had been a fascistic attitude." 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Silvyo Ovadya, the head of the Jewish 
community in Turkey, lauded Erdogan for "telling the truth."  The 
Greek Orthodox Patriarchate spokesman Dositheos Anagnostopoulos said 
Erdogan's had been a "brave approach," but that "concrete steps" 
should follow it.  Hurriyet reports Greek dailies took Erdogan's 
remarks to their headlines, some saying the Turkish PM's words were 
"historic confessions and self-criticism." 
 
Energy Minister Yildiz to Travel to Iraq, the US 
Mainstream Sabah report Energy Minister Taner Yildiz will travel 
Wednesday to Baghdad to come together with the electricity ministers 
from Iran, Iraq and Syria.  In the "summit meeting," Yildiz will 
discuss with the ministers from Turkey's neighbors "cooperation" in 
oil, natural gas and electricity issues.  Following his visit to 
Iraq, Yildiz is expected to travel to the US, according to Sabah. 
 
Football Diplomacy and Diplomatic Inroads Between the U.S. and Iran 
 
Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "From Ahmadinejad to Obama: Come, 
Let's Discuss," and reports, "Yesterday Iranian President 
 
ANKARA 00000747  003 OF 004 
 
 
Ahmadinejad invited President Obama to discuss the world's 
problems."  In "Let's Discuss the World with Obama," mainstream 
Haberturk reports, "Ahmadinejad said he is ready to take up the 
world's problems with Obama."  Meanwhile, leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports in "Football Diplomacy with Iran," that "Iran has 
accepted the U.S. Soccer Federations offer for a 'friendship match'" 
to take place at Tehran's Azadi Stadium, which holds up to 100,000 
people. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey/IMF 
 
Gungor Uras wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "It seems the government 
is very reluctant to conclude a deal with the IMF and is doing its 
best with time gaining tactics.  Can Turkey really survive without 
the IMF credits?  The answer can be positive if the government 
implements a new policy based on restructuring economy and measures 
for sustainable deficit." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "The government 
has not yet concluded an agreement with the IMF but working on new 
projects to revitalize economy.  All of these projects are based on 
lifting up economic data by promoting domestic demand.  Obviously 
extra funding is necessary to implement such projects.  If IMF is 
not going to be source, who is going to be?  The minister in charge 
of economy needs to address this dilemma." 
 
Aydin Ayaydin wrote in mainstream Vatan: "If the AKP government 
makes a deal with IMF, it will have to implement fiscal discipline 
and belt-tightening measures which will not be a helpful way to be 
popular at the upcoming general elections.  It seems the government 
tends to gain time without IMF until after the elections.  Needless 
to say, the consequences in post-elections period will be more 
severe than before." 
 
Nazif Gurdogan wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak (5/24): "The 
global economic crisis has changed the way of thinking about 
economic models.  During this crisis, supply and demand trend has 
shifted from superficial needs to genuine needs.  Correct planning 
at the right time offers a good thing to turn crisis into 
opportunities." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan will travel to Greece on June 20 to attend 
the opening of the new Acropolis Museum.  On June 25, Erdogan will 
visit Albania. 
 
- Turkey's special Iraq envoy Murat Ozcelik has been posted to 
Baghdad as Turkey's new ambassador in Iraq. 
 
- On Tuesday, President Abdullah Gul will travel to Kyrgyzstan for a 
two day official visit. 
 
- On Wednesday, opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal will kick off a 
tour of the mainly Kurdish southeastern provinces. 
 
- Abdullatif Sener, a former cabinet minister in the first AKP 
government, founded yesterday a new political party - "Turkey 
Party."  Sener said his party would be a "democratic and centrist" 
one. 
 
- On Tuesday, Prime Minister Erdogan and TGS Chief General Basbug 
will observe the Turkish military's scheduled war games, the Efes 
2009 military exercises in Izmir. 
 
World 
 
- Xavier Bertrand, Secretary General of the French ruling party UMP, 
 
ANKARA 00000747  004 OF 004 
 
 
says they were against the EU accession of Turkey in the short, 
medium and long term. 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Demetris Christofias says Turkey cannot join 
the EU as long as Turkey's occupation of Cyprus continues. 
 
- Cem Ozdemir, the co-chair of the German Green Party, voiced 
confidence that visa requirements for Turkish visitors would be 
removed completely. 
 
- The trial of the DHKP-C (Dev-Sol) militants starts in the Belgian 
Court of Appeals. 
 
- International rating companies say a deal with the IMF would have 
no impact on Turkey's credit rating. 
 
- The French branch of the Church of Scientology is about to go on 
trial in Paris to face charges of "organized fraud." 
 
JEFFREY