09ANKARA803
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2916
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0803/01 1591037
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081037Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9846
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0088
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5840
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3911
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7353
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7235
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3815
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, JUNE 8, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Davutoglu Meet in Washington 
Papers reported Saturday Secretary Clinton said late Friday after 
meeting Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu that the U.S. was "very 
encouraged" by the progress in the Turkey-Armenia normalization 
process.  Clinton said she "sees commitment on both sides," but 
acknowledged the process was "difficult and required patience as 
well as perseverance."  Davutoglu thanked to Clinton and the U.S. 
government for their support  in the normalization processes as well 
as the resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.  "Turkey is 
optimistic to achieve a prosperous and peaceful Caucasus region," 
said Davutoglu.  He added, "We are fully committed to our 
normalization process with Armenia, and also, we are ready to work 
together with the U.S. and other co-chairs of the Minsk Group for 
the resolution of the Armenian-Azeri issues." 
 
Monday papers report FM Davutoglu will visit Pakistan on June 9-10 
and Afghanistan from June 11-13.  Papers expect Turkey to provide 
counter-insurgency training for Pakistan's military. 
 
Europe Says "Right" (Milliyet) 
Media outlets are closely following the results of this weekend's 
elections in the EU, with many from the right to the left, from the 
secularists to the Islamists, speculating the political right's 
gains will adversely affect Turkey's EU bid and Turkey's 
relationship with the EU.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in, "The 
Pro-Turkey European Left Melts Away," that, "Racist parties in the 
Netherlands and in Austria who oppose Turkey's membership to the EU 
and who oppose Islam were hugely successful," which the paper notes 
spells "bad news for Turkey."  In "The Far Right Rises in Europe," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet notes "the results of the elections 
demonstrate the rise of the far right in Europe, which is creating 
anxiety," as "opposition to Turkey's EU membership is on the rise." 
Mainstream Milliyet reports, "The far right made a huge explosion" 
in the European elections, which "is a negative development for 
Turkey." Murat Yetkin of liberal Radikal comments, "there is no 
ground for optimism about the future of Turkish ties to the EU." 
Meanwhile, some note the record-breaking low in voter turnout.  NTV 
reports, "In Europe, voter participation drops as support for the 
right increases."  Mainstream Haberturk reports in "The EU's Turkey 
Election," that "the EU parliamentary elections debated internal 
issues and the effects of the economic crisis, as well as Turkey's 
EU membership," as "voter participation fell to a ten-year low." 
 
Obama and Sarkozy Differ on Turkey's EU Bid 
Media pay close attention to this weekend's public disagreement 
between President Obama and President Sarkozy over Turkey's EU 
membership.  During a press conference commemorating the 65th 
anniversary of D-Day, President Obama noted Turkey is "an important 
NATO ally" and "very valuable for the EU," while French President 
Sarkozy said, "We want Turkey to be a bridge between East and West," 
and "I told President Obama that it's very important for Europe to 
have borders. For me Europe is a force for stability in the world 
and I cannot allow that force for stabilization to be destroyed." 
Mainstreams Haberturk, Aksam, and Hurriyet report Obama later 
"shunned" a luncheon hosted by Sarkozy in Paris, with Aksam 
speculating that "France's objections to Turkey's EU entry played a 
role in this decision."  Omer Taspinar of mainstream Sabah comments, 
"only two days after Obama's Cairo speech Obama sparred with Sarkozy 
in France," over Turkey's EU bid, which is an indication of the 
U.S.-Turkey "model partnership" and the commentator notes, "Obama 
must continue to lobby for Turkey."  Mainstream Haberturk also 
reports, "Obama and Sarkozy can agree on many other things," but 
"they cannot agree on Turkey."  Liberal Radikal says, "the recent 
disagreement between Obama and Sarkozy demonstrates the tensions 
between Turkey and the EU." 
 
Turkey-Iraq Discuss Closure of Makhmur Refugee Camp (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet reports Saturday that during the last two visits 
 
ANKARA 00000803  002 OF 003 
 
 
of the Turkish Interior Minister Besir Atalay to Iraq, and during 
the visit of an Iraqi diplomatic delegation to Ankara, Turkey and 
Iraq have agreed to close the Makhmur camp in northern Iraq, which 
was used to extend logistical support to the PKK.  On Wednesday, 
representatives of the Prime Ministry, the Interior Ministry, the 
Foreign Ministry, the Health Ministry, the military General Staff 
(TGS), the intelligence service MIT, the Gendarme Command and police 
came together to discuss the issue.  At the meeting, the officials 
agreed to determine the number of Turkish and other refugees in the 
camp, and to gather information about the refugees willing to return 
to Turkey, according to Milliyet. 
 
Ankara Minor Criminal Court Freezes the Assets of RTUK Chair Zahid 
Akman 
Weekend papers reported that the Ankara Chief Prosecutor's office 
requested the court freeze the assets of 18 people, including RTUK 
Chair Zahid Akman, under the Deniz Feneri investigation.  Following 
this request, the Ankara Minor Criminal Court ordered the assets of 
all those who were mentioned in the investigation related to the 
German based Deniz Feneri, including Zahid Akman and Kanal 7 
President Zekeriya Karaman, frozen.  The process will be implemented 
by the Directorate General of Title Deed Records, directorates of 
vehicle registration and the offices of commercial records.  Earlier 
there were allegations that 18 people whose names were mentioned in 
the investigation were moving their assets out of the country by 
reducing their shares in companies where they were partners. 
 
Local Elections Repeated in Several Towns 
Sabah, Vatan, Radikal, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Zaman and others:  Local 
elections were repeated in 30 towns on Sunday upon a decision of the 
High Electoral Board (YSK).  The ruling AK Party won 12 mayoral 
seats, main opposition CHP won 10 seats, MHP two seats, DP three 
seats, DTP and Anavatan won one seat each.  Mainstream Sabah reports 
that the AKP and DTP supporters clashed in Mardin's Nusaybin town. 
9 people, six of them soldiers, were injured during the clashes. 
 
Lebanon Elections 
Media report the results in Lebanon show the hotly contested race 
has resulted in a victory of those backing the West over those 
backing Hezbollah.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "Critical 
Elections in Lebanon Take Place in A Peaceful Atmosphere."  In 
"Critical Elections in Lebanon," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "the elections amounted to a struggle between supporters of 
the West and supporters of Hezbollah."  Mainstream Milliyet reports 
in "A  Hariri Surprise in Lebanon," that "Pro-West candidate Saad 
Hariri has declared victory" and "Hezbollah has accepted defeat." 
CNN Turk headlines, "Victory for the Pro- West March 14th Movement," 
and notes, "In the race between pro-Iran and pro-Syria Hezbollah and 
pro-West parties, Saad Hariri's pro-West March 14th movement has 
won." 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Obama's Cairo Speech 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The timing as well as the 
venue of Obama's message regarding Washington's strong support for 
Turkey's accession to the European Union has been noticeably 
important.  President Obama reiterated this policy commitment at the 
anniversary of the D-Day invasion in Normandy.  There are quite 
number of European circles who believe that the U.S. has nothing to 
do with their affairs.  The message in France was basically a good 
response to these circles as well.  Ankara meanwhile should notice 
the importance of Washington's support and make use of it." 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "President Obama's Cairo 
address was a clear indication to the entire world as he described a 
brand new page in relations with the Islamic world.  Peace and 
justice will be the main motives in shaping Washington's policy line 
toward the Islamic world.  Meanwhile his message in France while he 
and Sarkozy did not agree with each other was also very important 
one.  President Obama was telling not only France but all of Europe 
 
ANKARA 00000803  003 OF 003 
 
 
that Turkey's EU accession would be the best answer against the 
conflict of civilization theory." 
 
Ali Bulac wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Those who supported the 
American military presence in Iraq are now applauding President 
Obama's message in Cairo.  When the two most recent speeches, in 
Ankara and Cairo, are put together there is a clear picture of how 
the U.S. considers and shapes Turkey's future.  Turkey will be 
placed in the Western alliance strongly to accomplish duties shaped 
by the powers and will not be allowed to form any union with Islamic 
world.  Domestically, Turkey will be shaped based on an encouraged 
secularism with Islam regardless of whether the two can match or 
not." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Even though 
President Obama gave very important support for Turkey's EU 
accession, the recent visit by EU Commissioner Olli Rehn to 
Washington highlighted the other side of the coin.  As Rehn 
expressed clearly to the American government officials, Turkey 
should not blame only Europeans for being reluctant on the accession 
process because Ankara has failed on fulfilling major policy 
harmonization.  The EU circles are confused even more when Turkey's 
foreign minister and the minister in charge of EU affairs do not 
speak the same language." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- On Sunday, one village guard was killed and two others were 
wounded when a landmine believed to have been planted by the PKK 
went off in Uludere in the province of Sirnak. 
 
- The Economy Coordination Board will decide whether to extend the 
tax incentives in the automotive industry and other sectors. 
 
- On Sunday, State Minister for women and family, Selma Aliye Kavaf, 
joined a dinner of the Fettullah Gulen sect in Denizli. 
 
- On Monday, NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer will pay a 
farewell visit to Turkey before handing over his post to Andres Fogh 
Rasmussen. 
 
World 
 
- Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou said Nicosia was 
examining 'alternative scenarios' about the EU summit in December 
when the EU will review Turkey's EU entry bid. 
 
- Iraq calls on Turkey to release more water down the Euphrates 
River. 
 
- Secretary Clinton warns that the Obama administration is 
considering placing North Korea back on the list of states that 
sponsor terrorism. 
 
- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu says that that he plans 
to deliver a major speech on his foreign policy this week. 
 
JEFFREY