09ANKARA1262
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3105
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1262/01 2381016
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261016Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0644
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0277
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6201
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4116
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7519
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7407
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3991
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001262 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 26, 2009 
 
ANKARA 00001262  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Basbug: Government Must Take Economic, Social Measures To Beat 
Terror 
Media outlets report the Chief of the military General Staff (TGS) 
General Ilker Basbug said in a statement posted on the TGS webpage 
that Turkey was a "unitary state," and that Turkish was the official 
language of the country.  The message was posted on the occasion of 
August 30 Victory Day.  Basbug made it clear that Turkish military 
would not engage in any activity that might lead to direct or 
indirect contact with the terrorist PKK or its supporters.  Papers 
note the statement came after the criticism raised by the opposition 
on the latest National Security Council (MGK) declaration which 
backed the government's "democratization package" that aims to 
address the Kurdish question. 
 
In response to the  criticism that came from the opposition and the 
media that the MGK declaration was a "tacit approval of holding 
contacts with the Kurdish DTP," Basbug said TSK would not accept 
"those who enjoy the privileges of the democratic system" (i.e., the 
pro-Kurdish DTP) showing tolerance to the terrorists who target 
innocent civilians."  Basbug stressed the Turkish military was "a 
side" when it came to the defense of the nation state and its 
unitary structure.  "While the army continues its fight against the 
terrorist organization, it is important for the government to take 
measures in economic, social and cultural areas in order to 
eradicate terrorism," said Basbug.  On the "democratization package" 
of the government, Basbug said the right to freely discuss issues 
should not contain elements that could jeopardize the existence of 
the state, or drive Turkey toward separation. 
 
Reactions to Basbug's Statement 
Papers report the ruling AKP deputy group chief Bekir Bozbag said 
Basbug's message was "positive."  Bozbag commented that the 
constitution has its "red lines" concerning the extent of possible 
reforms.  Bozbag noted the TGS Chief's message was directed both 
toward the government and the opposition.  Opposition CHP deputy 
group chief Kemal Anadol said that in his message concerning the 
Kurdish initiative, General Basbug emphasized important points, but 
expressed regret that such sensitivity was not seen at the MGK 
meeting.  MHP deputy group chairman Mehmet Sandir said Basbug's 
remarks on the Kurdish initiative were positive.  Sandir said, "He 
declared what is obvious.  With this statement, the government's 
Kurdish initiative is over -- insistence on its continuation would 
be tantamount to separatism."  Kurdish party DTP deputy group 
chairmen Gulten Kisanak and Selahattin Demirtas issued a statement 
in reaction to the statements of Basbug and the AKP's Bekir Bozdag. 
The DTP statement said Basbug and Bozbag's remarks show that the 
'Kurdish initiative' is "not anything outside the official 
rhetoric." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the TGS Statement/Kurdish Issue 
 
Mustafa Unal wrote in Islamist-oriented/intellectual Zaman: 
Opposition parties CHP and MHP exerted extra efforts to pull the 
military into the field of debates over the government's Kurdish 
initiative.  They successfully provoked the military and forced them 
to speak.   Chief of General Staff General Basbug, as a custom, was 
going to talk during the "Victory week", anyway.  Bahceli and Baykal 
were definitely aware of the timing.  General Basbug, in order to 
respond the accusations by CHP, MHP and DTP, adjust the timing of 
his speech to an earlier time.  Usually these speeches are not 
limited with the great Victory but usually cover the issues on the 
regime, secularism and other sensitive issues.  This time, all his 
messages were referring to the government's Kurdish initiative. 
Both opposition parties CHP and MHP were satisfied with General 
Basbug's messages and they said that the Turkish General Staff (TGS) 
was objecting the government's opening.  AKP deputy Bozdag, however, 
said "Basbug declared that the opening is a state policy."  Who is 
right?  As a matter of fact, Basbug's words on the constitution's 
unchangeable principles, are not any different than the words of the 
 
ANKARA 00001262  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
architects of the initiative, President Gul and Prime Minister 
Erdogan.  They all say "single state, single nation, single flag and 
single homeland."  Even though the military is not completely out of 
it but, the democratic opening is mainly an issue for the politics. 
Maybe it is not possible for the CHP and the MHP to pursue politics 
without the military, but this is not possible in the democracies. 
They have to be contented with the speech only." 
 
Mehmet Barlas wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Once again, General 
Basbug directed the politics.  If the opposition parties had said 
the same things as Basbug, the government would be very angry but 
just because the direction came from the military, the same 
government said "our opinions match, besides, our constitution has 
already determined all these red lines."  There is this general 
belief in Turkey that the civilians cannot determine the important 
issues of the politics.  Now, following the TGS statement, the 
spokespersons of the opposition parties can be listened." 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Turkey should not miss 
the opportunity now to resolve the Kurdish issue.  This issue 
created serious problems for Turkey in foreign politics, especially 
in the relationship with its allies and neighbors, for years.  If 
the issue is resolved through this democratic move, Turkey will be 
revived in this arena also and moreover, a solution will open the 
doors for Turkey as a regional power." 
 
Can Atakli wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "With yesterday's statement, 
the TGS gave the message that other than the red lines, they will 
not object to the Kurdish initiative.  If the government pays 
attention to this kindness and evaluates the opening within this 
framework, the tensions in the country will decrease and the 
military will be saved from unfair accusations. " 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal Radikal:  "If the Kurdish initiative, 
which is referred as 'the state project' by the interior minister 
Besir Atalay, is controlled by President Gul above the level of the 
political parties, it will ease the tension of  PM Erdogan.  The 
government, should accept the fact that at this point, their 
interlocutor is the CHP because this is the natural way of politics. 
 Therefore, Erdogan should soon change his methods before the public 
starts thinking that the solution will not be reached again." 
 
DTP To Announce Ocalan's 'Roadmap' September 1 
Media outlets report that on September 1 World Peace Day, Kurdish 
party DTP will hold a rally in Diyarbakir, to which one million 
people are expected to join.  DTP's Diyarbakir provincial head Firat 
Anli said that on the same day, the DTP plans to make public a 
"roadmap" outlined by the PKK's imprisoned leader Abdullah Ocalan 
for the resolution of the Kurdish question. 
 
U.S. To Deport PKK's Parlak (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports the Federal Appeals Court in Cincinnati 
approved the "deportation" of Ibrahim Parlak, a Turk suspected of 
being a PKK member, who has resided in the U.S. since 1991.  Parlak 
allegedly did not declare his ties with the PKK during his Green 
Card application in 1993.  He was convicted of being involved in the 
killing of two Turkish soldiers, and a served prison sentence in 
Turkey.  Senator Carl Levin and Representative Fred Upton have 
submitted a bill for Parlak to be given Green Card, according to 
Hurriyet. 
 
Friends of Pakistan Meeting 
Media hail yesterday's meeting in Istanbul of the Friends of A 
Democratic Pakistan as establishing a "Marshall Plan" for the 
country.  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "Support to Pakistan Will 
Continue." Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines, "A Marshall Plan 
for Pakistan," and the paper reports, "The historic summit sought to 
provide support to the rebuilding of Pakistan after it has been 
ravaged by its war on terror."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports in "A Marshal Plan for Pakistan," that, "The Makaland 
Project seeks to rebuild (Pakistan) in order to re-establish 
 
ANKARA 00001262  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
stability after two million people were displaced by clashes with 
the Taliban." 
 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Foreign Minister Davutoglu gave a 
harsh response to a question that Ankara's support to Islamabad 
depends on negotiations with the U.S. on Iraq, saying such comments 
were "extremely irrational," and that there was no need for a third 
country in order to improve ties with Pakistan.  Leftist Taraf 
reports Holbrooke said in response to a question that every country 
would decide on its own regarding sending combat troops to 
Afghanistan.  Mainstream Aksam reports Holbrooke said he spoke with 
President Karzai about the Taliban's young recruits at the age of 
13-14.  "If he's reelected," said Holbrooke, "Karzai said he would 
place among his priorities a general amnesty for young Taliban 
militants." 
 
Holbrooke on NTV 
Media note Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan 
Richard Holbrooke spoke with NTV last night regarding the NATO 
operations in Afghanistan; most note Holbrooke refused to compare 
Turkey's current Kurdish Initiative to the situation in the former 
Yugoslavia prior to its breakup.  Mainstream Haberturk reports, 
"Holbrooke: Turkey Cannot Be A Second Yugoslavia," and the article 
notes, "Holbrooke, the architect of the plan to bring peace to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina by dividing it up into independent states," said, 
"Turkey does not compare to Yugoslavia."  The paper notes that 
Turkish opposition CHP Leader Deniz Baykal recently criticized the 
government's plan to address Turkey's Kurdish issue by saying 
"Turkey could turn into a former Yugoslavia."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
carries the front page headline, "There Is No Comparison Between 
Turkey and Yugoslavia," and the article notes U.S diplomat Richard 
Holbrooke said at a meeting at the Ciragan Palace in Istanbul, 
"Former Yugoslavia was founded when the Treaty of Versailles was 
signed following World War I. Too many diverse peoples were put in 
one place (in Yugoslavia). Turkey is a great country founded by the 
great leader Ataturk. There are no similarities." 
A Documented Torture Confession from The CIA (Haberturk) 
Mainstream Hurriyet headlines, "A Super Prosecutor for The CIA," and 
the paper calls U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder's newly appointed 
special prosecutor John Durham, "a super prosecutor." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The CIA Torture Report Is 
Published Censored," as "The administration has begun a debate on 
the treatment of terror suspects," and "Dick Cheney reacted to the 
report."  Liberal Radikal notes, "Obama Bludgeons the CIA," as 
"Cheney charges Obama with putting the country at risk." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "The Investigation Into the CIA 
Angers Cheney."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines, "An 
Independent Prosecutor Investigates The CIA," and the article notes, 
"Attorney General Eric Holder has announced an investigation into 
whether the treatment of terror suspects violated laws," as "the 
report indicates interrogators threatened to kill children," of some 
suspects. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- On Wednesday, President Gul and Prime Minister Erdogan will hold 
separate meetings with Robert Wexler, visiting co-chair of the U.S. 
Senate Turkey Friendship Group. 
 
- Culture Minister Ertugrul Gunay said there were no plans to pardon 
the PKK's imprisoned leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
- Deputy Prime Minister Ali Babacan expressed concern about the 
gapping budget deficit, and warned that Turkey needs to "tighten its 
belt." 
 
- Batman governor Ahmet Turhan has recruited Kurdish-speaking 
bodyguards to boost dialogue with local people in the province of 
Batman. 
 
ANKARA 00001262  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
- The Health Ministry has decided to close down a special smoking 
section which was opened at Istanbul's Ataturk Airport. 
 
- Istanbul Municipality is restoring the 178-year old St. Dimitrios 
Church in Silivri district so that it can be converted into a 
mosque. 
 
World 
 
- Iraq and Syria recalled their ambassadors in a diplomatic crisis 
sparked by Iraqi accusations that Damascus is sheltering insurgents 
who carried out last week's truck bombings in Baghdad that killed 
101 people. 
 
- Taliban commander Waliur Rehman said the leader of the Pakistani 
Taliban, Baitullah Mehsud, has died of injuries sustained in a U.S. 
missile strike earlier this month. 
 
- Eight people are killed in a huge blast in the Afghan city of 
Kandahar.  The blast is caused by five car bombs strung together. 
 
- President Obama nominates Ben Bernanke for a second four-year term 
as the head of the Federal Reserve. 
 
- South Korea attempts to complete its first space launch today, a 
week after aborting the mission minutes before liftoff because a 
technical malfunction. 
 
JEFFREY