09ANKARA557
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0293
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0557/01 1051158
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151158Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9423
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9601
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5627
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3758
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7234
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7112
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3690
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 000557 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
 
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 15, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
A Call to Turkey in an Armenian Report (CNN Turk) 
Media report the International Crisis Group issued a report 
recommending that Turkey "not miss the opportunity" to normalize 
relations with Armenia.  Mainstream Milliyet reports in, "Don't Miss 
the Opportunity with Armenia," that the Brussels-based think tank 
"stressed the importance of supporting the normalization process 
with Armenia."  Leftist Taraf calls the report "A 'Don't Miss This 
Opportunity' Recommendation to Turkey."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports "The ICG told Ankara to persuade Baku and to not 
miss out on the opportunity with Armenia," and the ICG report warned 
U.S. President Barack Obama "to be cautious." 
 
In a related article, Milliyet headlines, "The Opposition Went, But 
the AKP Is Not Going to Baku," and notes, "parliamentarians from the 
CHP and MHP joined a meeting in Baku today on the topic of 
Turkey-Azerbaijan relations, but the AKP decided not to join," while 
the Head of the Turkey-Azerbaijan Friendship Group Mustafa Kabakci 
(of the ruling AKP)  in parliament said "we didn't give any 
promises" and "the invitation was not addressed solely to me, but to 
the Turkey-Azerbaijan Friendship Group."  Far right Ortadogu reports 
"The AKP said 'yes' to Armenia and 'no' to its brother," and 
'brother' here is referring to Azerbaijan.  Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak reports "After the tensions that developed last week, a group 
of Azeri women parliamentarians is in Ankara today for a very 
important visit," to "discuss bilateral relations with President 
Gul, Speaker of the Parliament Toptan, and other AKP party leaders." 
 
 
Meanwhile, Leftist Taraf reports British outlet The Times commented 
"Opening the Turkey-Armenian border will cause Turkey to become a 
major power in the Caucasus and Central Asia," as "The last piece of 
the iron curtain is falling" because, "the ice is melting between 
Armenia and Turkey."  Mainstream Star reports, "In a good will 
gesture to Armenia, Turkey will open the border with Armenia once 
per week" and this gate opening will mean that "Armenia can take a 
breath of relief for its economy." 
 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in "Yerevan Abandons Territorial 
Claims," that "sources in Yerevan indicate Armenia will no longer 
seek territorial claims from Turkey" and "Yerevan has given the 
green light to setting up an historical commission to examine the 
events of 1915." Zaman adds "it will take years before the committee 
begins fully working after its establishment." But Zaman notes, "By 
agreeing to set up a committee of historians, Yerevan would have 
accepted that the events of 1915 constitute an 'historical problem' 
rather than a political or legal problem."  An agreement between 
Turkey and Armenia will be announced in a third country, probably 
Switzerland, according to Zaman. 
 
Gul, Baykal, Bahceli on Turkey-Armenia 
Media outlets report that before departing for Bahrain on Tuesday, 
President Abdullah Gul spoke to reporters regarding Turkey's Armenia 
initiative.  "It's not appropriate diplomatically to discuss these 
issues openly in front of the cameras.  While we are talking to 
Armenians to resolve the differences, Turkey is also working toward 
a resolution to the problems between Azerbaijan and Armenia.  Our 
desire is stability in the Caucasus," said Gul. 
 
Addressing his party group yesterday, the main opposition CHP leader 
Deniz Baykal blamed the ruling AKP for making "some promises behind 
the curtains" on Armenia.  "They tell us to open the border.  If we 
open the border, the Armenian occupation of Nagorno Karabakh will 
gain legitimacy.  How can those ruling Turkey accept that?" asked 
Baykal.  Baykal stressed Turkey "must be in solidarity with 
Azerbaijan," noting that "energy cooperation could be jeopardized if 
the border with Armenia opens." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000557  002 OF 005 
 
 
Opposition far right MHP chairman Devlet Bahceli said "No one has 
the power to open the border with Armenia unless the allegations 
based on the genocide lie are given up, the occupied 
Nagorno-Karabakh is returned to Azerbaijan, and territorial claims 
over Turkey are abandoned."  Bahceli claimed the normalization 
process with Armenia that began with President Gul's September visit 
to Yerevan reached a level making "unilateral concessions." 
 
Anti-PKK Operations Detain 51 in 12 Provinces in Turkey 
Media outlets report 51 people, including three pro-Kurdish DTP 
deputy provincial chairmen and three lawyers for Abdullah Ocalan, 
were taken into custody in 12 provinces, in operations initiated 
against the PKK by the Diyarbakir Prosecutor's Office.  The 
prosecutor's office said the people detained were the members of the 
PKK's "Turkey Working Group" and were accused of "organizing and 
leading the illegal actions of the PKK in Turkey."  Following a 
"technical pursuit" by police that lasted for one year, operations 
were staged on 57 places in 15 provinces --mostly in Diyarbakir.  51 
people including three deputy chairmen of Democratic Society Party, 
or DTP, as well as three lawyers of Abdullah Ocalan, head of PKK 
terrorist organization, were taken into custody. 
 
Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP Chairman Ahmet Turk said the 
operation was the "manifestation of the AKP government's intolerance 
to the local election results."  "Our friends must be set free.  The 
PKK's declaration of 'inaction' until June 1 is a good opportunity 
for Turkey," said Turk.  The DTP deputy Emine Ayna said the 
operation was "very dangerous" and was "forcing people to seek ways 
other than politics" to address the Kurdish issue. 
 
Basbug Delivers 'Historic' Speech 
Media outlets report on Tuesday, the Chief of the military General 
Staff (TGS), General Ilker Basbug, issued "key messages" in his 
annual speech at the War Academy in Istanbul.  Basbug said the 
responsibilities of the military leaders were important, emphasizing 
"the concerns and recommendations of the military should be taken 
into consideration by the civilian authority."  "Of course, the 
final decision lies with the civilian authority.  Politicians, 
however, would be responsible for any outcome that may emerge from a 
failure to consider the sincere and realistic recommendations made 
by the military."  Basbug said "ill-intentioned groups" were 
carrying out smear campaigns to label the Turkish military as 
"anti-democratic and anti-religion."  "The army is made up of our 
people, and it has the same sensitivities our people have," said 
Basbug, adding the pious people in the country loved their army.  In 
"We Cannot Remain Indifferent to Sects," mainstream Milliyet reports 
Basbug as saying "religious sects" organized around interest groups 
could not be called "non-governmental organization."  "Some 
religious sects present themselves as a player in the democratic 
area, and that they have a strong position.  Such a perception, 
however, is misleading," emphasized Basbug. 
 
In "Surprise Opening," mainstream Sabah says that in his speech, 
Basbug put an emphasis on "the people of Turkey."  Basbug said "The 
people of Turkey who founded the Republic of Turkey are called the 
Turkish nation."  He noted the Turkish military was a "side" in the 
preservation of "nation-state" and "unitary state structures." 
Basbug also said the struggle against the outlawed PKK was "not an 
ethnic conflict."  Basbug underlined the Kurds live together with 
the rest of the nation and share a common future, and denied that 
the state implemented "assimilation policy" against the Kurds. 
"There's nothing wrong with the Kurds asking to enjoy their cultural 
rights but the appeal of the secondary identity should not dominate 
our common and upper identity," Basbug said.  Basbug said the 
"secondary identities," what he called "cultural freedoms," should 
be protected.  "But we cannot create new upper identities or 
minorities.  Otherwise we'll find ourselves in the position of Iraq, 
Lebanon and some Balkan countries," he said. 
 
Basbug described President Obama's praise for the Turkish model as 
something more than an effort to win the sympathy of Turks, saying 
 
ANKARA 00000557  003 OF 005 
 
 
it was actually an "attempt to solve the problems of the U.S. in the 
international arena."  "Secularism is the fundamental pillar of the 
founding philosophy of Turkey.  A modern republic can only be 
possible with democracy," said Basbug.  On the PKK and the problem 
of terror, Basbug said the "state must do some changes, with better 
implementation of the existing legal arrangements, in a way to 
separate the mountain cadres of the PKK from the organization." 
"Terrorists are human beings too," said Basbug.  "For us the 
important things is to capture them alive and bring them to 
justice." 
 
Editorial Commentary on General Basbug's Speech 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah:  " In his speech, General 
Basbug highlighted issues regarding counterterrorism, democracy, 
secularism and civilian-military ties.  He said 'the state should 
take measures to prevent people from joining the terrorist 
organization.  Arrangements should be made in the existing laws in 
order to divide the terrorist organization PKK.'  With these 
realistic and brave comments, General Basbug made the politicians' 
jobs easier.  I hope they will take Basbug's passing ball and score 
a goal." 
 
Taha Akyol wrote in mainstream Milliyet: " Basbug's remarks showed 
us all a new intellectual approach from the military." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in Milliyet:  "General Basbug gave warm messages 
to religious people and to Kurds, but rather harsh messages to 
religious sects for presenting themselves as though they are part of 
democratic life." 
 
Hikmet Cetinkaya wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet:  "General 
Basbug pulled the masks off the Fethullah Gulen supporters' faces by 
saying 'some religious sects are trying to shape our socio-political 
life.'  FG supporters view the military as the greatest obstacle to 
their ability to assume the most important positions of power in 
Turkey." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman:  General Basbug, in 
his speech yesterday, focused so much on domestic issues and 
home-security that he failed to mention global issues such as 
Israel's harsh policies, Iran's nuclear program, security problems 
in Iraq, NATO's mission, and the request for additional troops to 
Afghanistan.  All these issues are the military's responsibility and 
are all about Turkey's security." 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal Radikal:  "In his speech yesterday, 
General Basbug stressed openly that the Turkish military respects 
the constitution, the rule of law and democracy.  His remarks 
regarding the religious sects reflected the military's open distaste 
for the Fethullah Gulen community." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak:  "General 
Basbug delivered a positive speech yesterday in order to avoid 
tensions.  He touched political issues only through security issues. 
 Even though it will be wrong to call this "a new era" for the 
military, we can definitely note there are new balances in the 
military.  Nevertheless, in democratic countries TGS Chiefs do not 
deliver such ceremonial speeches via live TV broadcast.  Moreover, 
in democratic countries, such speeches have no impact on political 
balances." 
 
Baykal, Bahceli Criticize Latest 'Ergenekon' Detentions 
Media outlets report rising reactions to Monday's police searches at 
the offices of the Organization to Support Contemporary Life (CYDD) 
and at the house of the CYDD chairperson Professor Turkan Saylan, a 
respected figure of secular women in Turkey who has been helping 
girls to continue their education by giving monthly allowances to 
36,000 students.  Saylan's personal documents were seized in her 
house. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000557  004 OF 005 
 
 
The main opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal strongly criticized the 
latest wave of arrests made in the controversial 'Ergenekon' case. 
"This is terror, this is a coup d'etat," said Baykal.  "Coups are 
not always made by tanks, rifles and troops.  This is a coup by the 
ruling AKP.  In fact, it is also a coup by the prosecutors," Baykal 
told a meeting of his party group at the parliament.  Baykal said 
the Ergenekon case has been turned into a "symbol of horror."  "No 
one knows why members of the CYDD, the Baskent University Rector 
Mehmet Haberal and other rectors were detained, or why the house of 
Turkan Saylan was searched," emphasized Baykal.  Opposition MHP 
leader Devlet Bahceli said Turkey's laws were being "abused for 
political purposes."  "There's concern that the laws are being 
abused for political gain as well for oppressing people," said 
Bahceli. 
 
The Taliban Strikes Again in Afghanistan, Wins Zerdari's Approval 
for Sharia Law in Pakistan's Svat Region 
Media outlets note the Taliban is not going away - in fact their 
influence is clearly on the rise throughout Afghanistan and 
Pakistan.  Secularist outlets, in particular, pay attention to the 
Taliban's cold-blooded murder of a newly wedded couple in 
Afghanistan, along with Pakistan's decision to allow the Taliban to 
practice Sharia law in the Svat region.  Islamist outlets refrain 
from commenting on these developments.  Mainstream Milliyet reports 
in, "Pakistan is Becoming Talibanized," that "Washington is in 
shock" because the U.S. sees the peace accord between Pakistan and 
the Taliban as "undermining democracy and human rights." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines, "Zerdari Approves Sharia 
Law in Svat."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "A Taliban 
Lesson to Lovers," that "a young couple in Afghanistan was murdered 
by the Taliban after they were married," and "they eloped because 
the young wife's parents did not approve of her marriage."  CNN Turk 
reports in "Taliban Savagery" that "these two were lined up for a 
lesson" from the Taliban. 
 
Obama Extends A Hand to Cuba, Castro Complains It's Not Enough 
Media outlets comment that U.S. President Barack Obama is changing 
the U.S. approach to Cuba, but Fidel Castro is still trying to call 
the shots.  Far right Ortadogu headlines "Castro Wants a Lifting of 
the Blockade, not More Donations."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
headlines, "Cuba Doesn't Want Alms," and "Fidel Castro criticized 
the revised U.S. policy for not promising to lift the blockade." 
Liberal Radikal headlines "An Obama Hand to Cuba," and reports that 
Cuba "wants an end to  isolation."  Mainstream Sabah reports "A 
47-Year Old Law is Lifted," as "families are pleased that the travel 
restrictions have been lifted" but "Fidel Castro says 'We don't want 
the blockade.'" 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- An F-16 training jet that took off from its base in the western 
province of Balikesir crashed in the neighboring province of Bursa. 
The pilot could not be found in the wreckage site. 
 
- Turkey's budget deficit skyrocketed in the first three months of 
2009, increasing by 337 percent up to 19.1 billion TL.  The deficit 
was 8.7 billion TL in March. 
 
- Turkey's Treasury Undersecretariat said Tuesday the net 
international direct investments in Turkey went down 67.1 percent to 
USD 366 million in February over the same month of 2008, which were 
USD 1.1 billion in January. 
 
- The German experts brought to Turkey by the far right BPP 
determine that the March helicopter crash which killed party leader 
Muhsin Yazicioglu was caused by "adverse weather conditions." 
 
World 
 
 
ANKARA 00000557  005 OF 005 
 
 
- The Jerusalem Post reports the US and Israel will hold their 
largest joint missile defense drills later this year, testing three 
anti-ballistic missile defense systems. 
 
- Iranian President Ahmadinejad says Iran plans to launch another 
satellite into space despite concerns in the West over the launch of 
Iran's first domestically made satellite in February. 
 
- Prior to the April 19 general elections in Turkish Cyprus, 
'President' Mehmet Ali Talat traveled to Washington to meet with 
Secretary Clinton on Thursday. 
 
- North Korea orders International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
inspectors out of the country. 
 
JEFFREY