09ANKARA1218
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6101
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1218/01 2311124
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191124Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0582
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0259
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6176
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4097
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7503
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7391
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3973
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001218 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 19, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Atalay Meets DISK, TUSIAD Under 'Kurdish Initiative' 
Media outlets report that under the frame of the ruling AKP 
government's 'Kurdish Initiative,' Interior Minister Besir Atalay 
visited Tuesday the leftist labor union DISK and Turkey's leading 
business grouping TUSIAD.  Atalay said after his meeting with DISK 
officials, "This process, which is full of painful experiences, is 
not only the problem of the AKP or the government but is the 
responsibility of all of us."  Atalay later met with TUSIAD board 
members.  Speaking after the meeting, Atalay said the association 
had contributed to a number of social issues, adding the government 
attached significant importance to the contributions of TUSIAD. 
TUSIAD chairperson Arzuhan Dogan Yalcindag said the democratization 
process and public consensus were essential in solving the problem. 
 
 
Erdogan May Meet Baykal, Bahceli On 'Kurdish Move' (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet the AKP government will also consult its 
'Kurdish Initiative' with the military General Staff (TGS) and the 
National Security Council (MGK).  The issue will be discussed at the 
MGK meeting if requested by the military members of the council. 
The government has reportedly taken into consideration the messages 
coming from opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal, and sources say 
Prime Minister Erdogan was likely to meet Baykal as part of the 
"democratic move."  Erdogan may also meet Devlet Bahceli, leader of 
the MHP, after the party's congress scheduled in November, comments 
Hurriyet. 
 
CHP Holds 'Secret Talks' With Opinion Leaders On Kurdish Question 
(Zaman) 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says on its front page the opposition CHP 
has launched a "secret initiative" and that it meets with opinion 
leaders regarding Turkey's Kurdish question.  CHP met with over 20 
opinion leaders and tribal leaders last week, and will make public a 
report next week.  The last touches on the report will be made after 
examining the roadmap to be released by the PKK leader Ocalan, 
according to Zaman.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak says in spite of 
its criticism of Prime Minister Erdogan's recent meeting with the 
Kurdish DTP leader Ahmet Turk, CHP was now holding "secret meetings 
with the DTP.  In a meeting between the CHP's Kemal Kilicdaroglu and 
the DTP's Fatma Kurtulan, the AKP government's "democratic move" was 
discussed.  The DTP asked CHP to support the new process, says Yeni 
Safak. 
 
Ocalan's Road Map Will Be Revealed At Conrad Hotel 
Mainstream Vatan reports that jailed PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan's 
lawyers will go to Imrali today to collect Ocalan's "road map" for 
the Kurdish issue.  It has been learned that the lawyers are 
planning to have press conference at the Conrad Hotel in Istanbul 
tomorrow and press, including the foreign press have been informed 
about the event.   Reportedly,  Ocalan's lawyers contacted some 
other hotels for the press event arrangements but, none of the 
hotels accepted to host this event.  According to Kanal D, agreement 
with Conrad has not finalized yet but the media already started to 
get accredited to the event. 
 
President Gul Gives Message Of Unity 
All papers:  At a reception given by the Foreign Ministry, President 
Gul said that the country's unity was the top priority.  Gul 
interrupted a journalist's question regarding the road map of jailed 
PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan and said "Forget Imrali (where Ocalan is 
serving life imprisonment).  They are not our interlocutor.  Every 
country should solve its problem by itself.  Turkey's unitary 
structure must be strengthened as a result of all works under way, 
there should be no threat to this structure." 
 
Editorial Debate on Kurdish Initiative 
 
Taha Akyol wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "What imprisoned leader 
Ocalan has been talking about is about a project of division based 
 
ANKARA 00001218  002 OF 003 
 
 
on ethnic differences.  Instead of focusing on impossible ideas, the 
DTP and others should take the reaching out EU standards as a main 
goal to achieve which will certainly be a facilitative tool in this 
process." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The way Ocalan acts 
looks as if he is a commander with achieved victory who offers a 
peace plan.  This kind of approach, along with some inflammatory 
remarks by DTP members will not be helping the process at all. 
Instead PKK has started to sabotage it already." 
 
Hakan Albayrak wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "There are 
sensible statements coming from the DTP while Ocalan statements work 
in the opposite direction.  However it is a healthy thing to be able 
to discuss every opinion in a complete free platform.  This is the 
very time to address the Kurdish issue because it is backed by 
people strongly." 
 
Bejan Matur wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Turkey's Kurds are in 
a struggle for their existence which will make Turkey a more 
democratized country in the end.  This process will have an impact 
not only on Kurds' relations with the state but also it will 
transform relations of Alevis, religious and minority groups with 
the state.  In addition to that, Iraqi Kurds are also in need of 
getting closer to Turkey." 
 
Muharrem Sarikaya wrote in tabloid HaberTurk: "The best description 
regarding the Kurdish initiative came from Minister Babacan who 
underlined the parliament as the venue for solution process." 
 
Foreign Minister Davutoglu: "There Is No Special Request For 
Afghanistan" 
Mainstream Hurriyet quotes Foreign Minister Davutoglu as saying 
"Turkish military performs duties in Afghanistan under the ISAF. 
Naturally, when Turkey takes over the commanding duties, there will 
be an increase on the troop numbers.  However, there is absolutely 
no request received for the combatant troops to be sent to 
Afghanistan." 
 
Afghan Elections 
Media outlets note the elections in Afghanistan will be taking place 
under the shadows of the Taliban, terror, bombs, poverty, and 
weapons.  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "An Election in the Shadow of 
The Taliban," and the article reports, "The Afghan public is going 
to the polls for the second time to select a president," but, 
"However, the Taliban has killed 19 people in attacks over the past 
72 hours and they have threatened those who go to vote."  Sabah also 
comments, "A war-weary Afghanistan is electing a president amid the 
bombings."  Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "An Election in the 
Shadow of Terror," and notes, "The radically Islamist Taliban are 
hoping there will be a low turnout."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
headlines, "An Election in the Shadow of Weapons," and the paper 
notes, "Afghanistan has been at war for the last 30 years," and 
"Afghans are heading to the polls for the second time in the 
country's history." Mainstream Haberturk headlines sarcastically, 
"It's Democracy Time for Afghanistan," next to a photo of the 
wreckage from a suicide bomb in Kabul. 
 
Liberal Radikal carries a photo next to the headline, "This is The 
Afghanistan-Type Electoral System." 
 
Next to this photo, mainstream Haberturk headlines, "It's Democracy 
Time for Afghanistan." 
 
Khamenei: "Muslims - Let's Unite, Mahdi Is Coming" (Radikal) 
Media outlets note Iran's religious leader has called on the Muslim 
world to form an army in anticipation of the coming of Mahdi, 
Islam's messianic savior.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports on its front 
page that Iran's Ali Hosseini-Khamenei called on "Muslim countries" 
including Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, to 
"unite and form an army" for the "imminent coming" of Islam's 
 
ANKARA 00001218  003 OF 003 
 
 
messianic savior, Mahdi.  Hurriyet notes "Khamanei made a call to 
the Islamic World," to "fight the U.S. and Israel." 
 
U.S. Prepares A New Peace Plan for A Palestinian State (Zaman) 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Barack Obama has a new plan to 
solve the crisis in the Middle East," as Israel's PM Netanyahu is 
considering "an un-armed Palestinian state" in which "Jerusalem will 
be a capital shared between Palestine and Israel." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines, "A Plan for An Unarmed 
Palestine," and notes, "Washington is greeting (Egyptian President) 
Mubarek by preparing a new plan," for the establishment of a 
Palestinian state. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Turkey's National Security Council (MGK) will convene Thursday. 
President Gul said the government's Kurdish initiative will be 
discussed at the meeting. 
 
- On Wednesday, the religious affairs directorate (Diyanet) will 
hold the third Alevi Workshop in Ankara with the participation of 
theologians and government officials. 
 
- A 16-year old drug dealer is killed in a children's penitentiary 
in Pozanti in Adana.  The parents of the boy have applied to the 
authorities, awaiting an explanation about the murder. 
 
- Jordan's Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh will visit Turkey on 
Wednesday.  Judeh will be received by President Gul. 
 
- The second round of collective bargaining talks between the 
government and civil servants' unions will be kicked off Wednesday. 
 
 
- Around 1,000 teahouse owners rallied in Ankara to protest the 
expanded smoking restrictions introduced by the government. 
 
World 
 
- Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki visits Damascus for security 
talks with Syrian President Assad. 
 
- Iranian President Ahmadinejad will submit his new cabinet list to 
the parliament on Wednesday. 
 
- Georgia's parliament votes unanimously to leave the Commonwealth 
of Independent States. 
 
- A Turk who owns a construction company in the Netherlands has been 
stabbed to death in the fifth slaying of a Turk in the country over 
the last one month. 
 
- The IMF says global recession is now over and a recovery has 
begun. 
 
- South Korea is preparing to launch its first space rocket. 
 
SILLIMAN