09ANKARA1759
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2495
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1759/01 3441230
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101230Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1437
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0183
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6631
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4320
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7681
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7588
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4185
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 10, 2009 
 
Media Highlights 
 
"Obama Doesn't Deserve the Prize" headlines mainstream Hurriyet 
Online, noting that "President Obama's Nobel prize acceptance 
ceremony came just days after he announced that he would send more 
troops to fight the war in Afghanistan."  The paper also notes, 
according to Q Poll's survey conducted in the US that "66 percent of 
the Americans think the 'President of War' doesn't deserve the Nobel 
Peace Prize in a period in which wars in Iraq and Afghanistan still 
continue."  Islamist-oriented Zaman Online writes in "Obama Goes to 
Norway for the Nobel," that Obama's speech is expected to focus on 
the Afghanistan issue."  Mainstream Aksam Online headlines "Keeping 
the Program Short Makes Norwegians Upset," and opines that 
"Norwegians think President Obama's decision to shorten the program 
was discourteous." 
 
Shocking Resignation by the Turkish Ambassador to US (Radikal) 
Turkish media are extensively covering the resignation of Turkish 
Ambassador to the US Nabi Sensoy - leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
headlines "Surprise Resignation," while Islamist-oriented Zaman 
claims "Washington Ambassador Resigns"  In newscasts throughout the 
evening and today, the story dominates on NTV, HaberTurk and 
CNNTurk, which claims in "Ambassadorial Crisis " that the Ambassador 
resigned over a protocol flap during the Obama-Erdogan meeting. 
According to mainstream Milliyet, Ambassador Sensoy failed to pass a 
Turkish Foreign Ministry request to the White House for a four-way 
meeting with foreign ministers attending. Milliyet reports that when 
questioned by FM Davutoglu, Sensoy responded saying "No, I did not. 
You may remove me from office if you want."  Mainstream Vatan 
speculates that Sensoy resigned because he was kept at a distance by 
Erdogan and his delegation during the visit, while liberal Radikal 
points the finger at the US which it says instigated the problem 
with its request for a one-on-one meeting. 
 
DTP Closure Case/Attacks on DTP Offices/US Permits DTP to Open an 
Office in Washington 
Islamist-oriented Yeni-Safak reports that the 11 member 
Constitutional Court continued intensive work yesterday on the DTP 
case and is determined to finalize the case as soon as possible. 
According to mainstream Vatan,  DTP closure tensions erupted in 
parliament when several AKP deputies interrupted a DTP deputy, who 
was accusing the AKP government over the closure case, and told her 
to "shut up." Vatan reports an armed attack Tuesday night against 
DTP offices in Ankara and Kecioren and says four suspects, including 
three Southeast veterans were taken into custody in connection with 
Kecioren attacks.  Yeni Safak and Radikal report that while DTP is 
waiting to hear the Constitutional Court decision on the party's 
future, the US Embassy in Ankara sent a letter to DTP headquarters, 
saying that the DTP request to open a branch in Washington was 
approved.  If the party is not closed, the bureau in Washington will 
be opened in 2010.  Papers note that the Embassy officials visited 
the party headquarters just a day before the case taken by the 
court, and gave them the green light. 
 
Editorial Whirl: Erdogan-Obama Meeting 
 
Semih Idiz writes in mass appeal Milliyet: "In their meeting in the 
Oval Office, President Obama told Prime Minister Erdogan the US also 
thinks Iran has the right to access nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes.  Iran, however, has a responsibility to relieve the 
concerns of the world.  'Since your ties with Iran are good, you 
should push Tehran toward that position,' Obama told Erdogan.  It 
seems that Erdogan's advocacy of Iran could not change Washington's 
perception.  Moreover, on Monday the Iranian Foreign Ministry made a 
statement to the effect that 'We don't want Turkey in this.'  It's 
clear that the Iran issue will be a headache for the Erdogan 
government." 
 
Sedat Ergin observes in mass appeal Hurriyet: "Before the 
Obama-Erdogan meeting, White House officials gave a special briefing 
 
ANKARA 00001759  002 OF 004 
 
 
to the press and shared a statement saying the US sees no problem 
with Turkey talking to Iran.  What's important for them, however, is 
the conveyance of the same message to Iran.  Turkey can play a 
useful potential role only if its messages are in accord with that 
of the US and the international community.  If Turkey adopts this 
approach and conveys to Iran that we are serious about the 
suggestions we have laid on the table, then Turkey's mediation role 
may turn positive.  If they do not support the approach, which has 
widespread international support, then there won't be much space in 
which to play a critical role for Turkey." 
 
Fehmi Koru comments in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak: "It's something 
new that during his visit to Washington, Prime Minister Erdogan 
spoke what he honestly believed instead of giving the US side what 
they want to hear, and did not bend his words in the speeches he 
delivered in the gatherings open to all.  It's noteworthy that 
Obama's attitude has been new as well.  Instead of speaking about 
the formulas he had voiced before [becoming President], Obama seemed 
to adopt the approach of 'increasing military presence' which 
befitted more his predecessor Bush regarding the resolution of the 
main international conflicts.  It's really positive for Obama that 
he listened to the 'Come to your senses' polite warning of his 
guest, and that he extended the time scheduled for the meeting.  If 
he can produce policies in line with what he listened to, he might 
be able to find the most appropriate formula for even the toughest 
problems.  In international relations, the US and everyone else will 
benefit if an egalitarian rhetoric dominates the ties with the US -- 
Erdogan's Washington visit has opened the door to that." 
 
Mehmet Ali Birand writes in mass appeal Posta: "It's obvious that 
two events must have impressed Erdogan very much -- one of them is 
the bombing of Gaza, the other was when he had to wait at the border 
to Gaza for half an hour during his Israel visit.  Again, he raged 
about Israel in the capital of the Jewish lobby.  I asked myself, 
'Was it necessary?'  The 'One Minute' incident in Davos was very 
effective anyway, he collected a large bonus in the Arab world. 
Isn't that enough?  I see that his insisting on this issue any 
further will not bring any more bonuses for Turkey or the prime 
minister." 
 
"The New Turkey" Takes Center Stage in Region 
Cuneyt Ulsever emphasizes in mass-appeal Hurriyet: "Before it pulls 
out of Iraq at the end of 2011, the US wants to leave northern Iraq 
under the protection of Turkey, and secure for the transfer of oil 
and gas from the region to the world markets through Turkey.  Turkey 
and the US have a common interest in the liquidation of the PKK in 
northern Iraq.  The US doesn't want to fight the PKK in northern 
Iraq, and asks Turkey to find a political solution to the problem. 
However, the Turkish government's Kurdish democratic initiative is 
not working in the country.  And it's not clear whether the US can 
even use the Incirlik Airbase while pulling out of Iraq.  Can you 
imagine what would happen if the Turkish government, as it did it 
March 2003, again makes the US change its plans while withdrawing 
from Iraq?" 
 
Sahin Alpay observes in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "In 1993, Turkey 
had problems with all of its neighbors, which were almost all 
supporting the PKK.  The AK Party government has reversed this 
situation.  In 1993, in a world newly emerging out of the Cold War, 
the US did not care much about democracy in Turkey.  Today's US 
Administration sees that a pro-Western stability in Turkey can only 
be achieved through democracy and the majority of EU countries see 
the importance of democracy in Turkey for regional and global 
peace." 
 
Hadi Uluengin writes in mass appeal Hurriyet: "The Zionist lobby in 
the US was alarmed when President Obama did not warn Turkey after 
the Davos outburst of Prime Minister Erdogan, and in connection with 
the neo-cons, they mobilized the think-tanks in the US which 
released floods of articles and analyses which blame the Ak Party of 
Islamism, and claim Turkey is drifting away from the West.  There's 
 
ANKARA 00001759  003 OF 004 
 
 
an alliance between the leftists-nationalists and the neo-con, 
pro-Israeli circles.  This alliance, however, does not stand a 
chance in the face of a new world and the new Turkey's dynamics. 
The new Turkey, with the approval of the US, is walking toward the 
horizons of a new world." 
 
All Eyes Turn to Greece Regarding Halki Seminary 
Vatan reports that following Erdogan's meeting with Obama, the 
re-opening of the Halki Seminary is on the agenda once again. 
Turkish Foreign and Education Ministries have been working on the 
issue.  AKP officials explained the planned formula saying "the 
seminary can be opened as a vocational school giving high-school 
level education.  And, under these conditions there is no need for 
legal or constitutional changes."  Turkish officials noted that 
Greece is expected to take steps addressing the problems of the 
Turkish minority in Western-Thrace. 
 
For Turkey's EU Bid, All Roads End in Cyprus (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reports that technical negotiations for Turkey's EU 
accession have reached a bottleneck due to political problems.  The 
paper adds that Cyprus is the key issue and notes EU officials' 
statements that a settlement in the harbor controversy between 
Turkey and the Greek Cypriots is needed to avoid a further crisis. 
 
Afghanistan: In "Mixed Signals from the US" mainstream Sabah reports 
"it's noteworthy that while the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Adm Michael Mullen said the US was satisfied over the 
[non-combat] contribution of Turkey to International Security 
Assistance Forces (ISAF) in Afghanistan, NSC Advisor  James Jones 
recently commented the opposite, saying "the US will be happy if 
Turkish forces join military operations."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
in "US: We're Pleased with Turkey's Contribution in Afghanistan," 
reports, "Adm Mullen said the relationship between the US and Turkey 
was one of great importance and from the military-to-military 
standpoint it was on extremely solid ground." 
 
"Climate Summit Sees Clash of Rich vs. Poor" headlines Hurriyet 
Daily News and predicts more discontent between rich and poor 
countries and highlights EPA head Lisa Jackson's appearance at the 
conference. In "Obama to Work with Congress Over Climate," Hurriyet 
DN notes that EPA's decision concerning greenhouse gases gives the 
President a new way to cut back but warns that Congress still needs 
to act on pending legislation.  Turkish media highlights the World 
Bank development report and notes that Istanbul will have miserable 
weather in 40 years.  Islamist-oriented Zaman Online gives full play 
to a complete translation of the NYT's Thursday Tomas Friedman 
article on why climate change is important. 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Court of Appeals President Hasan Gerceker says the judiciary was 
target of systematic assaults 
 
- DTP Tunceli deputy Serafettin Halis says PKK and DTP are 
representing the same group of people 
 
- Finance Minister Mehmet Simsek says the increase in industrial 
output was an indication of the exit from recession 
 
 
World 
 
- Worldwide famous novelist Dan Brown arrived in Istanbul for the 
promotion of his latest novel 
 
- Moody's Investors Service says the US and the UK must prove they 
can whittle down their ballooning deficits to avoid threats to their 
triple-A credit ratings 
 
ANKARA 00001759  004 OF 004 
 
 
SILLIMAN