09ANKARA1349
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4895
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1349/01 2571201
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141201Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0775
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0039
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6264
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4157
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7557
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7447
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4029
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001349 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
FM Davutoglu in Tehran: Turkey Is Ready To Do What Is Necessary To 
Avoid New Sanctions on Iran 
Media report Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu returned to Turkey on 
Sunday after an official visit to Tehran, Iran. During the visit, 
Davutoglu met Iranian FM Motaki, President Ahmadinejad, Iranian 
Parliament Speaker Larijani and Saeed Jalili, the secretary of 
Iran's Supreme National Security Council and chief nuclear 
negotiator. Iran's official news agency reported Davutoglu told 
Jalili during their meetings, "We hope that negotiations between 
Iran and the West will begin in the shortest possible time and we 
are ready to host those negotiations."  Davutoglu also said during a 
press conference on Saturday that what Turkey was trying to do was 
"to prevent Iran from being kept away from the global and regional 
economy." Davutoglu emphasized, "Therefore, Turkey is ready to do 
what it has to do to avoid new sanctions on Iran and to lift the 
current sanctions." 
 
Turkey to Buy Patriot Missiles from the U.S. 
Weekend media reported Turkey has decided to purchase 13 Patriot 
air-defense systems and 72 missiles from the United States. 
Mainstream Vatan quotes "U.S. defense expert" Steven Hildreth as 
saying, "the missile system will provide Turkey with the capability 
to defend against Iran's short range SCUD missiles."  Today in, 
"Ankara Has Not Made A Decision On The Patriots," mainstream 
Hurriyet reports "Ankara officials were annoyed that the information 
was leaked" regarding Turkey's purchase of the system and the paper 
says "U.S. officials leaked the information," and the information 
indicating Ankara is set to buy the missiles "is not true." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Sale of Patriot Missile Systems to Turkey 
 
Tulin Daloglu wrote in mainstream HaberTurk: "If this sale is 
finalized, Turkey will serve as the main country protecting Europe 
from Iran.  As for Ankara, it requires a major policy adjustment 
given its earlier evasive attitudes regarding Iran's nuclear arms 
program.   FM Davutoglu dreamt of a zero-problem climate with all 
Turkey's neighbors.  However the reality has brought a full stop to 
this romantic rhetoric.  After all, when this happens it will be 
Turkey's largest military purchase from the U.S. and I guess no one 
can claim that these missiles are for Turkey's protection against 
the PKK." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "If this sale is 
realized, Turkey will return to its status as one of the biggest 
military buyers of U.S. equipment.  Since these missiles will be 
placed close to the border with Iran, it naturally indicates 
security problems with this neighbor.  However given this 
government's foreign policy towards Iran, one wonders about the main 
motive.  The very same government sees no harm in Iranian nuclear 
tests.  At the same time, they are about to spend billions for 
missile defense.  Something is wrong with this picture." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Turkey keeps denying this 
fact, but everybody knows that Iran's nuclear program is the main 
reason for purchasing the defense system. On the other hand Syria is 
planning to modernize its missile inventory.  Therefore, it's 
natural for the Turkish Military to seek an upgrade in air defense 
systems.  In other words, this purchase is not imposed by the U.S.; 
it is based on Turkey's demand.  The procurement of those missiles 
will bring various advantages to Turkey, one is the increase of 
Turkey's importance within NATO." 
 
Erdogan: Anti-PKK Operations Will Continue As Long As Terror 
Continues 
Prime Minister Erdogan, during a Sunday visit to Polatli near 
Ankara, criticized "some circles" which he said were "disturbed" by 
the ruling AK Party government's move to widen democratic rights and 
freedoms.  "Some seek political gain over the blood of our martyrs. 
They panic when we talk about national unity, because it will make 
 
ANKARA 00001349  002 OF 003 
 
 
them lose their grounds of exploitation," Erdogan said at a ceremony 
held to mark the 88th anniversary of the Sakarya Battle.  Erdogan 
also reacted to a call by the pro-Kurdish DTP to stop military 
operations against the PKK.  "Operations will continue as long as 
terror remains a threat for Turkey," said Erdogan. 
 
Kilic: Lack of Political Dialogue Worse Than Terrorism 
Sunday papers report Constitutional Court Chairman Hasim Kilic 
voiced concerns regarding the political situation in Turkey. 
"Turkey has a problem worse than terrorism, which is lack of 
dialogue.  Political parties, leaders and people, have closed 
themselves against each other -- they cannot make any move.  It is 
worse than terrorism if political actors do not communicate face to 
face," said Kilic. 
 
Education Ministry Issues Circular Against Discrimination 
Mainstream Haberturk reports on its front page today that Education 
Minister Nimet Cubukcu has issued a circular before the start of the 
new education year, which instructs the teachers in elementary and 
high schools to lecture on tolerance and against religious, racial 
and language discrimination.  "Discrimination, due to social, 
cultural and economic reasons, is applied against men, women and the 
handicapped, and can be seen as racism and intolerance.  The Turkish 
society has always given good examples of peace, tolerance, justice, 
and respect for humankind and coexistence," said the circular. 
Haberturk comments the circular was actually asking for support for 
the ruling AK Party government's Kurdish democratic initiative. 
 
Milliyet: The Armenian People Are Ready for Peace With Turkey 
Just one month before the protocols on opening the border crossing 
between Turkey and Armenia were signed, mainstream Milliyet "took 
the pulse" of Armenians on the streets of Yerevan.  According to 
Milliyet, the "majority" of Armenians give "full support" to their 
government to establish ties with Turkey and open the borders. 
They, however, have a "red line" which is the recognition that a 
genocide occurred when Ottoman Turks massacred and expelled 
Armenians during World War I.  "Their biggest dream is, one day, to 
be allowed to live in the lands their grandfathers lived," 
Government Spokesman Sharmazanov said, "No one can question the 
Armenian genocide.  For Armenians, Eastern Anatolia will always be 
West Armenia."  Anahit, one Armenian Milliyet spoke to, said, "We 
want Diyarbakir to be ours again.  Both Turks, Armenians and Kurds 
know that Diyarbakir is our hometown." 
 
Obama Vilified By Two Million in DC 
Media closely follow the weekend's protests against U.S. President 
Barack Obama's plan to reform healthcare in the U.S.  Mainstream 
Haberturk headlines, "The U.S. Wasn't Angry at Bush, But They Are 
Tearing Obama to Pieces."  Liberal Radikal headlines, "Hitler, 
Lenin, Stalin, Castro, Obama!"   Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "They Called Obama a 'Communist.'"  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports, "President Obama's policies are being protested," as "some 
are accusing him of socializing the country because of his health 
reform plan."  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "Socialist Obama." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Obama's Health Reform 
 
Ali Aslan wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Tens of thousands are 
pouring in the nation's capital in order to protest Obama 
administration's policies, especially regarding the health reform 
plan.  Demonstrators are accusing President Obama of turning the 
U.S. into a socialist country.  There is a more serious backdrop at 
these demonstrations, which is about the south spirit and the north 
spirit.  The 9/11 attacks encouraged a resurrection of the 'southern 
spirit,' which despises others.  But President Obama is trying to 
encourage the 'northern spirit' which seeks better terms with 
others.  Given the recent demonstrations on health reform, the 
southern spirit has no intention to change." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
 
ANKARA 00001349  003 OF 003 
 
 
Domestic 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan will visit the U.S. from September 21-26 to 
join UN General Assembly meetings in New York and the G-20 summit in 
Pittsburgh. 
 
- On Tuesday, DTP leader Ahmet Turk and deputy chairperson Emine 
Ayna will visit northern Iraq to discuss the Turkish government's 
Kurdish initiative with Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and Iraqi KRG 
President Massoud Barzani. 
 
- On September 17, Prime Minister Erdogan will host an Iftar 
fast-breaking dinner for chief editors of newspapers and TV 
channels. 
 
- More than 100 people were arrested for looting goods from 
factories and shops following flash floods in Istanbul. 
 
- Alevi organizations have staged protests against compulsory 
religious instruction in Istanbul. 
 
- The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
said Turkey's economic importance had grown, adding Turkey could 
resume a fast track of economic growth as of 2010.  Turkey is the 
16th largest economy of the 30-member OECD, but currently ranks at 
the bottom of all 30 in terms of education. 
 
World 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Christofias says the Turkish Cypriots should 
hand over the control of Karpaz to Southern Cyprus and allow the 
settlement of 20,000 Greek Cypriot migrants in the area. 
 
- - Israeli President Shimon Peres is discharged from a Tel Aviv 
hospital a day after fainting on stage during a talk. 
 
- IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn says "the global 
economic crisis will continue, even if Germany and France had some 
good figures in the second quarter." 
 
- A Catalonian village of 8,000 people in the Spanish region of 
Barcelona, holds a referendum on the independence of Catalonia. 
 
JEFFREY