09ANKARA1274
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Fri Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3382
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1274/01 2401131
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281131Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0662
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0001
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6211
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4123
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7526
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7414
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3998
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001274 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, AUGUST 28, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan Calls On Nation To Support His Government's 'Democratic 
Move' on Kurdish Issue 
Media outlets report that in Thursday's televised address to the 
nation, Prime Minister Erdogan said his government's "democratic 
move" aimed to bring peace to the entire country.  "We are working 
to establish a democratic atmosphere where everyone can freely 
express himself," said Erdogan.  Erdogan said Turkey, conducting a 
long-term fight against terrorism, has experienced great losses due 
to terrorism.  He stressed that terror was not an issue that could 
be solved only through military measures.  He noted, "The point we 
reached today is a result of the common will of our state and 
nation.  Erdogan urged political parties, all civic organizations, 
academics and media to support his government's Kurdish initiative, 
saying, "everybody should be a part of the solution." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the PM's Address to the Nation/AKP's Kurdish 
Initiative 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal Radikal:  "Prime Minister Erdogan's 
address to the nation did not give a new angle to the Kurdish 
opening.  There are salad and side dishes ready on the table, 
however, the main dish is still not there.  The mistake in the 
choice of methods.  If Erdogan had included the CHP in efforts for a 
solution, debates would be more healthy and the existing shadow over 
the process would be removed.  It is never too late in the 
politics." 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in liberal Radikal:  "The Kurdish opening cannot 
be blocked by military statements.  It will continue to be debated 
and the process will not stop.  As is seen, we all are debating the 
issue." 
 
Rusen Cakir wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "In his address to the 
nation PM Erdogan said 'we are not claiming that we will do 
everything on our own or establish all the rules on our own.  We are 
not representing the whole of Turkey.  We have to work together.' 
I really wish that during their last seven years in power, the AKP 
government's acts were based on this principle.  If that were so, 
Turkey would not face such unnecessary polarization and clashes." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "In his address to the 
nation PM Erdogan said 'we'll never allow any action to damage 
Turkey's unitary structure.'  So far, it seems that all debates on 
the Kurdish issue took place between the government and the 
opposition.  However, the main obstacle was the PKK and DTP's 
demands in this process.  None of their demands could fit in the 
framework of article 3 of the Constitution.  Therefore, it doesn't 
reflect the facts to say that the Government and the DTP are in 
agreement on a solution and the opposition and the TGS have 
prevented it." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "The last 25 years of 
terror have damaged Turks trust in the Kurds while suppressing 
pro-democracy Kurds.  If  Turkey were successful in eliminating PKK 
terrorism, and only supporters of democracy were allowed the talk, 
Turkey would not have this trust problem.  In order to reach a 
solution, first of all, these suppressed Kurds should be separated 
from the PKK.  A comprehensive democratization initiative is the 
most important step to marginalize the PKK.  Being aware of this 
fact, the PKK and its leaders do not want to be left out of the 
process.  That is why DTP members are trying to spoil the peaceful 
atmosphere." 
 
Ihsan Dagi wrote in the Islamist-oriented/intellectual Zaman: 
"There are many points to be covered regarding Turkey's Kurdish 
issue.  However, the public's stance towards those opposing the 
(government's) opening is not very warm.  On the other hand, the 
public cautiously supports the initiative for a solution." 
 
 
ANKARA 00001274  002 OF 003 
 
 
Basbug: We Are All Brothers, Let's Keep This Unity 
Media outlets report that on Thursday, the chief of the general 
staff (TGS) General Ilker Basbug delivered messages of "unity and 
brotherhood" to the nation.  Basbug warned against any attempts to 
subvert that aim, while visiting the Fallen Soldiers' Tomb in 
Cigiltepe, Afyon, as part of Turkey's Victory Week celebrations. 
Accompanied by air, navy, land and gendarme force commanders, Basbug 
was welcomed by a group of students from the Kurdish towns of Kulp 
and Lice in the province of Diyarbakir.  "All our martyrs are laying 
side by side here.  We are all brothers and sisters. We should not 
allow those who want to spoil this unity," said Basbug. 
 
Rasmussen Pledges To Work For Better Ties Between NATO-Muslim 
Countries 
Papers report NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen joined 
Turkish leaders at a Ramadan fast-breaking iftar on Thursday. 
"Please see my presence here tonight as a clear manifestation of my 
respect for Islam as one of the world's great religions," Rasmussen 
said at the iftar.  Rasmussen praised Turkey as "a bridge between 
Europe, the Arab world and Central Asia," and pledged to work for 
better ties between NATO and Muslim countries.  Prime Minister 
Erdogan said the NATO chief's participation was a "meaningful 
message to the people of my country and the Muslim world."  Erdogan 
also said that his government will not step back in its Kurdish 
opening regardless of the costs. 
 
RTUK To Remove Limitations On Private Kurdish Broadcasters 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Turkey's radio and television 
watchdog RTUK has begun work to allow private television and radio 
stations to broadcast in Kurdish 24 hours a day.  RTUK will 
reportedly remove the limitations on duration and content of 
programs.  According to the existing regulations accepted in 2006, 
private channels are allowed to broadcast in Kurdish for 45 minutes 
a day.  "On the one hand, we have the state broadcasting for 24 
hours a day, and on the other, the limitations on private 
broadcasters.  This is senseless." said RTUK chairman Davut Dursun. 
 
 
Poll: AKP, CHP Lose Votes, MHP, DTP On The Rise 
Mainstream Vatan and Aksam carry a public opinion poll conducted by 
the A&G company in which 1,260 people were asked who they would vote 
for if elections were held today.  The distribution of votes, after 
splitting the 16.7 percent of the "Undecided" votes among the 
parties, was: AKP 35.3 percent, CHP 21.1, MHP 19.0, DTP 7.1, DP 4.1, 
and SP 2.9. 
 
Armenian Diaspora Believes Peace Talks With Turkey Have Ended 'In 
Fiasco' (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports the Armenian diaspora does not want 
President Sargsyan to travel to Turkey for the October 14 soccer 
game between the two countries, saying the "peace talks" have ended 
"in fiasco."  The Armenian nationalist Dashnaksutyun Party sees 
Foreign Minister Nalbandyan as "responsible" for this outcome of 
Armenia's "flirting" with Turkey, and urged him to resign, according 
to Hurriyet. 
 
Friendly Warning From Wexler (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reports U.S. House of Representatives' Turkey 
Caucus co-head Robert Wexler said in his Thursday meeting with 
President Gul that the dialogue process with Armenia should be sped 
up.  "If the dialogue process is not continued, the bill on Armenian 
allegations will be submitted to the U.S. Congress; and this time, 
it will pass," said Wexler.  Wexler also promised he will work for 
the improvement of economic ties between Turkey and the U.S., 
reports Sabah. 
 
U.S. Missile Defense Shield in Turkey (Milliyet) 
Media outlets pay close attention to a recent story in the Polish 
newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza that reported that the US missile shield 
might be based in Israel or Turkey instead of Eastern Europe as 
planned previously.  Mainstream Sabah headlines "The Claim that the 
 
ANKARA 00001274  003 OF 003 
 
 
Shield's Destination  is Turkey," and reports, "US officials 
speaking to the Polish press said the alternatives for the missile 
defense shield against the threat of Iran have shifted from the 
Czech Republic and Poland to Turkey and Israel.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet writes "the US administration considers using bases in 
Turkey and Israel and vessels deployed in the region instead of 
establishing the missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic." 
The paper notes "Russia's strong objections produced this shift." 
Papers report the US State Department Spokesman Philip Crowley as 
saying that "the report was not true." Liberal Radikal reports "the 
Obama administration thinks that cooperation with Russia will help 
in solving most of the global conflicts.  In turn, the US will have 
some tough bargaining with Russia." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Five people were killed and 17 others injured Thursday when an 
Istanbul-bound train collided with construction machinery near the 
town of Bilecik. 
 
- The AKP mayor of Kars has removed three sculptures of women in the 
city, saying that it was not appropriate to have sculptures of women 
in front of state offices. 
 
- Higher Education Board (YOK) decision regarding the opening of a 
Kurdish language department in Mardin's Artuklu University has been 
put off until September 10 on the grounds that the matter should be 
evaluated through in-depth analysis. 
 
- Housing sales in Turkey increase by 78.9 percent in the second 
quarter of the year in comparison to the first quarter. 
 
World 
 
- Iraqi Shiite leader Abdulaziz al-Hakim will be laid to rest in the 
Iraqi city of Najaf today. 
 
- Unidentified people robbed the Turkish Airlines office in Baghdad, 
and took more than USD 160,000. 
 
- The U.S. military in Afghanistan admits to keeping files on 
journalists and classifying reporting on the war as "positive, 
negative and neutral." 
 
- China calls on the US to halt air and sea military surveillance 
close to its shores. 
 
- Turkish soccer players in Germany have recently become the targets 
of racist attacks. 
 
SILLIMAN