09ANKARA1245
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9483
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1245/01 2361003
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241003Z AUG 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0621
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0271
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6191
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4108
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7513
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7401
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3985
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001245 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, AUGUST 24, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Debates Continue on 'Kurdish Initiative' 
Media outlets continue reporting about the ongoing controversy and 
debates regarding the ruling AKP government's 'Kurdish Initiative.' 
Last week, MHP leader Bahceli had lashed out at the National 
Security Council's (MGK) approval of the continuation of the 
government efforts to find a settlement to the Kurdish question. 
President Gul has invited Bahceli to the presidential palace for a 
meeting, but the MHP leader turned down the call.  Monday papers 
report the AKP deputy group chief Bekir Bozdag said MHP was accusing 
all with "treason" at a time when the President, Prime Minister, the 
government, and MGK was working to help the initiative which aims 
peace, security and happiness in the country.  "What the MHP has 
been doing is not nationalism but racism.  Why is the MHP uneasy 
with the efforts seeking peace, could it be out of fear that there 
will be no more martyrs' funerals for the MHP to abuse?" asked 
Bozdag.  MHP Secretary General Cihan Pacaci underlined the 
importance of Turkeys' unity, and said the "process" was one in 
which the PKK's demands were discussed.  "The MHP will not even 
discuss this process -- that's why we didn't meet with the Interior 
Minister and the President," said Pacaci.  CHP deputy chairman Onur 
Oymen said a "model" wanted by the U.S. for Turkey and the AKP 
government's policies "overlapped."  "It's interesting that for the 
first time, the MGK did not mention the continuation of a 
'determined fight against the PKK.'  It means they've abandoned 
fighting, but will continue it through negotiations," emphasized 
Oymen.  The pro-Kurdish DTP deputy group chief Selahattin Demirtas 
sais what the MHP opposed was a democratic solution to the problem. 
"MHP opposes democratization and peace.  We do not support the AKP 
but only the peace process.  At the time being, CHP and MHP want 
war," said Demirtas. 
 
Two Revised Laws for the Kurdish Opening 
Mainstream Vatan reports that the government is in preparation to 
launch legal steps to advance its democratic move.  The AKP 
government revises the repentance law and public reform bill in 
order to renew them.  Article 221 of the Turkish Penal Code (TCK) 
says that those who set up, lead, become a member of an illegal 
organization and aid or commit offense in name of such organization, 
will not be punished if they surrender to security forces and give 
information about illegal organization on their free will.  The 
government decided to revise this bill because it is believed that 
the arrangement was not effective and that the government had to 
make arrangements to help the integration of former terrorists with 
the society.  The Public Reform Law, which was vetoed by former 
President Sezer in 2004, will also be revised.  This bill was 
suggesting shrinkage in the state's authorities and transferring the 
authority from the central government to local administrations. 
 
 
 
 
 Editorials on the Debates on the Kurdish Initiative 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Contrary to the arguments 
by some, developments in Iraq invalidate the belief that Turkey's 
Kurdish initiative was imposed by foreign powers like the U.S.  Some 
in Turkey tend to argue that the U.S. wants to see a solution to the 
Kurdish problem because it affects Iraq's stability.  As the chaotic 
situation in Iraq grows even more serious than before, it may be 
more difficult for the U.S. to implement the current plans to 
withdraw.  Along with Shiite and Sunni tension, Iraq has more 
serious potential problems including Kirkuk's status and tension 
between Arabs and Kurds.  Turkey has to resolve its Kurdish issue 
because it is an internal problem to address.  In the meantime, 
Ankara needs to develop a security plan based on developments in 
Iraq." 
 
Ali Bulac wrote in Islamist Zaman: "Turkey certainly has to find 
ways to address the Kurdish problem on its own.  Yet at the same 
 
ANKARA 00001245  002 OF 003 
 
 
time, this issue has obtained a regional nature ever since the 
invasion of Iraq with the involvement of U.S., Europe and several 
countries in the region and we cannot simply ignore that." 
 
Mehmet Tezkan wrote in mainstream Vatan: "By reading the recent 
statements from DTP as well as from the government, one cannot help 
but wonder about the serious inconsistencies regarding the approach. 
 The government characterization is advancing democratic standards 
countrywide just like they like to call the current efforts as a 
democratic initiative.  As for the DTP figures, democratic steps are 
not enough and results can only be achieved by negotiation with the 
PKK and its leader directly or indirectly.  If these approaches 
remain as they are, it will require optimism to expect something 
concrete out of this process." 
 
Chief Prosecutor Finds 'No Links' Between Deniz Feneri-AKP 
(Haberturk) 
Mainstream Haberturk reported on Sunday that following an 
investigation that has lasted two and a half months, the chief 
prosecutor has decided there was no concrete proof of links between 
the Germany-based Islamist Deniz Feneri charity and the ruling AK 
Party, dropping charges that the AK Party was receiving financial 
aid from foreign organizations.  According to article 69 of the 
Turkish Constitution, political parties are prohibited to accept aid 
from foreign states, international organizations and individuals who 
are not Turkish citizens.  Three Turks from the administration of 
Deniz Feneri charity in Germany have been convicted for "fraud" for 
collecting donations totaling 41 million Euros, out of which 17 
million Euros have been transferred to Turkey.  The investigation of 
the chief prosecutor against the AK Party has concluded, but Ankara 
prosecutor is still probing the links of the Deniz Feneri charity 
with the suspects in Ankara, says Haberturk. 
 
Hakkari Governor To Be Appointed MGK Secretary General (Bugun) 
Conservative-nationalist Bugun says the AKP government, aiming to 
advance the civilianization of the National Security Council (MGK), 
will hand over the post of MGK Secretary General to a governor. 
Hakkari governor Muammer Turker is the strongest candidate for the 
post. 
 
Erdogan to Participate in G-20 Pittsburgh Summit in September 
Monday's mainstream Haberturk reports Prime Minister Erdogan will 
participate in the G-20 Summit that will be held in Pittsburgh on 
September 24-25, which will discuss the global economic crisis. 
Erdogan is expected to meet with President Obama during his four-day 
visit to the U.S., says Haberturk. 
 
Editorial on Obama's Health Care Plan 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Unlike developments in 
Iraq and Afghanistan, Americans are more focused and debating on the 
Obama administration's health care plan.  President Obama is trying 
to achieve what President Clinton tried and failed to do 16 years 
ago.  This is a tough period for Obama because the anti-reform lobby 
is very alive in the U.S. again.  This is a leadership test for 
President Obama with all the risks as he tries to achieve something 
against the no-additional-tax lobbies and pro status quo lobbies 
which make about the half of the country." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- On August 24-25, the Friends of Democratic Pakistan meeting will 
be held in Istanbul with the participation of Richard Holbrooke, the 
U.S. Special Envoy for Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
 
- On August 27, Turkmenistan's Head of State Gurbanguli 
Berdimuhamedov will pay a state visit to Turkey.  Berdimuhamedov 
will meet with President Abdullah Gul in Antalya. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001245  003 OF 003 
 
 
- Finance Minister Mehmet Simsek said "dialogue" with the IMF 
continued, adding  the sides were discussing the amount of funds to 
be given to Turkey. 
 
- A draft bill on judicial reform will be discussed at Monday's 
meeting of the Council of Ministers. 
 
- Collective bargaining talks between the government and the labor 
unions will be continued on Monday. 
 
World 
 
- On August 27-28, NATO Secretary General Andres Fogh Rasmussen will 
visit Turkey to meet with President Abdullah Gul and Prime Minister 
Erdogan. 
 
- Eight years after the September 11, 2001 attacks, the U.S. Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mike Mullen says al-Qaeda remains "very 
capable" of attacking the U.S. 
 
- Armenian Americans community representatives sent a letter to 
Secretary Clinton , expressing their concern about the unfair and 
inaccurate" statements of  OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chair Matthew Bryza. 
 
 
- Israeli PM Netanyahu has asked the Swedish government to condemn 
an article in Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet saying that Israeli 
troops harvested the organs of the Palestinians they killed. 
 
SILLIMAN