09ASMARA340
Eritrea Fraud Summary through August 2009
Thu Oct 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Asmara
VZCZCXRO9173
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHAE #0340/01 2741405
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011405Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY ASMARA
TO RUEHPNH/NVC PORTSMOUTH NH 0328
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0516
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 ASMARA 000340 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/FPP, DHS FOR CIS/FDNS 
DEPT PASS KCC WILLIAMSBURG KY 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KFRD CVIS CPAS CMGT ASEC DJ ET ZA IL KE SD EG ER
SUBJECT: Eritrea Fraud Summary through August 2009 
 
Ref: (A) State 57623, (B) Asmara 279 
 
(a) Country Conditions 
---------------------- 
 
¶1. The Eritrean government (GSE) continued its harsh economic 
policies, which further increased the scarcity of basic goods and 
the impoverishment its people.  Grocery stores are thinly stocked; 
meat and fish are not always available, and basic commodities such 
as sugar, flour, cooking oil, coffee and tea are strictly rationed 
and are sometimes unavailable due to restrictions on imports and the 
government's monopoly on possessing hard currency (the official 
exchange rate is 15 nakfa to the dollar, but black market rates are 
45 nakfa/dollar).  Salaries for those in the public sector were 
frozen in 1999 though inflation has risen over 350% since then. 
Current inflation is estimated to be 35% and growing.  President 
Isaias Afwerki stated in a July 2009 interview that people should 
"sacrifice a breakfast... to put in place a road."  People are 
hungry and are resorting to increasingly desperate measures, 
including crime, to feed their families. 
 
¶2. Hundreds of thousands of Eritrea's citizens are conscripted to 
national service where many are forced to serve until age 54 (men) 
and age 47 (women) at wages under $30/month.  Mandatory national 
service begins as early as age 17 for both boys and girls, when they 
are required to leave home to attend their 4th year of high school 
at "Sawa," a camp that includes intensive military training.  Some 
conscripts have performed back-breaking hard labor since 1994 when 
national service began.  The ministry of defense periodically 
conducts round-ups of any persons who cannot show evidence of their 
demobilization from national service.  Round-ups may occur any time 
of day or night throughout the year, but become more frequent 
immediately before Eritrea's May 24th Independence Day holiday. 
 
¶3. The GSE generally does not provide passports or exit visas to 
Eritreans who are not released from national service.  Many parents 
seek any avenue to take their children out of the country prior to 
being conscripted, even at the risk of their own arrest.  Those 
unable to obtain permission to leave Eritrea often flee illegally 
across the border to Sudan or Ethiopia where they hope to register 
as refugees.  This has led to a massive exodus across Eritrea's 
borders, with as many as 3,000 people per month leaving the country 
and paying smugglers $2,000-3,000 for a way out.  According to the 
UN, Eritrea had the second-highest number of asylum seekers in the 
world in 2008, after Somalia. 
 
¶4. The consular section in Asmara has been closed to most visa 
services since January 2007.  The following explanation is posted on 
the Asmara Embassy website: "The Government of Eritrea has not 
consistently granted visas to State Department temporary visitors 
who provide vital support for our Embassy operations.  Additionally, 
in direct violation of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic 
Relations, a treaty to which the Government of Eritrea is a 
signatory, consular staff are not notified if an American is 
arrested, nor can they travel freely to visit an American citizen in 
trouble.  The Government of Eritrea does not allow unrestricted 
travel by American diplomatic and consular personnel, who are not 
allowed outside the capital of Asmara without requesting permission 
to travel 10 days in advance.  Permission is often not granted even 
when requested in advance.  For these reasons we are closed for 
public operations except for the provision of necessary services to 
American citizens." 
¶5. Asmara re-opened for student visa services in June 2009.  Post 
also adjudicates nonimmigrant visas for USG exchange visitors, 
Eritrean government officials, and resident diplomats and members of 
international organizations and their families.  Immigrant visas are 
limited to SIVs and adoptions.  The consular section provides 
document intake services for immigrant and diversity visas, 
electronically and physically transfers cases to other posts upon 
request, and provides document verification services for U.S. 
embassies and consulates processing Eritrean applicants.  Post 
anticipates remaining closed in the immediate future for most visa 
services, but continues to provide the full array of American 
Citizen Services. 
 
¶6. Though Eritrea has historically been considered a low-to-medium 
fraud country, but its incidence is increasing due to deteriorating 
country conditions.  Asmara is now a medium-fraud post, but as 
fraudulent activity increases, Asmara has the potential to become a 
high-fraud post as profit-motivated fraud rings learn to take 
advantage of a population desperate to escape the GSE's oppressive 
policies. 
 
(b) NIV Fraud 
------------- 
 
¶7. No significant fraud was found in the limited number of NIVs 
adjudicated by post.  For student visa applicants, the University of 
Asmara generally provides reliable student record verification and 
 
ASMARA 00000340  002 OF 006 
 
 
issues temporary diplomas until students have completed national 
service.  Post is aware of some cases when the university would not 
release records because students had not yet completed national 
service.  University graduates sometime work as graduate assistants 
for their national service and are more likely than others to be 
released after less than two years.  Posts interviewing Eritrean 
students should be aware that the University of Asmara graduated its 
final class in 2007, and it now acts as an umbrella organization for 
the testing and recordkeeping of seven institutions of higher 
education (IHE): Eritrea Institute of Technology (first graduating 
class: 2007), Hamelmallo Agricultural College (first class: 2008), 
College of Health Sciences (first class: 2008), Orotta School of 
Medicine (first class will graduate November 2009), College of 
Marine Sciences & Technology (first class: 2008), College of 
Business and Economics (first class:  2008), and the College of Arts 
and Social Sciences (first class: 2008).  None of the institutions 
is currently accredited, but in 2007 the GSE created the National 
Board for Higher Education (NBHE), which is currently producing 
guidelines to assess each institution and determine if they will be 
accredited. 
 
¶8. Post completed several validation studies during the reporting 
period.  Of those receiving B1/B2 visas between May 01, 2006 and 
December 31, 2008 (until January 15, 2007, the consular section was 
still fully open to the public for visa services), about 66% of 
those receiving visas returned to Eritrea.  Not uncommon for 
Eritrea, post could not reach about 14% of the visa recipients by 
phone, so actual percentage may be 5% higher or lower[t1].  About 
30% of the visa recipients are still in the U.S. both legally (after 
adjusting status) and illegally.  The rest died or did not travel on 
their visas.  Most of those that did not return were young men 
(under age 40).  Post believes the relatively high return rate is 
because the GSE only issues passports and exit visas to those it 
believes will return to Eritrea.  Post also found that 100% of those 
receiving J-1 exchange visas to participate in the international 
visitor program over the last five years have returned.  Four of the 
last twelve FSN's post sent to training in the U.S. did not return; 
post has implemented a policy of sending its local employees to 
regional training rather than to the U.S. 
 
(c) IV Fraud 
------------ 
 
¶9. Post is not currently issuing IVs other than adoptions and SIVs, 
and did not experience fraud during the reporting period.  Asmara is 
considered to be a medium-fraud post for IVs.  Marriage fraud has 
always been a concern of the consular section due to the number of 
arranged marriages (greater than 80% in Eritrea).  Almost all 
weddings in Eritrea are grand affairs, and even impoverished 
families celebrate with elaborate ceremonies recorded on video.  Any 
wedding without an elaborate religious service and video 
documentation is highly suspect.  Note that other Western embassies 
in Asmara adjudicating family-based immigration visas report that as 
many as 40% of marriage certificates are fraudulent. 
 
(d) DV Fraud 
------------ 
 
¶10. Asmara is considered to be a medium-fraud post for DVs.  Though 
not open for DV processing, post performs a significant amount of 
document verification in support of DVs adjudicated at other posts. 
Twenty-three of 209 documents (11%) verified by post during this 
reporting period were fraudulent, most of them school transcripts, 
and most of them toward the end of the DV processing year.  Posts 
adjudicating Eritrean DV applicants should be aware that government 
secondary schools for the 1994 through 2003 school years admitted 
(and school transcripts reflect marks for) students from the 8th to 
11th grade; a student completing 11th grade in 2006 or earlier was 
considered to have finished high school.  Beginning with the 2003-04 
school year, government secondary schools admitted (and school 
transcripts reflect marks for) students from the 9th to 12th grade; 
a student is thus now not considered by the GSE to have completed 
high school until completing 12th grade, away from home at Sawa. 
Secondary school transcripts for students completing 12th grade in 
2007 or later will reflect the grades from their final year at Sawa. 
 There should be no transcripts showing a student completing the 
fourth year of a government secondary school in 2007.  Note that 
Asmara's two private schools, the Italian School and the Asmara 
International Community School, teach through the 12th grade, and 
their Eritrean students are still required by Eritrean law to go to 
Sawa for the three-month segment of military training before 
beginning the required minimum 18 months of national service. 
 
¶11. Post is aware of the high propensity for DV fraud by Eritrean 
applicants.  Post has received several examples of unsolicited 
e-mails circulating around Asmara from the "Diversity Visa 
Coordinator, Bureau of Consular Affairs, U.S Department of State" 
advising the recipient that he is a "visa lottery program winner." 
A secondary school director who is a good contact of the consular 
 
ASMARA 00000340  003 OF 006 
 
 
section states that he is often asked to falsify documents for DV 
applicants; he mentioned a person known by name of Eritrean or 
Ethiopian origin, who travels between Khartoum and Nairobi, charging 
up to $2,000 per school transcript.  Post has also encountered many 
fraudulent documents bearing the stamp of a known person who left 
the Asmara public registration office in 2005.  Post has seen 
several examples of legitimate students providing falsified 
documents, e.g. substituting their name on another student's 
transcripts when they could have provided their own, or enhancing 
the grades on their own transcripts, such as to show a "B" average 
rather than a "D" average.  Asmara advises any posts adjudicating 
DVs to scan and send any questionable documents to us for 
verification; post can usually provide results within a few days. 
 
(e) ACS and U.S. Passport Fraud 
------------------------------- 
 
¶12. Asmara is a low-fraud post for ACS and U.S. passports.  The 
majority of CRBA applicants are for infants or toddlers with 
non-resident Eritrean-American fathers and Eritrean mothers, often 
one or two decades younger than and not necessarily married to the 
child's father.  The Eritrean-American father often has a difficult 
time demonstrating adequate physical presence in the US to transmit 
citizenship.  Often, there is no passport stamp showing entry into 
the U.S. though the father states he was living there.  Because of 
this, post often requests additional proof of physical presence such 
as school transcripts, W2 statements, and tax records.  Post has 
received several fraudulent employment letters so does not accept 
these as proof of physical presence.  Several cases remain 
outstanding as it approaches 90 days since the AmCit parent was 
notified that additional proof is needed to establish physical 
presence; these cases may yet prove to be fraudulent.  Post has not 
had any false paternity claims.  DNA testing had been used in the 
recent past to prove out-of-wedlock paternity, but no fraud was ever 
found, and all parties completed the tests as requested (no "no 
shows[t2]"). 
 
(f) Adoption Fraud 
------------------ 
 
¶13. Asmara accepts petitions for the adoption of Eritrean children, 
and is a low-fraud post for adoptions.  Eritrea allows prospective 
parents to fully adopt an Eritrean child, but at least one parent 
must be of Eritrean descent.  There are two ways to adopt a child. 
If a child is abandoned as an infant and placed in an orphanage, the 
Ministry of Labor and Human Welfare administers the adoption. 
ConOff consulted with the ministry and determined that sound 
procedures are in place to assure children are truly orphans and 
adoptions are valid.  The other method is through the adoption 
court: if the parent(s) have died or are unable to care for a child, 
adoption may be granted, usually to a family member.  Post had 
several cases during this reporting period where the prospective 
adoptive parents had been granted guardianship, but not adoption, of 
the child they wanted to adopt.  All were instructed to finalize the 
adoptions through the adoption court and were able to do so within 
several months.  Post requested proof of numerous documents (birth 
certificates, death certificates, court adoption papers) for several 
adoption cases and none were fraudulent. 
 
(g) DNA Testing 
--------------- 
 
¶14. Asmara uses DNA testing for children and siblings of AmCits and 
LPR's (IR2, F2, F4 and Visas 92 follow-to-join cases), primarily at 
the request of USCIS in the U.S.  Requests are increasing - post 
performed 29 DNA tests over the past 18 month period but most were 
in the last six months.  Asmara does not generally receive the 
results of the tests requested by USCIS, but of the four results 
received during the reporting period, one was fraudulent; two 
"brothers" were tested and one proved to be the legitimate child of 
the AmCit, the other did not.  ConOff has witnessed DNA collection 
and post believes the laboratories used in Eritrea are reliable, 
strictly following required procedures.  Due to deteriorating 
conditions in Eritrea, post believes the propensity for fraud in 
these types of cases is high and encourages posts processing 
Eritrean IVs to consider utilizing DNA testing. 
 
(h) Asylum and Other DHS Benefits Fraud 
--------------------------------------- 
¶15. Post only rarely issues Visas 92s and Visas 93s (asylum and 
refugee follow-to-join travel letters issued on visa foils) and has 
not experienced fraud during the reporting period.  The risk of 
persecution is very real for many Eritrean citizens, particularly 
those unable to obtain a passport or exit visa who leave the country 
illegally.  The military has shoot-to-kill orders for those caught 
trying to cross the border illegally.  If caught or discovered to 
have left the country illegally, the person and his/her family 
members might be imprisoned and/or fined. 
 
 
ASMARA 00000340  004 OF 006 
 
 
¶16. Those persons who have completed national service, passed the 
age at which they might be recalled to national service, who are not 
members of non-registered religious groups, or, who are politically 
well-connected are the most likely to be able to obtain passports 
and exit visas and leave the country legally[t3].  Family members of 
some high-level GSE officials are known to have applied for asylum 
in the U.S. with the GSE official listed as a family member for a 
follow-to-join reunion.  Post cooperates with DHS by sharing 
country-specific and derogatory information regarding the asylee's 
family relationships in Eritrea when available. 
 
(i) Alien Smuggling 
------------------- 
 
¶17. Eritrea is a source country for illegal travelers, and there are 
indications of organized systems designed to facilitate travel to 
the U.S.  During just the past three months, post was alerted to a 
number of Eritreans found with fraudulent passports in Brazil, El 
Salvador, and Colombia[t4] (some via Rio/Sao Paolo and others via 
Tel Aviv).  This is the first time post has learned of Eritreans 
attempting to travel toward the U.S. through Israel.  During this 
reporting period, 12 full planeloads of Eritreans were deported from 
Egypt (most originating from the Sinai Peninsula) back to Eritrea, 
with several post contacts affirming that it is Israel, not Egypt, 
that is the targeted destination.  The path to Israel through the 
Sinai Peninsula is a common route for Eritreans, and contacts in 
Israel inform post of an increasing number of Eritreans with 
fraudulent Australian and Israeli visas attempting to secure a visa 
through the Costa Rican, Mexican and Colombian Embassy with the end 
goal of arriving in the U.S.  Post will be monitoring this potential 
route closely over the next reporting period. 
 
¶18. Most alien smuggling is geared toward getting people out of 
Eritrea through Sudan or Ethiopia; subsequent attempts to travel to 
the U.S. originate in third countries.  The smugglers[t5], who 
charge from $1000 to as high as $7000 are purported Eritrean 
military, police, and national security officers.  There are also 
reports of Rashaida (a trans-national ethnic group known to be 
traders) involvement.  In August 2009, Italian authorities 
discovered a boat in the Mediterranean originating from Libya where 
75 of 80 Eritreans onboard a boat had perished.  This is just one 
example of the desperate measures Eritreans are willing to take to 
escape the harsh conditions of their country. 
 
(j) DS Criminal Fraud Investigations 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶19. Conoff and RSO have an excellent relationship and freely share 
information of value to both parties.  The FSNI on the RSO's staff 
is readily available and assists the consular section with its fraud 
investigations as needed.  Post has instigated no criminal fraud 
investigations during the reporting period, and strained relations 
between the USG and the GSE would make any sort of joint 
collaboration on a criminal investigation highly unlikely. 
 
(k) Host Country Passports and Documents 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶20. Airline contacts have informed post of numerous cases of 
fraudulent Eritrean passports being used for travel to Frankfurt, 
Amsterdam and Milan.  It is also often possible for those unable to 
obtain a passport to purchase one through corrupt officials at 
prices between $6500 and $10,000 (the normal price in Asmara is 
$30); see reftel (b) for further details.  Persons who flee the 
country to Sudan because they are not able to obtain a passport in 
Asmara may legally obtain a passport at the Eritrean Embassy in 
Khartoum.  The GSE issues passports to Eritrean nationals living in 
Sudan, even if they departed illegally.  A passport recently issued 
by the Eritrean Embassy in Khartoum may be a sign that the applicant 
has left Eritrea in violation of Eritrean immigration law, and 
therefore may have questionable ties to Eritrea.  Eritrean passports 
issued in Khartoum cost $50, and the applicant usually signs a 
document admitting to having left Eritrea illegally.  Reports 
indicate the Eritrean Embassy in Khartoum maintains a list of 
persons the GSE deems hostile to the regime, and that Sudanese 
authorities have arrested and deported these individuals at the 
request of the Embassy.  Post speculates the government facilitates 
passport issuance abroad in hopes that these emigrants will remit 
hard currency after settlement in wealthier countries. 
 
¶21. The Eritrean passport has no identifiable security features. 
Bio data is hand-written, physical photographs are used, and the 
lamination is of extremely poor quality.  Eritrea has signed an 
international agreement stating that they will begin issuing machine 
readable passports by March 31, 2010.  The GSE has not yet signed a 
contract or paid a design/production fee to the company they have 
approached which would likely produce the passports, so post 
believes it is highly unlikely this will happen by the target date. 
 
 
ASMARA 00000340  005 OF 006 
 
 
 
¶22. The Eritrean national ID card is the only document proving 
Eritrean nationality, but it is hand-written in Tigrinya and Arabic 
(no English), poorly laminated, and easily altered.  It is possible 
that certain Eritrean citizens, particularly Jehovah's Witnesses, 
may not be able to obtain an Eritrean ID card. 
 
¶23. Post has received evidence that the GSE provides a certificate 
to Eritrean asylees living overseas to allow them entry/exit without 
an Eritrean entrance stamp being placed in their passport.  The 
certificate is written only in Tigrinya, is stamped for entrance and 
exit, and provides proof of the individual's payment of the 2% 
"rehabilitation tax."  The GSE allows asylees back into the country 
so that they will bring in desperately needed hard currency. 
 
¶24. Adjudicating officers using completion of Eritrean national 
service as a sign of ties to Eritrea should be aware of reliable 
reports that a source in Dubai supplies false national service 
completion certificates.  Post has not yet seen a fraudulent 
certificate, but official certificates have no known security 
features and could be easily forged.  There are also reports that 
these certificates may obtained fraudulently within Eritrea by 
corrupt officials.  The GSE does not verify these certificates. 
 
¶25. Post has received reports that officially issued birth and 
marriage certificates can be fraudulently obtained for $330 from the 
Asmara (and probably other) Eritrean municipalities.  Information 
contained on official birth and marriage certificates can be altered 
as desired.  On a positive note, birth, marriage, and divorce 
records are now computerized and assigned a unique identification 
number.  This system will eventually roll out to all towns and 
villages in Eritrea, and indicates the GSE's willingness to curb the 
falsification of legal documents. 
 
(l) Cooperation with Host Government Authorities 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶26. Post continues to receive little cooperation on consular issues 
from the host government other than routine document verification. 
Because legitimately issued governmental documents may have been 
fraudulently obtained, this cooperation is of limited use.  School 
records are well kept and schools cooperate in verifying these 
documents.  Post believes that the GSE would likely cooperate with 
the USG regarding the breakup of any sort of organized fraud ring. 
Over this reporting period, see reftel (b), the GSE has arrested 
numerous individuals for issuing fraudulent documents and passports. 
 
 
¶27.  For most requests of the GSE, post must request assistance 
through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) via a diplomatic note. 
 After following this process through the MFA, post finally received 
exemplars of entry and exit stamps for several ports of entry, and 
exemplars of the signatures used for authenticating documents. 
Post's Regional Consular Officer (RCO) recently received a visa 
after several diplomatic notes were sent (and numerous follow-up 
phone calls made) to the MFA.  This is the first time in several 
years that an RCO has received a visa after numerous tries by two 
RCO's.  ConOff arrived at post several weeks later than scheduled in 
April 2009, because of GSE delays in issuing the visa.  When a 
diplomatic note was sent by post to the MFA implying the consular 
section might need to be closed in the absence of a consular 
officer, the visa was issued. 
 
(m) Areas of Particular Concern 
------------------------------- 
 
¶28. Post enjoys an excellent relationship with other embassies in 
Asmara, and consular-related information is readily shared.  A 
consular working group recently started and holds meetings monthly 
to discuss consular issues, most recently focusing on fraud. 
Airline contacts also provide reliable and helpful information. 
Since Asmara is closed to the public for most visa services, it 
interfaces with many other posts (especially Nairobi, Addis Ababa, 
Kampala, Khartoum, and Johannesburg) on a regular basis, 
particularly for transferring cases and verifying documents.  ConOff 
also regularly receives information related to fraud from the post 
RSO and external DHS contacts. 
 
¶29. The GSE's restrictive policies continue to hamper consular 
operations.  GSE restrictions on diplomatic travel make it almost 
impossible for an American citizen to rely on emergency consular 
assistance outside of the capital.  This was the case for two AmCits 
arrested during this reporting period, including an 
Eritrean-American Embassy employee who was recently arrested and 
held for four days. The Embassy was not notified, nor was the ConOff 
able to visit after learning of the arrest.  Without significant 
changes in GSE policies, the consular section will likely remain 
closed for general visa services. 
 
 
ASMARA 00000340  006 OF 006 
 
 
¶30. With the opening of the consular section for student visas in 
June 2009, ConOff gave a presentation to 150 potential student visa 
applicants at the American Center, a few blocks away from the U.S. 
Embassy, as one of its regularly scheduled evening events.  A month 
later at a similar event, members of the Eritrean national security 
office began signing in and videotaping participants as they 
entered.  A few weeks later in August, the GSE informed the Embassy 
that it must cancel all public events, indefinitely.  Because of 
this restriction, it is unlikely[t6] that any consular-related 
public outreach events will be held in the near future. 
 
(n) Staffing and Training 
------------------------- 
 
¶31. Asmara is staffed by one consular officer who arrived in April 
¶2009.  This is the first time in 10 years that Asmara has had an 
experienced (third-tour) consular officer.  ConOff backs up the 
Pol/Econ officer as needed.  The section is also staffed by a 
consular assistant with 10 years experience, and a visa assistant 
with two and a half years experience.  The Pol/Econ officer holds a 
consular commission and backs up as ConOff as needed.  A 
20-hour/week consular associate position and a full-time consular 
cashier position are unfilled, and will likely remain unfilled until 
the section re-opens fully for visa services. 
 
¶32. ConOff has not completed any fraud training since ConGen in 
April[t7] 2006.   The consular assistant completed the Fraud 
Prevention Workshop at FSI in spring 2004; and completed online 
courses in Detecting Fraudulent Documents in January 2009, and 
Examining U.S. Passports in April, 2009.  The visa assistant 
completed online courses in Detecting Fraudulent Documents, February 
2009; and Detecting Imposters, March 2009. 
 
¶33.  Post Fraud Prevention Manager and point of contact for all 
related issues is consular officer Pamela Hack, e-mail 
HackPJ@state.gov, telephone 291-1-120004 x2415 or IVG 596-2415. 
[t1]Is this a guess or actual statisitical analysis? 
[t2]I took a sentence out here because it didn't track logically. 
[t3]Your sentence did not make sense.  Does this replacement meet 
the need? 
[t4]Please note the correct spelling of the country. 
[t5] The term coyote is not universally clear and isn't really 
necessary.  The term trafficker applies to those who move people 
coercively.  Smuggler is the best term for those hired by migrants 
to move them. 
[t6]Be careful with the word "extremely."   It really should only be 
applied to extreme circumstances. 
[t7] Personal preference: comma not needed and is distracting 
between a month and year.