09BAGHDAD2981
RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ON SECURITY
Tue Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2981/01 3141402
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101402Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5404UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PM, NEA/I-PM, AND NEA/RA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ON SECURITY 
DIALOGUES 
 
REF: STATE 112900 
 
¶1.  The answers below are keyed to the questions contained in 
reftel. 
 
¶2.  Does the United States currently have an established 
security dialogue with Iraq?  (Please report on all 
established or ad hoc dialogues of a pol-mil nature, 
regardless of the terminology by which they are described 
(including: strategic dialogues, security dialogues, pol-mil 
working groups, security consultative mechanisms, or any 
variation or combination of these terms).  Furthermore, for 
the sake of completeness, please detail any mechanisms or 
dialogues that are purely military-to-military in nature, to 
include military consultative discussions, scheduled 
high-level defense engagements, and so forth.) 
 
Yes.  Continuous (from weekly to semiannually) and at levels 
from the Prime Minister, Minister of Defense, and Joint Force 
Chief of Staff on down. 
 
Under the U.S. ) Iraq Security Agreement, we participate in 
the Joint Military Operations Coordinating Committee (JMOCC) 
which contains the following four Joint Subcommittees: 
 
                     meeting frequency 
 
International Zone Security Transition 
  as needed (was weekly until 
 
                    recently) 
Military Operations, Training and Logistics Support     as 
needed 
Vehicles, Vessels & Aircraft Movement                      as 
needed (working groups 
 
                    meet frequently) 
Provincial Stability Assessment 
     monthly 
 
 
We also participate under the SA in the Joint Committee (JC) 
made up of the 
 following eight JSCs: 
 
Agreed Facilities and Areas 
      semiannually (working groups 
 
                     meet more frequently) 
Entry & Exit 
              semiannually (working groups 
 
                     meet more frequently) 
Imports, Exports, Mail 
        semiannually (working groups 
 
                     meet more frequently) 
Jurisdiction 
                ad hoc 
Claims 
                quarterly (working groups meet 
 
                     frequently) 
Surveillance & Airspace Control 
  quarterly 
Frequency Management 
    monthly 
Detainee Affairs 
            bimonthly 
 
¶3.  When was the dialogue or mechanism first established? 
2003 for some dialogues. 1 Jan 2009 for the U.S. ) Iraq 
Security Agreement. 
 
¶4.  By what means was it established? 
Some requested by USG, others by GOI.  The JSCs listed in 
Paragraph 2 above were established upon entry-into-effect of 
the U.S. ) Iraq Security Agreement. 
 
¶5.  Is the frequency of such meetings controlled through a 
binding agreement, or is this dialogue regulated by an 
informal understanding? 
Informal understanding, but codified in the U.S. - Iraq 
Security Agreement. 
 
¶6.  When did the group last meet?  JC:  11 June 2009.  JMOCC: 
 16 July 2009.  JSC working groups meet continuously, some 
weekly. 
 
¶7.  Does the USG or host government have a set schedule or 
any general expectations regarding the frequency of this 
 
exchange? 
Yes, expectations are clear and mutual. 
 
¶8.  When is the next scheduled meeting?  Continuous. 
 
¶9.  Does the USG or host government hold any expectations as 
to the level of leadership hosting the exchange? 
Yes.  Leadership level firmly established for the JC, JMOCC, 
and for each JSC.  The JC is at the level of the Ambassador, 
the Commanding General MNF-I, and the Minister of Interior. 
The JMOCC is at the level of the Minister-Counselor for 
Political-Military Affairs, the Commanding General MNF-I, and 
the Minister of Defense.  Ten of the JSCs are at the 
general-officer level, and two are at the colonel (FS-1) 
level. 
 
¶10.  PM would also be interested in post's brief, honest 
assessment regarding the overall utility of the dialogue. 
These dialogues are essential if we are to advance along the 
path of helping Iraq become a sovereign, stable and 
self-reliant nation on its way to becoming a strategic 
partner of the U.S. 
 
¶11.  Are new issues frequently broached, or has the dialogue 
devolved into a stagnant exchange of PowerPoint slides? 
New issues are brought to table daily. Situation remains 
dynamic 
 
¶12.  POC:  Pol-Mil/Plans ) Chris O,Connor, IVG:  724-2854. 
 
HILL