09BAGHDAD2986
Iraqi Women Plant Flag As First Female Police Officers
Thu Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO5776
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2986 3161021
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121021Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5412
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHMFISS/COMJSOC FT BRAGG NCUNCLAS BAGHDAD 002986 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TAGS: KJUS PGOV IZ
 
SUBJECT: Iraqi Women Plant Flag As First Female Police Officers 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Coordinator for Assistance Transition Patricia 
Haslach attended Baghdad Police College's graduation ceremony, 
including its first class of 50 female police officers on November 
¶9.  Recruited from around Iraq, the new first lieutenants will serve 
at Ministry of Interior (MOI) and provincial headquarters.  INL 
supports 13 International Police Advisors at the Baghdad Police 
College under the military's Multinational Security Transition 
Command Iraq's (MNSTC-I) training command.  Danish and UK police 
advisors also worked closely with the cadets.  Attended by Interior 
Minister Bolani just two weeks after the car bomb attacks that 
devastated several government buildings in Baghdad, the graduation 
was a positive sign of the GOI's determination to return to 
business.  The graduates, representing a new generation of women 
trailblazers in security professions, expressed the need for 
advanced training and combating discrimination in a male-dominant 
sector.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Iraq's first fifty women graduated from the Baghdad Police 
College's officer training program on November 9 alongside 1,050 
male colleagues.  Interior Minister Bolani attended and gave opening 
remarks, encouraging graduates to continue the fight against 
terrorism despite recent setbacks.  The MOI recruited the women 
through a nation-wide television, radio, and print media campaign 
last fall.  The self-called "Lioness Group" are all university 
graduates, roughly half are lawyers; others are scientists, 
sociologists, psychologists, journalists, and accountants.   The 
women attended a separate training program from men with a 
reportedly similar curriculum.  In addition to the officers, 25 
former shurta (basic policewomen) also graduated as the first female 
commissioner class (first line supervisors). 
 
¶3. (SBU) INL supports 13 International Police Advisors (IPA) at the 
Baghdad Police College under the military's training command.  To 
complement the formal training, U.S., UK, and Danish police and 
military women serving in Baghdad mentored the Iraqi cadets on the 
challenges facing them as trailblazers in a traditionally male 
profession. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Danish Police Superintendent and International Police 
Advisor at the Baghdad Police College Nanna Skriver told us that 
while the MOI will not relegate the women strictly to administrative 
tasks, the new graduates will be assigned to headquarters, instead 
of police stations, in areas from which they were recruited.  This 
reflects both general security concerns and their own desires to 
serve near their families.  Based on their educational background, 
the women will serve in forensics, human resources, investigations, 
public and higher education, domestic violence, and community 
outreach capacities.  As more female police officers graduate and 
societal views about women in the police force become more accepted, 
Skriver is optimistic that future classes will join their male 
colleagues in the full range of field positions.  Another 100 women 
will begin officer candidate training in January. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Coordinator for Assistance Transition Patricia Haslach 
attended the ceremony, along with MNSTC-I MG Barbero, and spoke with 
many of the female cadets following the ceremony.  Haslach praised 
the women for their brave decision to serve their country.  The 
newly minted first lieutenants told her that they were fully aware 
Qnewly minted first lieutenants told her that they were fully aware 
of the challenges ahead of them, but were eager to take on the task. 
 Several women expressed the need for additional higher-level 
training opportunities for women in their new specialties and the 
need to combat discrimination in a male-dominant profession. 
Haslach reaffirmed the Embassy's commitment to police training, 
noting our intention to focus on the advanced skills such as those 
advocated by the graduates.  (Note: As police training transitions 
from the U.S. military to civilian lead, INL Baghdad will be 
incorporating specialized and higher-level training and advising 
programs like those advocated by the new officers.  End Note) 
 
¶6. (SBU) The ceremony was widely covered by international and local 
media, including the Washington Post, New York Times, Associated 
Press, NBC, and Christian Science Monitor. Haslach gave on-camera 
interviews to leading Iraqi TV stations, al Sumaria and al Hurra, 
emphasizing USG support for the new Iraqi police officers and their 
families.  She also underscored the assistance coordination with the 
international community to support the Iraqi Police and Security 
Forces as they demonstrate great resilience in the wake of the 
October 25 bombings.