09BASRAH48
BASRA GOVERNMENT FLEXES MUSCLES TO SACK MINISTERIAL DG
Thu Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO7621
RR RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0048 2460821
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030821Z SEP 09
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0906
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0484
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0944UNCLAS BASRAH 000048 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID SOCI IZ
SUBJECT: BASRA GOVERNMENT FLEXES MUSCLES TO SACK MINISTERIAL DG 
 
¶1. (SBU) In a first for the Basra government, the Provincial 
Council and Governor Shiltagh joined forces to use new 
Provincial Powers Law to remove a federal official from his job. 
 Six times before, the Basra provincial government had tried to 
fire the managerially challenged Director General (DG) for 
Sewers, Khadim Ahmed Muhsin.  Backed by the Minister of 
Municipalities and Public Works in Baghdad, however, the 
ineffective Muhsin had remained in place, doing little to 
improve the provinces sewage management, and arguably making 
matters worse.  In the last round, however, the Basra government 
leveraged both the Provincial Powers Law and our threat to 
withhold assistance to finally force the DG from office. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  PRT Basra experienced first-hand the difficulties 
working with DG Muhsin.  The Provincial Council and the governor 
were anxious to implement the PRT's two major sewer projects, 
valued at over $21 million.  The DG, however, refused to take 
the necessary steps to move the much-needed projects forward, 
and in fact seemed almost hostile in dealing with our staff. 
During Provincial Council deliberations on how to deal with the 
DG, the PRT underscored for a competent DG by stating that we 
would put our two projects on hold until better leadership was 
put in place in the sewer directorate. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  On July 22, the Provincial Council voted to fire the 
DG, and days later Governor Shiltagh signed the executing order 
to remove him.  Under the provisions of the Provincial Powers 
Law, the governor informed the Minister of Municipalities and 
Public Works in Baghdad of the action, and submitted three names 
of engineers working in the Basra's directorate of sewers as 
nominees for the DG position.  The Basra government named a 
young, energetic female technocrat as the acting DG, even as 
Muhsin refused to vacate his ministry office.  The Minister of 
Municipalities and Public Works did not act quickly on the 
nominations, eventually rejecting them all.  The governor then 
put forward the acting DG's name, and the minister rejected her 
as being too inexperienced.  It was only after a PRT member 
contacted the deputy minister in Baghdad  directly to underscore 
our intention to suspend our projects that the minister acted. 
He proposed as the new DG a female engineer running one of the 
larger sewage-treatment plants in Basra province.  The governor 
and the Provincial Council agreed to accept her.  They also 
acceded to the minister's demand that Muhsin be allowed to 
resign at the end of August instead of being fired.  When the DG 
showed no signs of leaving at the end of August, the governor 
sent police to arrest him, according to Governor Shiltagh's son 
and political advisor.  A shocked Muhsin collapsed as he was 
being handcuffed.  In a quickly arranged phone call to the 
governor, he agreed to leave his office in return for calling 
off the police.  Muhsin showed up at work once more to turn over 
his files to the new DG, who has confirmed that she has now 
taken full charge of the directorate. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Comment:  The Basra government's use of the Provincial 
Powers Law to remove an entrenched and ineffective DG did not 
unfold in textbook style, but it did happen.  Despite the 
minister's transparent stalling tactics and eventual demand that 
Muhsin be allowed to resign rather than being fired, in the end 
the minister bowed to the wishes of the Basra government.  The 
Provincial Powers Law gave the current provincial government the 
proper tool to succeed where previous governments had failed. 
Governor Shiltagh has informed us that he is now casting a 
critical eye on the performance of other DGs.  For those DGs, 
Muhsin's removal will send a powerful signal that they will be 
held accountable by the Basra government for their actions -- or 
inaction.  It lets the DGs know that days of being responsive 
only to their ministers -- and protected by them -- are over. 
 
SHEARER 
 
NALAND