09BAGHDAD757
SPECIAL LEADERSHIP TRAINING FOR PRT TEAM LEADERS
Thu Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
R 191047Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2290
INFO DIR FSINFATC WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000757 
 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I, NEA/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER IZ
SUBJECT:  SPECIAL LEADERSHIP TRAINING FOR PRT TEAM LEADERS 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  Embassy Baghdad's Office of 
Provincial Affairs (OPA) requests that FSI/NFATC in consultation 
with NEA develop a special 3-5 day course on "Leading Diverse Teams 
in Conflict Zones" for senior and FS-01 officers assigned to Team 
Leader positions in Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) in Iraq. 
The course also could be adapted for officers assigned to leadership 
positions in Afghanistan PRTs and in other conflict zones as well. 
 
¶2. There are currently 26 PRTs in Iraq headed by senior officers and 
FS-01s who must manage and lead civilian teams partnered with 
military brigades, to accomplish the mission of helping to build 
Iraqi provincial officials' capacity to govern.  The teams include 
professionals from State, USAID, DOD, Justice and other agencies, 
"3161" direct-hire subject matter experts, bilingual-bicultural 
advisers, and third country nationals.  Despite undeniable security 
improvements, service in Iraq remains service in a war zone.  Teams 
are under constant threat of explosive, mortar or small arms 
attacks, and their travel is limited to official business in armored 
convoys.  Work hours are long and team members live in spartan 
environments with little privacy and few off-duty options.  Although 
the team leaders are experienced FSOs capable of managing their 
mission and mentoring their staffs, few team leaders have exercised 
such complex responsibilities in such dangerous circumstances. 
 
¶3. Team Leaders currently are required to take two NFATC courses 
before arriving in Baghdad:  the week-long PRT course and the 
two-week FACT course.  Neither of those courses, however, prepares 
them for the special demands they will face as leaders in a 
high-stress, high ambiguity conflict zone. 
 
¶4. Over and above the day-to-day difficulties of capacity-building 
and development assistance work -- for which most Foreign Service 
officers are not trained, the team leaders must direct the work of 
diverse professionals from different backgrounds, many of whom have 
never worked for the State Department.  The administrative, 
contracting, hiring authority and logistical rules guiding 
operations in the PRTs are also remarkably intricate. 
 
¶5. OPA had discussed development of a PRT leadership course with 
FSI/NFATC trainers Ray Leki and Christine Powers during their visit 
to Baghdad in February 2009.  Leki and Powers led a session at the 
Quarterly Team Leaders' Conference. 
 
¶6. The Obama Administration has made clear that the PRT program 
remains one of its highest priorities for Iraq. NEA projects 
continuation of PRTs in Iraq at least through December 2011. 
 
¶7. Embassy Baghdad now asks that FSI/NFATC work with NEA to develop 
a 3-5 day version of the Senior Leadership Training course that 
would be geared toward leading diverse teams in conflict zones. 
Embassy Baghdad would recommend that all incoming officers assigned 
to lead PRTs in Iraq be required to take the course.  Ideally, the 
course would include modules on: 
- understanding styles of leadership; 
- representing the PRT and the USG to Iraqis, the UN and other 
foreign entities; 
- managing and leading in a multi-national, multi-cultural, 
multi-organization environment; 
- supervising and leading diverse multi-cultural, interagency and 
interdisciplinary teams; 
- working with the military, USAID, the United Nations, development 
NGOs, and other experts; 
- understanding the supervisory and evaluation requirements for 
FSOs, Civil Service detailees, "3161s," and other categories of 
employee; 
- dealing with EEO, harassment, disciplinary and other interpersonal 
issues in a high-stress environment; 
- managing up and around, working with challenging peers, 
- managing up and around, working with challenging peers, 
colleagues, bosses and subordinates; and 
- motivating self and others. 
 
¶8. In an increasingly "expeditionary" Foreign Service, diplomats 
would benefit from the focus and preparation afforded by this kind 
of leadership training course.  Looking beyond the Team Leaders 
assigned to PRTs in Iraq, the course would be relevant for those 
officers assigned to leadership positions in Afghan PRTs or possibly 
in other conflict zones. 
 
BUTENIS