09BAGHDAD3353
IRAQ: INCSR Report Part I - Drug and Chemical Control
Tue Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO6814
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3353/01 3630414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290414Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5920
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHMFISS/COMJSOC FT BRAGG NCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 003353 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL-I 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM KJUS PGOV IZ
 
SUBJECT: IRAQ: INCSR Report Part I - Drug and Chemical Control 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Senior Iraqi Government officials acknowledge that 
illicit drugs enter Iraq from Iran, some to be used by Iraqis, but 
most transshipped south out of Basra or north through Iraqi 
Kurdistan. However, officials deny that illicit narcotics are a 
major problem in Iraq. Indeed, faced with terrorist attacks and 
sectarian violence, the Government of Iraq (GOI) maintains no 
drug-abuse-specific statistics. The Iraqi Ministry of the Interior 
(MOI) has reported no known production of illicit drugs in Iraq. 
While the MOI, which also supervises the Border Forces, monitors 
narcotics-related arrests or seizures, it does not track the 
information in a manner in a manner that can be disseminated. 
Anecdotal reports from the Kurdish region note an increased albeit 
nascent use of illegal narcotics as a function of proximity to the 
transit route and returning Iraqi Kurds from exile in Iran with 
existing addictions.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) According to the Ministry of Health (MOH), the Iraqi 
health system is under-resourced and overwhelmed by trauma cases. 
Given the relatively modest drug abuse problems in Iraq, the MOH has 
not organized special treatment options for drug abuse. There are no 
controls over prescription drugs and no GOI focus on illegal drug 
use. Smuggling or theft of chemicals of any sort is more often 
related to bomb-making activities, not drug manufacture or abuse. 
However, within the last few years, there has been a marked increase 
in the seizure of large quantities of methamphetamine precursors, 
ephedrine and pseudoephedrine, as well as large seizures of 
amphetamine tablets. Money laundering is widely employed to support 
sectarian militias and/or terrorist groups, but is less apt to be 
used to launder the proceeds of narcotics sales. The availability of 
both chemical precursors and money laundering networks illustrate 
Iraq's vulnerability to narcotics trafficking should the security 
environment continue to improve. The three GOI anti-corruption 
agencies reported no corruption cases involving narcotics. Iraq is a 
party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
 
Status of Country 
----------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) Iraq is not a significant producer of illicit drugs or 
precursor chemicals. USDA advisors in Iraq opined that most of Iraq 
is too arid to grow plants that could be used for illicit drugs. In 
the South, where sufficient water is available, efforts to farm 
marijuana instead of rice have not succeeded. Due to its 
geographical location near drug-producing countries (Afghanistan) 
and drug-consuming or transshipping countries (Iran), Iraq is a 
transit country for illicit drugs. Iraq's vast desert borders and 
tenuous security situation make it vulnerable to illicit drug 
smuggling operations. However, due to numerous military checkpoints 
and subversive activity outside of military-controlled areas, the 
amount of narcotics being smuggled in and through Iraq is estimated 
to be low. Iraq is not a major drug-consuming country: most Iraqis 
would seem hard-pressed to find the cash to support a drug habit. A 
2009 INL-commissioned National Drug Intelligence Center report 
states that "although drug abuse statistics are sparse, reporting 
indicates that the abuse of synthetic drugs, especially 
pharmaceuticals, within Iraq is increasing.  The primary abusers are 
Qpharmaceuticals, within Iraq is increasing.  The primary abusers are 
reportedly Iraqi youths." 
 
Policy Initiatives 
------------------ 
¶4. (SBU) Policy Initiatives:  The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), 
in conjunction with the Department of State (DOS) Bureau of 
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement (INL), has begun an 
extensive training program for Iraqi border forces. This basic 
skills training program for Iraqi Forces includes a module on 
narcotics. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Agency (SAMHSA) is 
pursuing a partnership with GOI/MOH to provide training and 
technical assistance supporting two major treatment goals: 1) 
Screen, identify and treat patients needing substance abuse 
services; and 2) Provide rehabilitation, counseling and education 
services for patients enabling them to stay in treatment. 
 
Law Enforcement Efforts 
----------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) While Iraq lacks a coordinated national anti-narcotics 
effort, several Iraqi police commanders have requested training from 
the U.S. in identifying and prosecuting narcotics traffickers. The 
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has sent test kits for 
narcotics to several police units. Training in how to use these kits 
 
BAGHDAD 00003353  002 OF 004 
 
 
is done by U.S. contractors. Several provinces have anti-narcotics 
units and have requested funding, training and equipment for 
forensics laboratories to assist them in enforcing the strict 
anti-narcotics laws. To date, the GOI does not have official 
statistics on arrests and convictions for narcotics-related crime. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Iraqi Ministry of Justice (MOJ) reports that the vast 
majority of inmates confined in Iraq's prisons are there on 
terrorism-related charges. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) and the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) provide 
advisory and training assistance to Iraqi Department of Border 
Enforcement officials at high threat locations along Iraq's borders. 
DHS and CBP also provide assistance to Iraqi Customs, Immigration, 
and Border Guards to help ensure their policies, procedures, and 
capabilities enhance Iraqi border control efforts. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The USG provides some assistance to help the GOI develop 
counter-narcotics capacity. For example, State Department 
INL-contracted experts assigned to MNC-I (Multi-National Corps-Iraq) 
conduct training for Iraqi Border Forces. DEA also provides 
assistance. DEA operates in a concerted region-wide manner through 
the Ankara Regional Office in Turkey. DEA efforts include: 
establishing relations in the KRG (Kurdish Regional Government) 
between MNSTC-I (Multi-National Security Transition Corps-Iraq) and 
Kurdish authorities to develop operational cooperation, intelligence 
sharing, and investigative training; sharing intelligence and 
supporting Coalition initiatives such as MNF-W's (Multi-National 
Force-West) Joint Prosecution Exploitation Cell (JPEC); increasing 
efforts to develop intelligence in southeast Turkey, along the 
borders with Iran and Syria; assigning DEA agents to the Major 
Crimes Task Force (MCTF), an interagency effort headed by the FBI 
that works with the Iraqi Ministry of Interior. 
 
Corruption 
---------- 
¶8.  (SBU) While corruption is a serious problem in Iraq, Iraqi 
officials do not seem to engage in narcotics-related corruption. 
Before 2003, the GOI enforced strict prohibitions on narcotics 
abuse; current Iraqi cultural norms discourage recreational drug 
use. Consequently, current GOI officials are not viewed as 
encouraging or facilitating illicit production or otherwise 
supporting drug-trafficking. INL has provided $21 million in 
assistance from the FY-07 supplemental budget, and an additional 
$6.2 million from the 2008 supplemental budget, to train Iraqi 
anti-corruption agencies. Thus far, none of the corruption 
investigations undertaken have involved narcotics. 
 
Agreements and Treaties 
----------------------- 
¶9.  (SBU) Iraq is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention, the 1961 
UN Single Convention as amended by the 1972 Protocol, and the 1971 
UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances, In March 2008, Iraq 
acceded to the UN Convention against Corruption and to the UN 
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC) but has not 
signed any of the UNTOC protocols. The extradition treaty between 
Iraq and the United States is in force. 
 
Drug Flow/Transit 
----------------- 
¶10.  (SBU) Iraq is primarily a narcotics transit country. This 
presents many challenges for its new government.   An Iraqi official 
Qpresents many challenges for its new government.   An Iraqi official 
in Sulaymaniyah province reported seeing opium, heroin, and cannabis 
coming over the border in mule trains, cars and trucks operated by 
Iranian gangs. The drugs are moved on to Turkey, where the opium is 
refined into heroin then transited to Western Europe. 
 
Domestic Programs/Demand Reduction 
---------------------------------- 
¶11. (SBU) With its current focus on anti-terrorism operations, the 
GOI has no domestic programs to respond to the relatively few 
instances of narcotics-related problems. There are no prescription 
drug controls in Iraq. Village markets often have prescription 
drugs, pilfered from medical facilities, for sale in an uncontrolled 
atmosphere. In February 2008, the GOI, in a report provided by the 
National Intelligence Information Agency, within the Ministry of the 
Interior (MOI), summarized the drug problem in Iraq. The GOI 
reported that after 2003, there was a noticeable increase in the 
sale and consumption of illegal drugs. 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00003353  003 OF 004 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The GOI estimated approximately 10,000 Iraqi's are 
addicted to illegal narcotics, with recent growth among the addicted 
population between the ages of 16-24. It identified Iran as the main 
source of illegal drugs, and Maysan province as a primary passageway 
for illegal drugs. Health officials believe that Valium, a drug 
found in Iraqi correctional facilities and health institutions, is 
the drug most commonly abused by the Iraqi population. NGOs report 
that prescription drugs are significantly cheaper and more easily 
accessible than illegal drugs or even alcohol.  Accordingly, there 
is limited street demand for illegal drugs at this time. 
 
Drug Trafficking, the Insurgency, and Security Forces 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶13.  (SBU) There is some evidence that terrorists and/or violent 
groups use drug trafficking as a means of financing. Additionally, 
Coalition forces have reported that these groups use drugs to 
increase the risk-taking willingness of their fighters. 
 
Amphetamine 
----------- 
¶14.  (SBU) Since 2006, there have been several seizures of 
significant amounts of amphetamine tablets in Iraq. 
In December 2006, coalition forces seized 50,000 tablets of 
amphetamine.  In June 2008, coalition forces seized 595,000 tablets 
of amphetamine.  In July 2008 the Iraqi National Intelligence and 
Information Agency (INIIA) seized approximately 425,000 tablets of 
amphetamine.  In October 2008, coalition forces seized 125,000 
tablets of amphetamine.  Regionally, Jordanian law enforcement 
reported seizing approximately ten million tablets a year since 
2004, while Saudi Arabian authorities reported seizing approximately 
twenty-two million tablets from May to November 2007. 
 
Hashish 
------- 
¶15.  (SBU) Kuwait law enforcement has reported large quantities of 
hashish are being smuggled from Iran through Basra Province into 
Kuwait. This is corroborated by limited Iraqi intelligence 
reporting. Syrian law enforcement officials reported seizing 
approximately 125 kgs of hashish smuggled through Iraq. 
Equipment/Precursors. In the last three years there have been 
multiple attempts to import tablet processing equipment and large 
quantities of methamphetamine precursors into Iraq. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) In 2005 international law enforcement officials tracked 
the delivery of a tablet manufacturing press capable of producing 
50,000 tablets per hour from Germany to Iraq.  In 2006, 
international law enforcement officials stopped six shipments of 
ephedrine to Iraq totaling 18,000 kgs, and in 2007, stopped an 
additional three shipments of pseudoephedrine totaling 250,900 kgs. 
The International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) has set Iraq's 
legitimate annual ephedrine/ pseudoephedrine requirement at 1,400 
kgs.  In March 2008, international law enforcement officials halted 
the shipment of 10,000 kgs of pseudoephedrine to a company in Iraq. 
 
Methamphetamine 
--------------- 
¶17.  (SBU) While there has not been any indication of large scale 
methamphetamine production in Iraq, incidents of this nature and the 
large number of amphetamine tablets seized cause concern for the 
possibility of future production of methamphetamine or, more likely, 
illicit diversion of precursors to third countries. 
 
U.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
QU.S. Policy Initiatives and Programs 
------------------------------------ 
¶18.  (SBU) To assist Iraqi maritime forces in readiness to patrol, 
the USCG sent two engineering teams to provide training in the areas 
of logistics and administration. They also sent teams to provided 
advanced outboard motor maintenance and small boat operations 
training. 
 
The Road Ahead 
-------------- 
¶19.  (SBU) The USG will continue to support the training of the 
Iraqi Army, the Iraqi Police, the anti-corruption agencies, the 
Border Forces, and economic policy-makers in terms of agriculture 
and banking. Further, the USG is exploring a demand reduction 
program that will focus on awareness programs for youths.  The U.S. 
will encourage Iraq to direct more resources towards 
narcotics-related crime and abuse, and will assist Iraqi ministries 
 
BAGHDAD 00003353  004 OF 004 
 
 
to improve their capacity in preparation for a period when improved 
security permits a more typical enforcement effort.