09BAGHDAD63
ASHURA IN KARBALA: PEACEFUL, CROWDED, SANGUINE
Sun Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4123
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0063 0111308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111308Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1174
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000063 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KISL SOCI IZ
SUBJECT: ASHURA IN KARBALA: PEACEFUL, CROWDED, SANGUINE 
 
(U)  This message is Sensitive but Unclassified; handle 
accordingly.  Not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Ashura commemorations passed peacefully in 
Karbala amid a heavy security presence, elements of which 
will remain in place through Arba'ayniyah (February 15-16), 
which marks the end of the 40-day mourning period.  A record 
number of pilgrims, estimated at two million, participated. 
The Gaza situation elicited little visible sympathy.  In 
keeping with Ashura tradition, the streets were witness to 
bloody displays of emotion by visitors commemorating the 
slaying of Imam Husayn and several of his family in the 
Battle of Karbala.  End summary. 
 
----------------- 
Peaceful, Crowded 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Karbala's fifth Ashura since Iraq's liberation 
passed without major incident.  Most of the record number of 
pilgrims, estimated at two million, were Iraqis, but Iraqi 
Security Forces (ISF) estimate that 60,000 to 70,000 hailed 
from abroad, including sizeable delegations from India, 
Pakistan, and Iran.  Mindful of the possibility of heightened 
emotions spilling over into violence, regional ISF commander 
MG Othman al-Ghanimi deployed 28,000 soldiers and police 
around the province.  They were assigned to staff 
checkpoints, search pilgrims, spot potential trouble from 
watchtowers, and man snipers' nests on rooftops.  Othman has 
stated publicly that some strictures, such as vehicle 
searches, will remain in place through Arba'ayniyah (February 
15-16), which marks the end of the 40-day mourning period. 
 
------------------------ 
Gaza Not an Ashura Issue 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU)  A local witness to the traditional Aza Tuwarij (the 
procession of marchers from Hindiyah in eastern Karbala 
province to the downtown shrines of Imam Husayn and Imam 
Abbas) commented that pilgrims this year appeared more 
emotional than he recalled from previous Ashura celebrations. 
 Asked whether the Gaza situation was part of the reason, he 
replied no.  Iraqi Shi'as, he explained, despise the 
Palestinians for having supported Saddam Hussein.  Moreover, 
he continued, most Palestinians are Sunnis who -- at least 
until recent years -- were wont to view the anniversary of 
Imam Husayn's death as a cause for celebration. 
 
-------------------- 
Blood in the Streets 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Ashura traditionally is a time of high drama in 
Karbala.  Mosques throughout the province ring with all-night 
recitations and enact passion plays depicting the slayings of 
Imam Husayn (Mohammad's grandson through his daughter Fatima 
and son-in-law Imam Ali), Husayn's half-brother Imam Abbas, 
and other descendants of the Prophet in the Battle of 
Karbala, the signal event marking the birth of Shi'a Islam 
(in 680 C.E.).  In remorse over their forebears' failure to 
come to Imam Husayn's aid, some Iraqi Shi'as don burial 
shrouds and lacerate their flesh with barbed whips and chains 
or cut their scalps with a special sword known as a qama. 
The blood shed quickly turns the white shrouds -- and the 
streets around the twin shrines -- red.  Acccording to the 
local witness, Indian and Pakistani Shia's are the most 
sanguine, slicing themselves all over with short knives and 
razors.  The witness said that the condemnation of such 
bloodletting issued by Shaykh Abd al-Mahdi al-Karbala'i on 
the eve of Ashura appeared to have little deterrent effect. 
Some fanatics even cut their children while others prodded 
their progeny to cut themselves with miniature qamas. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) It is not often that one is able to describe a 
bloody event as successful, let alone peaceful, but this 
Qbloody event as successful, let alone peaceful, but this 
year's Ashura commemmorations were both.  As they did during 
Shabaniyah last August, Karbalans demonstrated that they can 
manage large, emotion-fraught public events.  The ISF, 
meanwhile, showed again their ability to work cooperatively 
with the local authorities to keep the peace.  End comment. 
CROCKER