09BAGHDAD2336
UNAMI SRSG TO DONOR PARTNERS: TOGETHER WE STAND OR
Sun Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4437
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2336/01 2421235
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301235Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4510
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002336 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN IZ PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: UNAMI SRSG TO DONOR PARTNERS: TOGETHER WE STAND OR 
FALL 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 2298 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Summary:  New UNAMI SRSG Ad Melkert told 
a well-attended Iraq Partners Forum meeting on August 26 
that it is "time to close the ICI chapter and open a new 
chapter" of the book on GoI-donor coordination.  Melkert 
said his current thinking is to aim for an 
Ambassadorial-level, vice Ministerial-level, International 
Compact with Iraq (ICI) meeting in November.  He added that 
this meeting should aim to segue the ICI into a new donor 
coordination mechanism.  Melkert said he wants to focus on 
three issues: defining the true purpose of the ICI and how 
to maintain the political commitment to that purpose; 
reconciling and de-conflicting the myriad of plans, 
strategies and mechanisms for GOI planning and donor 
coordination; and determining how to plan for security for 
any international donor event, in light of the August 19 
bombings in Baghdad.  He described the various donor 
coordination mechanisms as "too many processes taking too 
much time from too many people."  Noting the importance of 
dialogue and cooperation between the UN and donor 
countries, Melkert declared that "together, we stand or 
fall."  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
High Interest in Donor Coordination at IPF Meeting 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (U) The Iraq Partners Forum (IPF) is a monthly informal 
gathering of donor countries at UNAMI in Baghdad to discuss 
donor coordination and assistance priorities.  Meetings are 
usually co-chaired by the UNAMI Deputy SRSG for the Office 
of Development and Humanitarian Support and the World Bank 
Country Manager, with attendance from the larger donors 
present in Baghdad and video-conference attendance by UNAMI 
staff and other donors based in Amman.  UNAMI had 
considered not even holding an IPF this month, give the 
general August doldrums in Baghdad, but the advance agenda 
(with discussion of the ICI and the GOI's proposal for its 
new assistance coordination mechanism - Septel - on tap) 
made for a full room.  Senior officials attended from the 
embassies or missions of the UK, Italy, Spain, Sweden, 
Australia, Denmark, the EC, the USG, and newcomers Greece 
and Korea, with Japan, Canada, and France participating via 
videoconference from Amman.  The World Bank was notably 
absent, and the meeting was chaired by Acting UNAMI DSRSG 
Dr. Naeema Al-Gasseer and new UNAMI SRSG Ad Melkert sitting 
beside her. 
 
------------------------- 
Together We Stand Or Fall 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) After a short introduction, Melkert said he 
wanted to make sure the international community keeps the 
social, political, humanitarian and economic agendas in 
Iraq closely linked and well informed.  He noted the need 
for increased cooperation among UN agencies, both in 
Baghdad and Amman, and with the larger donor community. 
Melkert,s first impression, he added, is that there is a 
willingness by all of Iraq's partners to acknowledge that 
we are in the Iraqi effort together.  Donor coordination is 
too often about process, he said, and needs to focus more 
on substance.  Melkert specifically called for clearer 
direction from the GOI, and said he planned to discuss 
coordination efforts with the World Bank in Baghdad and 
Washington and with other UN agencies.  Noting the 
importance of open, frank dialogue and cooperation between 
the UN and the donor countries in Baghdad, Melkert declared 
that "together, we stand or fall." 
 
-------------------------- 
Closing the ICI Chapter... 
-------------------------- 
Q-------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Turning to the ICI, Melkert stated that his recent 
consultations with donors had been very helpful, 
specifically referencing his conversation with DCM for 
Assistance Transition Haslach (reftel).  Melkert said he 
would continue his discussions with other donors, the GOI, 
and UNNY. His preliminary assessment is that it is "time to 
close the ICI chapter and open a new chapter" in the book 
of GOI-donor country coordination.  Melkert added that 
while he would like to leave the door open to an 
Ambassadorial-level meeting sometime in the fall, a 
Ministerial-level meeting appears much less likely, 
especially after the August 19 bombings in Baghdad.  In the 
short term, Melkert said he is focused on three issues: 
defining the true purpose of the ICI and how to maintain 
the political commitment to that purpose; reconciling and 
 
BAGHDAD 00002336  002 OF 002 
 
 
de-conflicting the myriad of plans, strategies and 
mechanisms for GOI planning and donor coordination; and 
determining how to plan for security for any event, 
Ambassadorial-level or otherwise, in light of the bombings. 
 
------------------------ 
...And Opening a New One 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Melkert went on to say that his current thinking 
is to merge the ICI into a yet-to-be-defined donor 
coordination mechanism that supports Iraq's National 
Development Plan (NDP), and noted that the UN is already 
aligning its agencies' strategies with this plan. 
Referring to the proliferation of donor coordination 
initiatives in Iraq (ICI, NDP, UNDAF, PRSP, IRFFI, etc.), 
Melkert said that there are "too many processes taking too 
much time from too many people," and that there is a need 
to condense and de-conflict these efforts into one 
comprehensive strategy.  He said the international 
community should encourage the GOI to define priorities for 
assistance, and that the GOI needs to provide direction, 
now and after the election.  Melkert concluded that he 
would like to take a few weeks to  continue his 
consultations with the donors, the World Bank in Baghdad 
and Washington, the UN in NY, and the GOI before revisiting 
the future of the ICI and donor coordination. 
 
¶6.  (U) The other agenda item for the IPF meeting, a 
presentation by the Ministry of Planning DG for 
International Cooperation on her proposal for a new GoI 
assistance coordination mechanism, will be reported septel. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Melkert's admonition to focus more on the 
substance of donor coordination rather than process is a 
welcome message and one that dovetails with the re-tooling 
of our assistance efforts under the new DCM for Assistance 
Transition.  Our consistent message to the UN and the rest 
of the donor community in Baghdad has been the need to 
focus on the end goals of efficient donor coordination and 
GOI leadership and direction on assistance rather than on 
any specific vehicle or process. 
 
HILL 
HILL