09BAGHDAD1061
Nomination of Jeff Lodinsky for the 2009 Barbara M. Watson
Sun Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #1061/01 1091300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191300Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2748UNCLAS BAGHDAD 001061 
 
Attention: Special Assistant Julie Ruterbories 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT APER AMGT IZ
SUBJECT:  Nomination of Jeff Lodinsky for the 2009 Barbara M. Watson 
Award 
 
¶1.   Embassy Baghdad is proud to nominate Consul General Jeff 
Lodinsky for the 2009 Barbara M. Watson Award.  Jeff supervises one 
of the most stressful, demanding and unusual Consular operations in 
the world.  Through his leadership in Baghdad, the diverse, 
multi-national staff has achieved remarkable, even historic 
milestones and bilateral breakthroughs: the resumption of student, 
exchange visitor and almost all NIV processing for the first time 
since 1991; the resumption of immigrant visa processing for the 
first time in a generation; the first outreach trips across Iraq in 
at least 30 years; extensive media outreach; the start of SIV 
processing and the processing of thousands of Special Immigrant 
Visas; the expansion of the Passport Agent Program; and the 
processing of thousands of passports for our brave soldiers.  Jeff 
also set up a shuttle service for consular customer access into the 
International Zone (unique in the world), negotiated an expansion of 
visa reciprocity, secured Panel Physician contracts, maintained 
compassionate lines of communication with hostage family members and 
provided assistance to American citizens across war-torn Iraq. 
Across all consular functions and in service to the largest U.S. 
embassy in the world, Jeff led a section that, according to the 
visiting OIG inspection team, "...successfully provides a wide range 
of services while operating under conditions and challenges unlike 
any other in the world...and this is a tribute to the enthusiastic 
leadership of the consular chief." 
¶2.  Consular Baghdad took on greater importance as the embassy 
begins to implement the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement 
(SFA). Jeff and his staff worked in direct support of SFA 
implementation; a key component of our emerging and maturing 
bilateral relationship.  Implementing the SFA has been accompanied 
by a significant increase in bilateral coordination, and resultant 
consular involvement, much of which is tied to SFA-related exchanges 
and programs.  With each visa representing an important bilateral 
building block, Jeff regularly met with senior representatives of 
Iraqi ministries and agencies to ensure the prompt handling of 
diplomatic applications and the accurate completion of application 
forms.  Fully 95 percent of all Baghdad NIV applications require an 
SAO and when worldwide SAO processing delays affected our cases, 
Jeff drafted several front channel cables to inform the Department 
of its impact and made the case for more equitable treatment of this 
key strategic partner.  He also worked with CA/VO/L/C to communicate 
front office requests and to develop a high profile list ("the best 
of all posts," according to L/C) to manage the crush of urgent 
expedite requests.  He drafted a series of position papers for the 
SAORRB in which he recommended common-sense modifications to 
outdated SAO tripwires.  Jeff initiated intense negotiations with 
the Government of Iraq to expand visa reciprocity and coordinated 
the successful effort with CA/VO/F/P. 
¶3.  Diplomatic relations between the United States and Iraq were 
suspended in 1991, and most consular services were still inactive 
when Jeff came to post. Our diplomatic surge in Iraq was being 
frustrated as applicants had to travel outside of Iraq to access 
visa services--even our vulnerable interpreters and translators, 
those most threatened by assassination and kidnapping.  This journey 
left several dead or wounded.  Jeff was determined to introduce visa 
services in Baghdad, but he faced some unique challenges.  Given our 
location within the tightly cordoned International Zone applicants 
Qlocation within the tightly cordoned International Zone applicants 
are unable to access the embassy.  To resolve this problem, Jeff 
convened a series of meetings with security representatives and the 
U.S. military to come up with a viable access plan.  Jeff created an 
escorted, secure shuttle system to gather applicants at a military 
checkpoint--this secure shuttle system is the first of its kind 
anywhere in the world. 
¶4.  Iraq matters because it occupies a central role in the Arab 
world.  Our country's influence on future generations starts with 
Iraqi students traveling to the U.S. to study.  Iraq's "10,000 
Student Scholarship Program" provided us with an opportunity to 
demonstrate our commitment to the next generation of Iraqis. 
Ambassador Crocker and I challenged Jeff and his team: find a way to 
interview all students here in Baghdad. In August, months prior to 
the official opening of the New Embassy Complex, a significant 
moment in the embassy's post war history.  Ambassador Crocker and 
the Minister of Education cut the ribbon in the Consular Section, in 
view of the international media, to inaugurate student visa 
processing in Baghdad. 
¶5.  Since at least the 1980s, all IV applicants had to apply outside 
Iraq at regional embassies. Jeff was determined to implement SIV/IV 
processing in a coherent, methodical but safe manner. He assembled 
his consular team to map out a strategy and worked seamlessly with 
NVC, CA/VO/L/P and Embassy Amman. We now have the capacity to 
process up to 7,000 primary applicants per year. In February 2009 we 
reached an important milestone when we commenced regular immigrant 
and diversity visa processing in Baghdad for the first time in a 
generation. 
¶6.  Jeff and his staff soon found themselves confronting other 
challenges.  The number of Americans returning to a more stable Iraq 
increased dramatically, and with them came complex child abduction 
cases, arrests, kidnappings and, tragically, deaths.  The number of 
American civilians who die in Iraq is in the double digits.  Jeff 
recognized that our ability to assist American citizens was not 
sufficient. Jeff identified several officers stationed at PRTs to 
act as "consular first responders."  He worked with 
 
HR/CDA/SL/PAS/T&R and CA/EX/PAS to secure Consular Titles to perform 
basic emergency services. 
¶7.  Every week brings a new ACS challenge.  In order to resolve a 
complex child abduction case in Basra, Jeff asked an officer there 
to meet with the abducting parent and eventually escort the child to 
Kuwait. A/S Janice Jacobs praised this coordination as an example of 
"tireless support to reunite a mother and daughter."  As lead State 
representative on the Hostage Affairs Working Group Jeff regularly 
spoke with family members of American hostages.  In heartbreaking 
conversations, Jeff communicated our commitment never to give up the 
search for their loved ones. Jeff met with American citizens at the 
Iranian refugee camp at Ashraf to ensure they were provided with 
direct consular assistance and the option to depart Iraq. He also 
led an effort to train and authorize military attorneys to accept 
passport applications on the battlefield so that soldiers do not 
have to travel to Baghdad. 
¶8. Consular work is incomplete if practiced only within bunkered 
security walls.  Jeff organized the first-ever outreach by an 
American consul to the Kurdistan Region and Tikrit.  His 
high-profile meetings with hundreds of students, educational and 
business leaders, college faculty, the sizable American citizen 
community and the media underscored Embassy Baghdad's commitment to 
this politically sensitive region.  The RRT team leader wrote to 
say, "Thank Jeff for being willing to come north and meet with 
people face-to-face.  His example set the right tone for his staff. 
Following his lead, Jeff's consular officers embarked on outreach 
trips to Hillah, Camp Victory and have planned trips across the 
country.  Jeff met with virtually every Iraqi news outlet during his 
tenure, speaking authoritatively and persuasively on a range of 
consular issues. 
¶9. Empowering a largely entry-level staff to take ownership of 
initiatives was critical to the consular section's success. Jeff 
kept me informed and then gave his staff the authority to take the 
initiative. The OIG wrote, "Section morale is much higher than 
expected and this is a tribute to the enthusiastic leadership of the 
consular chief...the staff conduct their business with an amazing 
sense of 'can do' and team spirit." Jeff instituted a scheduled 
training period, mentored the all-ELO staff and then ensured their 
emotional needs were addressed by asking post's Mental Health 
Practitioner to visit the section for a group consultation.  His LES 
staff, most of whom were TDY on loan from around the world, were 
sharply focused, enthusiastic and innovative-a tribute to Jeff's 
leadership and managerial style. Citation: "For his leadership in 
mentoring his all entry-level officer corps, reestablishing a 
functioning, full-service consular section at Embassy Baghdad and 
for providing critical assistance to the American forces stationed 
in Iraq and to the American citizen community." 
BUTENIS