09BERLIN155
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ, GUANTANAMO, MSC, ISRAEL, ECONOMY,
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 061140Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3234
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000155 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/AGS, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM IZ US IS XF FR VT
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ, GUANTANAMO, MSC, ISRAEL, ECONOMY, 
ENERGY, HEALTHCARE, VATICAN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   Iraqi Reconstruction 
¶3.   Fate Of Guantnamo Detainees 
¶4.   Munich Security Conference 
¶5.   Upcoming Israeli Elections 
¶6.   U.S. Economy -- Protectionism 
¶7.   Sarkozy Speech 
¶8.   Nuclear Energy 
¶9.   U.S. Healthcare Insurance 
¶10.  Vatican Controversy 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused Deutsche Bank's earnings in the fourth quarter of 
2008, Sweden's decision to reverse its decision to phase out nuclear 
energy, and the debate over the Pope's policy towards conservative 
bishops.   ZDF-TV's early evening newscast Heute opened with a 
report on the earnings of Deutsche Bank, while ARD-TV's early 
evening newscast Tagesschau opened with a story on the debate in the 
Committee on a Reform of Federal Affairs over how to limit debt. 
 
¶2.   Iraqi Reconstruction 
 
Stuttgarter Zeitung observed: "What Iraq needs most now are 
investments and reconstruction assistance, which is distributed in a 
way that avoids using 50 percent for unclear projects.  The 
infrastructure is still broken, and the labor market primarily 
exists as a shadow economy.  The new U.S. government has now 
indicated that it pins its hopes also on German assistance.  The 
government in Berlin will have to approve this request, because the 
United States has returned to a reasonable and coordinated policy in 
Iraq.  In Washington, Foreign Minister Steinmeier has announced that 
Germany would help in the education and healthcare sector." 
 
¶3.   Fate Of Guantnamo Detainees 
 
Regional daily Fraenkischer Tag of Bamberg opined: "There is no 
question that the United States bears primarily responsibility for 
Guantnamo.  Nevertheless, Europe should not simply ignore this 
problem.  EU member states that have accused the United States for 
years of having violated human rights in Guantnamo must now do 
justice to their former claims.  Innocent people have the right to 
asylum in Europe." 
 
¶4.   Munich Security Conference 
 
Under the headline "Return to Diplomacy," Handelsblatt noted in a 
feature on the Security Conference that "the U.S. government makes a 
stand in Munich and readjusts its foreign policy."  The report adds: 
"The visit of the senior delegation from Washington is the first 
opportunity for Germans and other Europeans to make contact with the 
new U.S. administration.   The hope for an improved transatlantic 
relationship, which President Obama apparently wants, is enormous. 
The complete array of international conflicts will therefore be 
readjusted at the Munich Security Conference." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau stated: "In 2003, the rift between the U.S. 
and important European countries widened.  Six years later, 
everything is pointing towards building bridges." 
 
¶5.   Upcoming Israeli Elections 
 
Under the headline "The Friends of War will welcome Netanyahu's 
election victory," Berliner Zeitung analyzed:  "The conflict with 
the Palestinians had an impact on all elections in the last three 
decades.  The Gaza War will tip the scales on Tuesday.  Likud head 
Netanyahu is making a political comeback....  The policy towards the 
Palestinians, not social and economic issues, will decide the 
elections, but.  The 1993 Oslo peace accord only changed the 
negative image of the Palestinians in Israel for a short time.... 
The current events solidified this gloomy image....  Benjamin 
Netanyahu complains that the Gaza war was stopped too early.  He 
wants to oust Hamas." 
 
¶6.   U.S. Economy -- Protectionism 
 
Under the headline: "Spiderman Obama," Handelsblatt judged: "In 
principle, Barack Obama has realized that the 'buy American' clause 
violates global trade treaties and can cause a global wave of 
protectionism.  But the real issue is to quickly stop the rapid 
decline of the United States by using an enormous amount of money. 
'Buy American' is only a side aspect.  In order to eliminate this 
clause, Obama will not risk of getting entangled in the spider web 
of partisan policies." 
 
die tageszeitung argued that the fear of a new era of protectionism 
is exaggerated, and argued: "The WTO treaties will prevent tariff 
borders from going down - and this is something even the United 
States does not want.  President Obama is primarily interested in 
effectively stimulating the economy.  In reality, the fans of free 
trade are on the retreat.  They must witness that the parallel 
liberalization of the markets for capital and goods does not 
automatically produce greater wealth or reduced susceptibility to 
crises.  Now they are calling for the U.S. government to take the 
lead in the fight against the economic crisis.  But the United 
States also feels the disadvantages of globalization.  In the 
outrage against Obama's 'buy American' policy, the disappointment of 
globalization supports seems to come to the fore." 
 
Mitteldeutsche Zeitung of Halle noted: "The issue has not been 
settled with the U.S. giving up the 'buy American' clause. 
Everywhere in the world, governments are busy supporting their 
national economies.  The transition between national economic 
stimuli packages and a dangerous sealing off of their economies is 
pervasive.  When the United States saves Chrysler and General Motors 
from going bankrupt by subsidizing the companies with billions of 
dollars, then car producers in other countries are put at a 
disadvantage.  A race for subsidies is looming when governments 
spend billions of euros in taxpayers' money.  But in the end, all 
sides will only lose." 
 
¶7.   Sarkozy Speech 
 
S|ddeutsche commented: "Prior to his election, Sarkozy promised 
people who work more will have more money in their pockets.  The 
popularity of the president is now falling.  There are no star roles 
to be played on the international stage, with which Sarkozy could 
cover up his difficulties at home.  He no longer speaks for the EU, 
and the whole world is looking towards the new man in Washington. 
The left speaks of a looming social tsunami and calls for increasing 
consumer spending.  But this would further increase France's chronic 
deficit.  Sarkozy is therefore right to give priority to the reform 
program.  His government has come up with a number of immediate 
attractive measures: Cathedrals and universities will be 
refurbished.  However, the larger important infrastructure programs, 
like improving the streets and railroads, take more time." 
 
¶8.   Nuclear Energy 
 
Deutschlandfunk commented: "New reasons that nuclear energy can act 
as a carrier of hope are not in sight.  Despite all promises, new 
problems must be added to old blunders and problems.  The Achilles 
heel of nuclear energy is not security but the final disposal of 
nuclear waste.  This problem has not been resolved anywhere in the 
world.  That is why it is a risky game to invest in new energy 
plants. All indications are that a return to nuclear energy is also 
risky because uranium is scarce and expensive even today, while [the 
development] of renewable energies is progressing rapidly." 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine, "Sweden's decision to return 
will isolate Germany's Social Democrats and the Greens.  In times of 
climate protection, the situation has totally changed.  All around 
Germany, operating times for nuclear power plants are being extended 
and new power plants are being ordered." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung editorialized: "On Thursday, the nuclear lobby 
achieved a resounding victory in Stockholm.  For the opponents of 
nuclear energy, especially the ones in Germany, this is a bitter 
defeat.  Why is Sweden now reversing its decision, even though it is 
thinly populated, has powerful rivers, enormous forests, and windy 
coastlines that offer enough opportunities for the generation of 
alternative energies?  Because it has never seriously tried it. 
Sweden merely talked loudly about the abolishment of nuclear energy, 
but this decision has never really been implemented.  This is bad 
news, because a radical rethinking would be necessary in energy 
policy." 
 
"The decision of the Swedish government to lift the ban on the 
construction of new nuclear power plants does not mean a renaissance 
of nuclear energy," die tageszeitung opined, and added: "The 
wishy-washy decision to replace nuclear energy once a good 
replacement is available meant in reality that the real phasing out 
of nuclear energy was postponed to never-never day.  We should be 
grateful that the Reinfeldt government is now creating clarity.  The 
parties must now show their true colors before the next elections." 
 
 
¶9.   U.S. Healthcare Insurance 
 
Regional daily N|rnberger Nachrichten  noted: "Before the end of 
last year, when President Obama's predecessor George W. Bush 
thwarted a bill of a healthcare insurance for children, people in 
the U.S. were outdated about this decision.  The cold reasoning of 
the alleged 'compassionate conservatism' was that there were no 
funds available in the budget.  Bush's wars, however, continue to 
burden the budget.  Nevertheless, there should and there must be 
enough funds available for repairing urgent social problems. 
[Obama's step] demonstrates a sense of responsibility which would 
also be good for politicians elsewhere who focus their attention 
only on bailout packages for banks and companies." 
 
¶10.   Vatican Controversy 
 
Regional daily Nordbayerischer Kurier of Bayreuth opined: "The 
Vatican, which is otherwise a master in presenting its own cause, 
has remarkably exposed itself in the case of Holocaust denier 
Richard Williamson.  It is simply not enough to try to change the 
storm of protests with a short statement into a mild response.  It 
is up to the Pope to say something, but he keeps quiet.  Benedict is 
silent at a time, when the world requires a clear statement. 
Nothing could characterize the detached seclusion of the Church 
leader better." 
 
Kieler Nachrichten argued: "The Pope is shocked at the chancellor. 
The Central Council of Jews no longer believes in what the Pope 
says. The chancellor is now saying that the Vatican's call to 
Williamson to recant his views on the Holocaust is good signal. 
This is a beginning.  For more than two weeks now, the Vatican and 
the German government, the Jews and the Catholics have been talking 
at cross purposes.  But enough is enough.  The Pope wanted to 
reconcile and not divide.  His gesture aimed at the opponents of the 
Second Vatican Council, but was not aimed at the deniers of the 
Holocaust.  The chancellor totally misunderstood Benedict's 
motivation.  Merkel made a mistake and she should admit to having 
made a mistake.  It is time to return to reason - on all sides 
involved." 
 
 
KOENIG