09BEIJING2570
XINJIANG STABILITY, ISRAEL SETTLEMENTS, PAKISTAN, INDIA
Tue Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0159
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2570/01 2510910
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080910Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5953
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6980
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0714
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0268
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002570 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MNUC SENV CH KN KS JP IN IR AE IS PK TW
SUBJECT: XINJIANG STABILITY, ISRAEL SETTLEMENTS, PAKISTAN, INDIA 
BORDER 
 
¶1. Key points at the September 8 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The Chinese Government was capable of dealing with the situation 
in Xinjiang and would handle the issue according to law. 
 
-- China hoped that Israel would "be prudent and take measures to 
facilitate the early resumption of talks" with Palestine. 
 
-- Asked about reports that China's ambassador to Pakistan had 
thanked Pakistan for its role in moderating the Organization of the 
Islamic Congress' response to unrest in Xinjiang, Jiang said that 
Pakistan and China were "friendly neighbors with an all-weather 
friendship." 
 
-- Indian media reports of Chinese incursions onto Indian territory 
were "groundless and untrue." 
 
-- China hoped relevant parties would promote denuclearization, 
peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
Xinjiang Unrest 
--------------- 
 
¶2.  The Chinese Government was capable of dealing with the situation 
in Xinjiang and would handle the issue according to law, said MFA 
Spokesperson Jiang Yu at the regularly scheduled September 8 press 
conference.  China would safeguard social stability and protect the 
public interest in the region.  Asked about reports that Hong Kong 
journalists had been beaten and detained while reporting in Urumqi, 
Jiang stated that police had taken some "necessary and temporary 
measures." Jiang said that reporters should "understand and comply" 
with such measures and noted that "conflicts could be resolved 
through communication."  China's policy of protecting foreign 
journalists in China remained unchanged, she declared. 
 
Israel Settlements 
------------------ 
 
¶3. China had taken note of reports of planned expansions of Jewish 
settlements on the West Bank, said Jiang.  The international 
community was dedicated to the resumption of talks between Israel 
and Palestine and expanded settlements would not help this goal. 
China hoped that Israel would "be prudent and take measures to 
facilitate the early resumption of talks." 
 
Pakistan and Xinjiang 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about reports that China's ambassador to Pakistan, Luo 
Zhaohu, had thanked Pakistan for its role in moderating the 
Organization of the Islamic Congress' response to unrest in 
Xinjiang, Jiang said that Pakistan and China were "friendly 
neighbors with an all-weather friendship."  Pakistan was an 
important Muslim country and China engaged with the Muslim world on 
the basis of mutual trust and respect for core interests, said 
Jiang.  China was a "united multi-ethnic country" with an ethnic 
policy aimed at common prosperity.  The Chinese people knew best how 
to address ethnic issues in China, said Jiang.  China hoped that 
Muslim countries would respect Chinese government efforts in this 
area and China appreciated their understanding and support. 
 
China-India Border Issues 
------------------------- 
 
¶5. China had "noted" recent Indian media reports of Chinese forces 
crossing the border into India, said Jiang.  These reports were 
"groundless and untrue."  Chinese border guards carried out their 
duties according to law and would not enter another country.  China 
and India should make joint efforts to safeguard peace and stability 
in the region, said the spokesperson. 
 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
¶6. China hoped relevant parties would proceed from the "overall 
interest" and promote denuclearization, peace and stability on the 
Korean Peninsula, said Jiang.  China was ready to work with other 
countries to restart dialogue "as soon as possible." 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. All parties at the recently concluded Political Directors General 
meeting on the Iranian nuclear issue agreed to increase efforts to 
reach a diplomatic settlement of the issue, said Jiang.  Relevant 
 
BEIJING 00002570  002 OF 002 
 
 
parties should make positive efforts to realize the resumption of 
talks.  Sanctions would not help diplomatic efforts aimed at the 
resumption of talks, said Jiang. 
 
Arms Shipment from UAE 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. Media stories from India on September 8 reported that Indian 
authorities had detained a UAE Air Force C-130 carrying small arms 
destined for China.  The spokesman was "unaware of the specific 
reports" regarding the incident and referred reporters to "relevant 
companies." 
 
Taiwan UN Membership 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. China's position on the issue of Taiwan admission to the United 
Nations was "clear and consistent."  UN membership was exclusive to 
sovereign nations and most members upheld UN General Assembly 
Resolution 2758, said Jiang.  China's One China policy was 
unchanged. 
 
China, Japan, South Korea Talks 
------------------------------- 
 
¶10. China, Japan and South Korea were having working-level 
consultations regarding the date and modalities for an upcoming 
meeting between the three countries' senior leaders.  2009 marked 
the tenth anniversary of the three nations' cooperation and 
coordination.  China would coordinate and host the meeting and hoped 
to strengthen cooperation with Japan and South Korea. 
 
Climate Change 
------------- 
 
¶11. The international community should adhere to the principle of 
common but differentiated responsibilities and take into account 
individual countries' history, development and competence in 
addressing climate change, said Jiang.  China hoped developed 
countries would make commitments to large emissions reductions and 
honor their commitments to provide developing countries with 
important technology.  Developing countries should also take 
measures to mitigate their emissions. 
 
HUNTSMAN