09BEIJING1353
MAY 19 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S. AMBASSADOR TO CHINA, BOC
Tue May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7831
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1353/01 1391118
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191118Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4077
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0485
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3539
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001353 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH FR AS KN PK BR IN KS XG BM RS
VM 
 
SUBJECT: MAY 19 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S. AMBASSADOR TO CHINA, BOC 
VERDICTS, U.S. LEGISLATION, BURMA 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 19 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- -- China "hoped the new U.S. Ambassador to China would play a 
positive role in promoting friendship between the two countries." 
 
-- China "welcomed the verdict" convicting two former Bank of China 
employees who "committed embezzlement and then absconded to the 
United States." 
 
-- Sections of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act for 2010 and 
2011 "violated the fundamental principles of international relations 
as well as the three China-U.S. joint communiques and relevant 
bilateral agreements." 
 
-- Asked about China's reaction to U.S. statements on Burmese 
political prisoner Aung San Suu Kyi, Ma said that the issue "should 
be decided by the people" of Burma. 
 
 
U.S. Ambassador to China 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. The United States officially "solicited the opinion of China" 
about the recently named U.S. Ambassador to China said MFA 
spokesperson Ma Zhaoxu at the May 19 regular press conference. 
China would deal with the issue through established international 
practice, he noted.  China hoped the new Ambassador would "play a 
positive role in promoting friendship between the two countries." 
 
Bank of China Convictions 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. China welcomed the verdict convicting two former Bank of China 
employees who "committed embezzlement and then absconded to the 
United States."  The case demonstrated "positive progress" in 
U.S.-China law enforcement cooperation.  "No matter where they hide" 
warned Ma, "international justice" would find corrupt people.  China 
would work with the United States to find a way to repatriate or 
extradite the pair back to China, said Ma. 
 
U.S. Legislation 
---------------- 
 
¶4. Sections of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act for 2010 and 
2011 violated "the fundamental principles of international relations 
as well as the three China-U.S. joint communiques and relevant 
bilateral agreements," Ma proclaimed.  The sections dealing with 
China's internal matters -- including Taiwan, Hong Kong and Tibet -- 
infringed on China's internal affairs, he added.  China had made 
solemn representations to the United States on this matter and urged 
the United States to "delete the sections so as not to damage 
bilateral relations."  In contrast, China had also "taken note" of 
four more positive bills pending in the U.S. House of 
Representatives dealing with "trade, energy, climate change and 
culture" introduced by the U.S.-China Working Group.  China was 
ready to make progress with the United States on all of those 
issues, said Ma. 
 
Burma 
----- 
 
¶5. Asked about China's reaction to U.S. statements seeking the 
release of Burmese political prisoner Aung San Suu Kyi, Ma said that 
the issue "should be decided by the people" of Burma.  He added that 
China hoped Burma would be able to achieve reconciliation, stability 
and peace. 
 
Tiananmen Massacre Anniversary 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6. Asked about the recently released memoirs of deposed Chinese 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, Ma said that the Chinese Communist Party 
and government had "already reached an unequivocal conclusion" on 
the "political incident of the late 1980s and related issues."  The 
past three decades had witnessed the "remarkable success" of 
Socialism with Chinese characteristics.  This development was "in 
the fundamental interest" of the Chinese people," said Ma.  Asked 
about remaining Tiananmen activists who were still in prison, Ma 
said that he didn't know where the reporter got his information. 
 
Tibet and Dalai Lama's Visit to France 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Tibet remained an "inalienable part of China" and the Dalai Lama 
was a "political exile" who had not stopped his efforts to split 
China.  The purpose of his visit to France was to "damage relations" 
 
BEIJING 00001353  002 OF 003 
 
 
between China and France, announced Ma.  China opposed any country 
allowing the Dalai Lama to conduct his political activities in its 
territory. 
 
H1N1 
---- 
 
¶8. Relevant Chinese Authorities would closely watch the developments 
of the progress of the H1N1 virus and China would follow the latest 
World Health Organization suggestions, said Ma.  China had made 
"major deployments" to counter the spread of the virus.  China 
"might adjust" its countermeasures, and reporters should watch the 
website of China's Ministry of Health carefully, said Ma. 
 
BRIC Meetings 
-------------- 
 
¶9. Asked about the upcoming Brazil, Russia, India, China (BRIC) 
Foreign Minister's meeting to be held in June, Ma said that China 
took a positive view towards the gathering.  All four countries were 
"major emerging powers" sharing the political will to take action on 
development issues.  The grouping was "transparent" and not aimed 
against any other country, Ma noted. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶10. Relevant countries should work hard to safeguard peace and 
stability on the Korean Peninsula and promote the Six-Party Talks, 
said Ma.  Ma added that China was "doing its part" on this issue. 
 
Sri Lanka 
--------- 
 
¶11. As a "friendly neighbor" of Sri Lanka, China was following the 
situation there closely, said the spokesperson.  China hoped the 
country could achieve national reconciliation, stability and 
economic development.  China had also offered 1 million USD in aid 
to help civilians in the northern part of the country as well as 20 
million RMB worth of tents. 
 
China-EU Summit 
--------------- 
 
¶12. Wen Jiabao planned to attend the 11th China-EU summit to be held 
in Prague on May 20th.  The summit represented the "highest 
consultative mechanism" between European and Chinese leaders.  Wen 
Jiabao would exchange views with counterparts on relations and would 
sign "cooperation documents."  Wen Jiabao's participation in the 
summit was a demonstration of the importance China placed on the 
relationship with the EU, said Ma.  China hoped to work with the EU 
to strengthen cooperation and combat the financial crisis. 
 
Papua New Guinea 
---------------- 
 
¶13. Foreign owned businesses suffered looting recently in Papua New 
Guinea including nine Chinese owned stores, said the spokesperson. 
Ma noted that there were no casualties and that most foreign owned 
shops had returned to regular operations.  The Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs made representations to the Papua New Guinea government and 
asked for increased police presence to avoid future incidents. 
China also warned its citizens to use caution in Papua New Guinea. 
 
Brazil Presidential Visit 
------------------------- 
 
¶14. President Hu Jintao would host a welcome ceremony for and hold 
talks with Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva during his 
current visit to China, said Ma.  Cooperation documents would be 
signed and China hoped to promote the strategic partnership with 
Brazil. 
 
Trafficking in UK 
----------------- 
 
¶15. Asked about reports of 77 Chinese children trafficked into the 
United Kingdom, Ma said that China "firmly opposed" the trafficking 
of children.  China urged the UK government to look into the reports 
and keep China informed of any developments. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶16. President of Sierra Leone Ernest Bai Koroma planned to visit 
China from May 24-30.  Prime Minister Wen Jiabao would attend the 
 
BEIJING 00001353  003 OF 003 
 
 
9th Asia-Europe Summit in Hanoi May 25-26.  The talks would focus on 
jointly combating the financial crisis and increasing communication 
and mutual trust between regions.  China hoped that the Summit would 
build on the achievements of the previous meeting held in Beijing 
last year. 
 
WEINSTEIN