09BEIJING200
January 22 MFA Press Briefing: President Obama's Inaugural
Thu Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2349
OO RUEHBC RUEHCN RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHGH RUEHKUK RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0200/01 0221031
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221031Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1984
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4493
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 2116
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON 4748UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM ETRD CH KN FR IR XF BM
SUBJECT: January 22 MFA Press Briefing: President Obama's Inaugural 
Speech, Guantanamo Bay Detainees, Sanlu Group Trial, Sino-French 
Relations 
 
¶1. Key points at the January 22 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- MFA Spokesperson was "not aware" of President Obama's inaugural 
speech having been censored when broadcast on Chinese media, adding 
that the media in China enjoyed their "own editing right." 
 
-- China hopes the "relevant parties" will adhere to international 
law when considering the release of Chinese Guantanamo Bay detainees 
to countries other than China. 
 
-- The trial of Sanlu Group's former executives is being "strictly 
handled by law," and China is paying "great attention" to food 
safety and relevant monitoring mechanisms. 
 
-- China will hold a series of cultural events this year to 
commemorate the establishment of Sino-French relations, but the 
"setback" in bilateral relations must be addressed by France. 
 
Obama's inaugural speech 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. At the regular MFA press briefing on January 22, MFA Spokesperson 
Jiang Yu said she was "not aware" of Obama's inaugural speech having 
been censored when broadcast on Chinese media, and added that in any 
case the media in China enjoyed their "own editing right."  When 
asked to respond to the fact that President Obama referred to the 
defeat of communism and the right to dissent in his speech, Jiang 
said that all countries should "work to build a harmonious world" 
and that China hopes President Obama's foreign policy will be 
conducive to global peace and stability. 
 
¶3. When pressed specifically about President Obama's pledge to 
improve human rights and civil liberties, Jiang stressed that the 
President's comments were not directed at one country, and that 
China "respects and protects" human rights, a value enshrined in its 
Constitution.  She added that because China is at a preliminary 
stage of socialism, it needs to "improve its human rights," as do 
all countries of the world.  She pointed out that China "works hard 
towards this goal" to promote human rights, has already signed some 
twenty international conventions, conducted dialogues with over 
twenty different countries and has "good contact" with the UN 
Commission on Human Rights and the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom 
of Religion. 
 
Guantanamo Bay 
-------------- 
 
¶4. When asked whether or not U.S.-China relations would be harmed if 
Chinese detainees from Guantanamo Bay were released to a country 
other than China, Jiang said that she hoped the "relevant parties" 
would adhere to international law, adding that Chinese terrorists 
must be "handed to China" which would in turn "handle the case by 
law." 
 
Sanlu Trial 
----------- 
 
¶5. The trial of Sanlu Group's former executives is being "strictly 
handled by law," said Jiang when asked about recent developments in 
the case, adding that China is paying "great attention" to food 
safety, has strengthened its relevant rules and regulations, and has 
cooperated with the international community to improve its food 
safety monitoring mechanisms. 
 
Visit to DPRK 
------------- 
 
¶6. The Chinese Communist Party (CPC) delegation to the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), led by CPC International Liaison 
Department Director Wang Jiarui, is a "normal exchange" between the 
two countries, said Jiang, referring more specific questions about 
Wang's agenda to "relevant departments." 
 
Iran 
---- 
 
¶7. Jiang said she had no information about an upcoming meeting on 
Iran to be held in Berlin next month, but that China hoped "dialogue 
and consultation" would continue to maintain regional stability and 
that diplomatic efforts would "improve." 
 
Middle East 
----------- 
 
¶8. On the situation in the Middle East, Jiang said that China 
welcomes Israel's withdrawal from Gaza as conducive to easing 
tension in the region.  She added that China expected both sides to 
 
BEIJING 00000200  002 OF 002 
 
 
implement Security Council Resolution 1860 to "promote stability and 
the rebuilding of Gaza." 
 
Sino-French relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶9. China will hold a series of cultural events this year to 
commemorate the establishment of Sino-French relations forty-five 
years ago, said Jiang.  However, the "setback" in relations between 
China and France is not China's responsibility, she added, and China 
expects France to bring bilateral relations "back on track," as the 
"doer has to undo what he has done." 
 
Chinese kidnapped in Burma 
-------------------------- 
 
¶10. Jiang had no information about a group of Chinese teens 
kidnapped and taken to Burma, and referred all questions to the 
Ministry of Public Security. 
 
Press briefing schedule 
----------------------- 
 
¶11. Jiang announced that due to the Spring Festival, MFA press 
briefings on January 27 and January 29 will be cancelled.  The next 
regular press briefing will be held on Tuesday, February 3. 
 
PICCUTA