09BEIJING3083
NOVEMBER 10 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: OBAMA VISIT, EXCHANGE RATE,
Wed Nov 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5425
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3083/01 3152306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 112306Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6769
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0342
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0381
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 1080UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003083 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM EFIN ECON PHSA ABUD IN XA TW SY
 
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 10 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: OBAMA VISIT, EXCHANGE RATE, 
DALAI LAMA, TAIWAN 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 10 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The visit of U.S. President Obama will have a great influence on 
the future development of bilateral relations. 
 
-- China will follow a proactive and transparent policy to improve 
the Renminbi (RMB) exchange mechanism and give full play to supply 
and demand. 
 
-- China is "firmly opposed" to the Dalai Lama's visit to the 
disputed border region Arunachal Pradesh. 
 
-- It is important for U.S.-China relations that both sides continue 
to follow the three Joint Communiques. 
 
President Obama Visit 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. The visit of U.S. President Obama would have a great influence on 
the future development of bilateral relations, said Qin Gang at the 
November 10 regularly scheduled MFA press briefing.  China hoped the 
two countries could work together to ensure proactive and 
comprehensive bilateral relations.  China looked forward to 
exchanging views on issues of mutual importance including 
international, regional and bilateral topics.  China and the United 
States continued to consult on the details of the visit and China 
hoped the visit would be a positive achievement.  There had been no 
change in the dates for the President's visit due to the tragedy at 
Fort Hood. 
 
Exchange Rate Issue 
------------------- 
 
¶3. China's position on its exchange rate was clear and had been 
expressed on many occasions, said the spokesperson.  China would 
follow a proactive and transparent policy to improve the Renminbi 
(RMB) exchange mechanism and give full play to supply and demand. 
China would work to ensure the stability of the RMB exchange rate on 
the basis of reason and flexibility.  The U.S. had the number one 
economy in the world and its development would affect the world 
financial situation.  If the United States could overcome the 
difficulties of the financial crisis and maintain the stability of 
its economy this would have a positive effect on the U.S. exchange 
rate.  This would be good for China and the world as a whole. 
 
China-India Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. China was "firmly opposed" to the Dalai Lama's visit to the 
disputed border region Arunachal Pradesh, said Qin.  The visit had 
fully exposed the anti-China nature of the Dalai Lama and his 
efforts were "doomed to fail."  China had expressed strong 
dissatisfaction over India's disregard for the Chinese position. 
 
Taiwan Issue 
------------ 
 
¶5. The three Joint Communiques were "very clear" regarding the 
status of Taiwan, said Qin.  It was important for U.S.-China 
relations that both sides continued to follow the Communiques. 
China's core interests should be respected to ensure the positive 
development of relations, said Qin. 
 
Pirates 
------- 
 
¶6. Qin had not heard reports that a Hong Kong cargo ship had 
repulsed an attack by pirates. He was, however, relieved to hear 
that the crew members were not being held captive.  China had 
dispatched PLA Navy ships to Somali waters to protect Chinese ships. 
 Hong Kong was part of Chinese territory and China would also 
provide protection to Hong Kong ships as required.  China was ready 
to cooperate with other nations to combat piracy and ensure the 
peace and stability of the region, he said. 
 
U.S.-China Trade 
---------------- 
 
¶7. U.S.-China trade had made unprecedented progress in the previous 
thirty years, said Qin.  The increasing interdependence had brought 
the two countries continually closer and brought tangible benefits 
to people in both countries.  Economic relations between China and 
the United States sometimes resulted in "friction and disputes" 
mostly because of the different national conditions of each country 
and the pressures of globalization.  China and the United states 
should cooperate on the basis of equality and mutual respect and 
should resist trade and investment protectionism.  China called on 
the United States to work with China to stop trade protectionism, 
 
BEIJING 00003083  002 OF 002 
 
 
said Qin. 
 
Uighur Executions 
----------------- 
 
¶8. The nine Uighurs put to death in Xinjiang were criminals who had 
been involved in the July 5 incident, said Qin.  The cases had been 
handled according to law. 
 
Africa Aid 
---------- 
 
¶9. Wen Jiabao mapped out a plan for Chinese aid to Africa for the 
next four years during the opening ceremony of the China-Africa 
Summit, said the spokesman.  The package would include favorable 
loans aimed at taking into account Africa's short-term needs and 
long-term desire for improved livelihoods and self-development.  The 
loans would cover areas such as agriculture, healthcare and 
education, said Qin.  China would continue to listen to the voices 
of African countries to map out the plan in more detail. 
 
Foreign Journalists 
-------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked whether there were restrictions on the reporting 
activities of foreign journalists in Xinjiang, Qin stated that 
foreign journalists would have to follow Chinese laws and 
regulations.  These laws and regulations applied to all regions of 
China including Xinjiang. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶11. Chinese Vice Premier Hui Liangyu would visit Rome for the World 
Summit on Food Security from November 16-18 and would pay a separate 
visit to Syria from November 18-20. 
 
HUNTSMAN