09BERLIN637
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, SUPREME COURT, MIDEAST,
Wed May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 271152Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4207
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000637 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM KN US IS XF FR AE
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, SUPREME COURT, MIDEAST, 
CLIMATE, FRANCE 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   North Korean Nuclear Threat 
¶3.   Supreme Court Nomination 
¶4.   Israeli Settlements 
¶5.   Climate Protection 
¶6.   New French Base in UAE 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Early evening newscasts ZDF-TV's Heute and ARD-TV's Tagesschau 
opened with stories on the German government's upcoming decision on 
carmaker Opel.  Newspapers led with diverse stories, including the 
government's further economic plans (Sueddeutsche), the "severe 
dispute about living wills" (FAZ), and the latest PISA study (Die 
Welt).  Editorials focused on the authority that deals with the 
former East German intelligence service and the debate about living 
wills. 
 
¶2.   North Korean Nuclear Threat 
 
Norddeutscher Rundfunk radio of Hamburg commented: "Once again a 
small country was not taken seriously and was only pushed back and 
forth on the chessboard of the geo-political interests of the major 
powers.  Moscow and Beijing have been easy on Pyongyang in order to 
prevent the reunification of the two Koreas and have slowed down UN 
attempts to achieve this goal.  At the same time, the world can't 
make the U.S. position out.  The non-members of the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, India and Israel, both of which have 
hundreds of nuclear warheads, are even supported in their efforts. 
They have not ratified the comprehensive ban on nuclear weapons 
tests from the 1990s and this does not jibe with condemnation of 
North Korea. The fiasco in the Far East could offer an opportunity 
for Barack Obama's plan of a nuclear-free world to take shape. 
Let's now start with the preparatory work.  By the way, Germany and 
other non-owners of nuclear weapons are not falling by the wayside. 
Especially as signatories of the NPT, they are the guarantors for 
credibility and could pursue a course counter [to other country's 
interests] and could use this opportunity to convince Tehran, too, 
[to give up its nuclear program]." 
 
Under the headline: "The Desperate Dictator," Sueddeutsche Zeitung 
judged: "No one should be afraid of North Korea.  Irrespective of 
the justified outrage in South Korea and Japan, it is highly likely 
that the regime will not use its weapons against its neighbors, 
because this would be suicidal.  North Korea is not striving for 
regional hegemony either.  The regime concentrates on itself and 
will not get in China's way.  Why then these bomb tests?  The 
detonation on Monday reflects the hobby of a dictator who suffers 
from a lack of attention. His logic works the other way round. 
North Korea is so weak that it stabilizes itself with its saber 
rattling.  Kim Jong-il uses the bomb as his life insurance.  And 
since his political life has obviously passed is zenith he needs the 
detonation all the more to safeguard his power and to control the 
change to a successor." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine judged: "North Korea has nothing that could 
give it international significance, apart from its nuclear 
threatening potential towards neighboring states such as South Korea 
or Japan and the export of missile technology to regimes which we 
would not like to see to have such weapons.  That is why we cannot 
expect Kim Jong-il to listen to the UN Security Council, or to take 
U.S. admonitions and threats more seriously than before.  President 
Obama will have to make up his mind whether he should again get 
involved in a game which embarrassed his predecessors Bush and 
Clinton before.  The whole world agrees that the key to the North 
Korea problem lies in China because Beijing keeps Kim's regime 
economically alive." 
 
Regional daily Frdnkischer Tag of Bamberg argued: "The problem for 
the rest of the world always comes up when the isolated regime in 
Pyongyang bares its teeth.  What to do with a regime that does not 
show any consideration for anything?  What should be done if all 
diplomatic means fail?  For instance, what effect do economic 
sanctions have on a regime that keeps its own people in a state of 
permanent captivity?  And what can be done against a man who could 
run amok with nuclear weapons and who could open hell shortly before 
his own fall?" 
 
Lausitzer Rundschau of Cottbus has this to say: "Thus far, Kim 
Jong-il has relied primarily on the Chinese leadership, which has 
considered Kim the lesser evil and had little interest in a 
development that could end with a reunification of the country.  But 
even Beijing is slowly realizing that the North Korean regime is 
turning into an increasing risk....  North Korea's plutonium can 
become a fatal danger for anyone and any time.  That is why fears 
from Washington are justified." 
 
Regional daily Der Neue Tag noted: "Even Russia and China, which 
support the Stalinist leadership in Pyongyang in order to preserve 
an alleged balance with the South on the Korean peninsula, must now 
realize what kind of unpredictable partner they have nurtured?.  It 
is heavily armed with conventional weapons and has one million 
people under weapons and is now planning a missile and nuclear 
weapons technology.  Kim Jong-il's clan is investing all its means 
into the military, while it is harassing its own people." 
 
¶3.   Supreme Court Nomination 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung headlined: "Obama Nominates Supreme Court 
Justice - First Woman with Latin American Background on Supreme 
Court," and reported: "On Tuesday, President Obama nominated Sonia 
Sotomayor as a justice for the Supreme Court.  The woman, who is 
considered a moderate left-winger, would be the first justice with a 
Latin American background if confirmed by the Senate.  Sotomayor's 
nomination is no surprise.  Currently a judge on the Appeals Court 
in New York, she was considered to be one of the favorites among the 
four remaining candidates.  As far as politics is concerned, Obama's 
decision is primarily seen as a bow to the growing influence of the 
Hispanic minority in the United States.  They had massively voted 
for the Democrats during the past presidential elections." 
 
Under the headline: "Obama Wants to Set the Tone of Supreme Court," 
Handelsblatt reported: "The two camps in the Supreme Court were 
almost equally strong, because outgoing Justice David Souter 
frequently voted for the positions of the Democrats [on the court] 
With Sotomayor, the Democrats now have for the first time in 15 
years the chance of setting the tone and strengthening their 
privilege of interpretation.  In the coming years, the Supreme Court 
is likely to deal with economic questions in addition to 
controversial issues such as Guantnamo.  Against the background of 
her previous rulings, economic circles have a skeptical view of 
Sotomayor.  In view of her biography and her young age, she 
personifies the change that has been demanded for the court, which 
has long been derided as the 'club of white men.'" 
 
Tagesspiegel profiled Sotomayor and wrote: "President Obama's 
nomination of Sonia Sotomayor is a decision that is typical of 
Obama.  She looks progressive; he nominates a woman, the third in 
the history of the Supreme Court; it is also historic that Sotomayor 
would be the first Latino representative on the Supreme Court.  His 
proposal is also conventional enough to gain the necessary approval 
in the Senate." 
 
Berliner Zeitung headlined on its front page: "Hispanic American to 
become Supreme Court Judge" and notes that "the lawyer would be the 
first member of Hispanic origin on the U.S. Supreme Court...  Since 
the Democrats have the majority in Congress, her approval seems to 
be clear.  Apart from Ruth Ginsburg, she would be the second woman 
among the nine judges.  The 54-year-old is believed to be relatively 
liberal."  A longer report inside the paper states: "Obama is aware 
of her appointment's historic dimension....  Obama is getting the 
opportunity to strengthen the liberal wing of the Supreme Court." 
 
¶4.   Israeli Settlements 
 
S|ddeutsche headlined "Israel seeks U.S. approval of settlement 
buildings" and said in its intro: "The new Israeli government under 
Prime Minister Netanyahu plans to reach a compromise with the U.S. 
government in the dispute over the 120 Jewish settlements in the 
West Bank and the 100 illegal outposts....  To persuade the U.S. to 
take a tougher approach on Tehran, Netanyahu seems to believe that 
it is necessary to reach a compromise on the outposts."  The paper 
concludes: "The Israeli settlements in the Palestinian territories 
are seen as key obstacles to progress in the Mideast peace process." 
 
Tagesspiegel headlined: "Israel: Fewer Settlements if U.S. Takes 
Action against Iran" and added: "Israel wants to offer the U.S. a 
deal on the Jewish settlements in the West Bank.  The government 
will remove dozens of illegal outposts if Washington allows Israel 
in return to extend its settlements in the West Bank.  Defense 
Minister Barak wants to formally make this proposal during his visit 
to the U.S. next week....  Netanyahu hopes that Israel's concessions 
on the settlement issue will lead to a tougher American policy on 
Tehran." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine carried a short report under the headline 
"Lieberman Praises the Roadmap," noting that "Israeli Foreign 
Minister Lieberman committed himself to the international Mideast 
peace plan, while Prime Minister Netanyahu still refused to approve 
the two-state solution described in the roadmap." 
 
¶5.   Climate Protection 
 
Two German papers carry short reports on the "unsuccessful" climate 
change meeting in Paris. 
 
Sueddeutsche headlined "Unsuccessful Climate Meeting" and reported 
that "the preparations for a new global climate agreement are not 
making any progress.  The 16 largest greenhouse gas emitters could 
not reach an agreement during their meeting in Paris...  Germany's 
representative, Environment Minister Gabriel expressed 
dissatisfaction, saying that the Europeans are still going it 
alone." 
 
FT Deutschland headlined: "Climate divides industrial and threshold 
countries," adding: "There has been no rapprochement between the 
most important participants in the UN climate summit at the end of 
the year in Copenhagen.  The 16 largest industrial and threshold 
countries could not agree on a common line during their preparatory 
talks yesterday.   German Environment Minister Gabriel said: 'No 
real progress has been made between developing and industrial 
countries.'" 
 
¶6.   New French Base in UAE 
 
According to Sueddeutsche Zeitung, "the French engagement with a 
base on the Persian Gulf is not without risk and it is no 
coincidence that it was Nicolas Sarkozy who convinced the sheikhs to 
allow French soldiers to enter their country.  For the monsieur from 
the Elyse Palace, the new base in Abu Dhabi means an important 
extension of the French sphere of influence for the first time into 
an area that was not part of the former French colonies.  In view of 
the French reintegration into NATO, it was only logical that the 
president added his own forces to the presence of the Anglo Saxons. 
As far as strategy is concerned, the base in Abu Dhabi is optimal. 
From here, the French are close enough to the potential and real 
trouble spots in the world.  But the most important aspect is the 
proximity to Iran.   Iran is not only threatening Israel, but the 
emirs are careful not even to mention this.  For them, Iran with its 
hegemonic claims is a threat.  That is why the French are welcome 
for a variety of reasons. Sarkozy will save the costs for the 
deployment in the UAE in Africa, where he cannot gain too much 
anyway." 
 
die tageszeitung commented: "If military bases made the world safer, 
peace would exist everywhere in the world.  Instead, the experience 
with the U.S., Soviet, French, and other bases abroad made clear 
that the main issue is the defense of national interests.  The new 
French base in the UAE is no exception to the rule....  With his 
base, Nicolas Sarkozy also wants to demonstrate that he is 
considering remaining a medium power as far as military and 
political aspects are concerned: at eye level with the U.S. and 
China, the essential military powers in the future.  For this 
positioning, Sarkozy has returned to NATO.  Ex-President Chirac said 
'non' to the Iraq war, thus creating new diplomatic credibility for 
France in the world.  But a comparable signal cannot be expected 
from a future conflict constellation.  Sarkozy is pinning his hope 
on military strength.  He has now brought France to the front line 
in one of the most unstable regions in the world." 
 
KOENIG