09BEIJING575
March 5 MFA Press Briefing: Sudan, Afghanistan, Tibet
Thu Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0317
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0575 0640905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050905Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2702
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0499
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6841
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0250UNCLAS BEIJING 000575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM SU AF CH
SUBJECT: March 5 MFA Press Briefing: Sudan, Afghanistan, Tibet 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 5 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China regrets the International Criminal Court (ICC) decision to 
issue an arrest warrant for President Omar al-Bashir and wishes the 
relevant parties would consider the possible "repercussions" of 
their actions. 
 
-- China, as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, stands 
ready to "consult and communicate" with others on Sudan and will 
continue to play a "dual role." 
 
-- China maintains that "further efforts" are needed to move forward 
in Sudan and that attention should be focused on reducing 
"disturbing factors." 
 
Sudan 
----- 
 
¶2. Repeating an official statement released today on the Internet, 
MFA spokesperson Qin Gang expressed China's regret at the 
regularly-scheduled March 5 MFA press briefing over the 
International Criminal Court (ICC) decision to issue an arrest 
warrant for President Omar al-Bashir of Sudan, and expressed China's 
desire that the relevant parties "think again" and consider the 
possible "repercussions" of their actions. He added that it has 
always been the desire of the people of Darfur and Sudan, as well as 
the international community, to achieve "peace and stability" in the 
region, and that China, as a "responsible player" has "done a lot" 
to achieve that aim and is "committed" to this goal. 
 
¶3. When pressed to explain what those repercussions might be, Qin 
Gang explained that "previous achievements" risked being 
"compromised" and that this alone was sufficient reason for China 
"to feel regret" about the ICC's decision.  He maintained that 
China, as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, is ready to 
"consult and communicate" with relevant parties on the issue, and 
will continue to play a "dual role."  China has always had "friendly 
relations" with Sudan, stressed Qin Gang, which is "good for the 
people of both countries." 
 
¶4. China has approximately 315 peacekeepers in Sudan, Qin Gang 
noted.  He emphasized that, through the joint efforts of members of 
the international community, "major progress" has been made, 
especially on the humanitarian front.  "Further efforts" are needed, 
however, in order to move forward, and a "double track" approach has 
proven "helpful" for a peaceful resolution of the situation, he 
said.  Qin added that the "disturbing factors" must now be reduced. 
 
 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
 
¶5. In answer to a question about China's contributions to 
multilateral efforts in Afghanistan, the spokesperson said that he 
had nothing further to add to his response given at the MFA press 
briefing on Tuesday, March 3. 
 
Tibet 
----- 
 
¶6. Responding to a question about accusations made by Tibetan groups 
in India that China was prohibiting Tibetans from traveling to Nepal 
and India and that Nepal was also turning away Tibetans at its 
border, Qin Gang said that all countries have the right to 
"crackdown on illegal immigration."  He maintained that Nepal has 
always considered Tibet as a part of China, and that China 
"appreciates" this. 
 
¶7. When pressed whether Tibetans involved in the uprisings in March 
2008 were being tortured, as Tibetan groups in India were claiming, 
Qin Gang said that Tibet and Tibetan areas in China were being 
administered "according to law." 
 
PICCUTA