09BERLIN1400
MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, IRAN, EU, GENERAL MOTORS,
Thu Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO9944
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1400/01 3091358
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051358Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5686
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1704
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0416
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0934
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2444
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1459
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0636
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BERLIN 001400 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO AF KGHG IR EU GM US IT
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, IRAN, EU, GENERAL MOTORS, 
GERMANY, CLIMATE, CIA;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   GMQs U-turn 
¶3.   Chancellor Merkel in the US 
¶4.   President Obama Q One year after the elections 
¶5.   Lisbon Treaty 
¶6.   CIA Q Italian Court 
¶7.   Climate Change 
¶8.   Iranian Protests 
¶9.   Afghanistan 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories 
 
Primetime newscasts and all newspapers led with stories on car maker 
GMQs decision to keep Opel, highlighting in very lengthy reports 
that German politicians and Opel employees are outraged at GM.  Lead 
headlines: QBerlin is outraged at General MotorsQ (Frankfurter 
Allgemeine), QAmericans snub MerkelQ (Tagesspiegel), QGeneral Motors 
blackmails BerlinQ (FT Deutschland), QGeneral Motors blackmails Opel 
employeesQ (Sueddeutsche), QAmericans put everyone of the scent. 
OpelQnothing but a cheat!Q (Bild), QGM cuts 10,000 Opel jobs 
(Berliner Zeitung).  Most papers carried several pages on GM and 
Opel.  Editorials focused on OpelQs situation. 
 
¶2.   GMQs U-turn 
 
In a front-page editorial, Tagesspiegel (11/5) described GMQs 
decision as a setback for Chancellor Merkel after her triumph in the 
U.S. Congress: QIt is really tragic.  On the day of her greatest 
triumph she was most humiliatedQnot anywhere, but in the U.S., the 
land of her dreams  This is an unprecedented affront and disaster 
for U.S.-German relations. 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/5) carried a sober front-page editorial: 
QThe anger in Germany is overwhelming, and the Russian leadership 
also feels duped.  The German federal and regional governments 
rescue plan has failed because they were not the dealQs driving 
forces.  They have embarrassed themselves. 
 
In a second front-page editorial, Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/5) 
added: QThis is particularly embarrassing for Chancellor Merkel who 
repeatedly urged GM to sell Opel to Magna  She interfered in the 
plans of an individual company.  This is not what politicians should 
do in a free market economy, not even in an election campaign.. 
For taxpayers, the U-turn is good news, but part of the employees 
will lose much. 
 
Under the headline QThe Opel disaster,Q Sueddeutsche (11/5) 
editorialized: QNow when rescuing Opel and the four plants in 
Germany has become critical, this time around under the auspices of 
GM, the new government is also under threat of being blackmailed 
Whenever necessary, GM can threaten to close plants.  So the 
tug-of-war to rescue Opel will go on, and the danger that the 
government will make a mistake is great. 
 
Mass-tabloid Bild (11/5) remarked: QThe behavior of managers is a 
slap in the face of all those who have been involved in the rescue 
efforts.  GM further damages Opel in the midst of a sales crisis. 
After this decision, there are only losers. 
 
Berliner Zeitung (11/5) commented: QYes, the sudden U-turn without 
preceding consultations is an affront to Germans.  The fact that the 
decision was made at a time when the Chancellor expressed gratitude 
to Americans for their achievements in the process that led to 
German unity, makes it even worse.  However, it is wrong to speak of 
a defeat for Merkel.  The recent measures taken by the government 
under the participation of the SPD have rescued the company, which 
would otherwise have faced bankruptcy. 
 
 
BERLIN 00001400  002 OF 005 
 
 
FT Deutschland (11/5) editorialized on its front page: QThose who 
hoped that the game of poker was over with GMQs decision were 
disappointed only hours later.    Another round is just beginning. 
For Germany, this is bad news, since the German government has 
demonstrated in previous rounds that it is not good at poker.  It 
was a particularly bad mistake for the government to make itself 
prone to blackmail. 
 
¶3.   Chancellor Merkel in the U.S. 
 
ARD-TVQs Tagesthemen (11/3) commented: QRegardless of the fact that 
standing ovations and occasional cheers are part of CongressQs 
standard repertoire, this time they have shown real appreciation. 
For many American politicians, Angela Merkel is the go to person in 
Europe.  There were many signs indicating that the red carpet was 
rolled out for her.   It must be clearly said: Angela Merkel has 
hit the right tone.  She has spoken about her personal experience, 
and for many Americans she is the embodied victory over Communism. 
Americans have a very emotional relation to the Wall.  It was very 
smart of Merkel to use the idea of overcoming walls throughout her 
speech It was astonishing how many Congressmen stood up and 
applauded her statements on climate protection, given that many 
brakemen are sitting in both houses of the Congress. 
 
ZDF-TVQs Heute (11/3) noted: QThis is a style America appreciates 
very much.  Merkel has professed the American dream.  She has 
reminded many Americans that Germany remains an important and 
particularly grateful ally.  However, there will also be critical 
questions.  People will want to know what was meant when the 
Chancellor assured Congress that Germany will share in the 
responsibility for Afghanistan.  Not everybody will applaud tougher 
climate protection measures.  Awareness of the need for climate 
protection is still in its nappies.  However, in general, this was a 
complex and personal speech America appreciates. 
 
Under the headline QOde to freedom,Q Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/4) 
remarked in a front-page editorial: QWas this really the German 
Chancellor who spoke there, the sober Angela Merkel who is not 
exactly known as a magician of words?  On Capitol Hill in 
Washington, a politician emerged who we have not seen before.  She 
was the first German Chancellor who was allowed to address both 
houses of the Congress.  She said thanks for the honor by expressing 
great commitment to freedom, the highest virtue of AmericansQand 
Germans.  She said that nothing stimulates her more than the power 
of freedom and the American Dream.  Such speeches do not remove the 
differences of interests that even exist in the closest alliance, 
but it helps in a dispute to realize that the agreements on the 
basics outweigh the differences by far.  Unlike her predecessor 
Schroeder, she has no doubt that NATO remains the pillar of 
GermanyQs security policy.  Given this ode to freedom, she must 
know that she could not fall short of it in the Bundestag and among 
the German public. 
 
 
Sueddeutsche (11/4) opined: QThe East German daughter of a pastor 
still sounds more convincing than West Germans when she says thanks 
to Americans for their efforts as a western guard in the Cold War as 
well as for their support of the historic opportunity for GermanyQs 
reunification.  America was right to trust GermanyQs democratic 
maturity. 
 
Berliner Zeitung (11/4) argued: QAngela Merkel delivered a 
remarkable speech to the U.S. Congress   It was a smart speech that 
linked her personal story in East Germany with the call to tear down 
the walls of the 21st century, such as the walls that prevent 
climate protection.  This was the only passage where she demanded 
something from the U.S. 
 
 
BERLIN 00001400  003 OF 005 
 
 
Under the headline QMerkelQs freedom speech,Q Die Welt (11/4) said 
in a front-page editorial: QSince 1989, Germany represents the model 
of successful U.S. policyQpeaceful introduction of democracy, 
integration into the western system and a woman as a leader.  The 
latter is music of the future for the U.S.  Many in the U.S. 
appreciate Merkel  Such speeches open doors and secure political 
influence.  U.S. presidents can fail in the Congress.  It is good 
for Germany when a chancellor is successful there. 
 
FT Deutschland (11/4) commented: QAngela Merkel delivered the kind 
of speech to the U.S. Congress that Americans love: personal, with 
pathos and flattery.  She told the story of a girl in East Germany 
who was dreaming of freedom and the land of opportunities.  The 
Chancellor smartly connected her personal anecdotes, historic 
references and current topics, such as the international approach to 
the nuclear dispute with Iran and the upcoming climate conference in 
Copenhagen.  On the foreign stage, MerkelQs policy is certainly 
beneficial.  In general, Merkel left a good impression on most 
Congressmen.  She met the expectations. 
 
Tagesspiegel (11/4) noted in a front-page editorial: QIn front of 
both house of the Congress, Angela Merkel has probably delivered the 
speech of her life.  A speech of gratitude to the American people, a 
commitment to the unbreakable alliance between Europe and the U.S. 
on the basis of common values, and the speech of a world leader who 
speaks on behalf of a country that wants to return to the world the 
assistance it received in recent decades.  The speech was marked by 
the signal that Germany bears its responsibility for the world.  No 
country has promoted German unity like the United States.  No other 
western ally expressed so much confidence in the maturity of Germans 
and their political representatives.  Afghanistan could now become 
the first test of this renewed loyalty. 
 
¶4.    President Obama Q One year after the elections 
 
In a lengthy editorial under the headline QPresident on probation, 
Sueddeutsche (11/5) noted: QTo the day it is one year ago that a new 
time was to start for America and the world.  The honeymoon between 
the American people and Obama is over.  Conservatives believe they 
were right when the described him as a fraud.  The left is 
disappointed.  In fact, Obama has not anything specific to showQnot 
yet   One year later it is clear that Obama is working very hard. 
It is still too early to come to a conclusion on his presidency. 
But in one year, when a new Congress is elected, Barack Obama must 
have delivered something so we can see where we are going. 
Otherwise the people will punish him, and so would history. 
 
Under the headline QWarning signal for Obama,Q Sueddeutsche (11/4) 
carried an editorial: QThe message is clear: Obama and his Democrats 
must finally implement the reforms they promised a year ago, and 
thus get the country moving.  Otherwise, next yearQs results, when 
36 governors and parts of the Congress are up for election, will be 
bad for the Democrats. 
 
Die Welt (11/4) headlined its editorial QSlap in ObamaQs face,Q and 
added: QThe initial glamour has not gone, but there are a few dents. 
 Clear victories for the Republicans show the limits of ObamaQs 
success strategy.  Skepticism of the President has grown in the 
country.   The midterm elections in 2010 will be the real test. 
This is the date Obama is focusing on.  The slap in his face in 
Virginia and New Jersey will have an impact on his policies. 
 
Berliner Zeitung (11/4) devoted most of page two to the first 
anniversary of the U.S. elections, highlighting: QToday a year ago 
the U.S. elected their first black President.  The office has 
changed Barack Obama.  The man who conveyed so much hope has 
problems to implement his ideas.  Is this still change we can 
believe in?Q  FT Deutschland (11/4) wrote: QPrior to his election on 
 
BERLIN 00001400  004 OF 005 
 
 
November 4, 2008, U.S. President Obama made many promises.  Since 
then he launched many reformsQbut it remains uncertain how 
successful they are.Q  Frankfurter Rundschau (11/4) headlined QThe 
magician lost his magic,Q and highlighted: QOne year after the 
elections, Obama is fighting against exaggerated expectations. 
 
¶5.    Lisbon Treaty 
 
Under the headline QNew Beginning in Europe,Q Berliner Zeitung 
(11/4) editorialized: QThe tense debates about the personnel for the 
new offices conceal the fact that the posts are only vaguely 
defined.  What is the future council president supposed to do?  What 
are his competences?  Will he be an internal coordinator, a better 
bureaucrat or somebody who can set political priorities?   If the 
new beginning is supposed to work, EuropeQs state and government 
leaders must quickly answer these questions.  They should first of 
all determine how strong and independent the new Lisbon Europe 
should be. 
 
Sueddeutsche (11/4) headlined QHectic search for EuropeQs foreign 
minister,Q and added: QIn Brussels, particularly two names are being 
discussed: David Milliband and Massimo DQAlema.  The most promising 
candidate is David Milliband.Q  The editorial headlined Qthe end of 
the war of nerves,Q and noted Qthe time has come when EUQs 27 
members can compete together with large powers and emerging 
countries. 
 
Die Welt (11/4) commented: QThe end of a painfully long ratification 
process came quicker than expected.  This treaty does not repair 
all of EuropeQs flaws but it creates democratic and efficient 
structures.   The most important thing is, however, that Europe can 
now stop talking about structures as if the future of the continent 
depends on them. 
 
¶6.    CIA Q Italian Court 
 
Several papers reported that QCIA agents were convicted as 
kidnappersQ by an Italian court (Berliner Zeitung).  Sueddeutsche 
Zeitung (11/5) editorialized under the headline QVictory of 
JusticeQ:  QThere are still judges in Italy.   The verdict 
convicting 23 Americans who kidnapped a radical Imam six years ago 
in Mailand and deported him to Egypt is a victory of justice.  Five 
years in prison is appropriate, although the verdict is only of 
symbolic value, as the agents, sentenced in absentia, are not 
expected to return to Italy.  The verdict is a blow to the former 
government under President Bush, which sacrificed the rule of law 
and betrayed the values of the West in the fight against a suspected 
evil.  The verdict makes clear that Europe must not be made the 
backyard of U.S. intelligence services. 
 
¶7.    Climate Change 
 
Weekly Die Zeit (11/5) wrote in a lengthy article:  QWe are outraged 
that the political global elite and particularly the U.S. superpower 
are about to postpone humankindQs number one problem for an 
indefinite time  Who is to blame?  Particularly the United States. 
America is the greatest emitter among the industrial countries, the 
greatest brakeman on climate protection, and the leader everybody is 
waiting for.  However, despite ObamaQs efforts, America will have 
nothing to offer in Copenhagen.  Too big is the resistance in the 
U.S. Congress and by lobbyists.  This vicious circle must be 
broken.  It is possible to exert pressure on the U.S.  If Europe and 
the most important developing countries reach an ambitious agreement 
in Copenhagen without the U.S., it could create a maelstrom the U.S. 
Congress can no longer resist.  There is a storm in America over 
climate protection and the coming months will decide in which 
direction America is moving. 
 
 
BERLIN 00001400  005 OF 005 
 
 
Berliner Zeitung (11/5) carried a page on climate protection, 
saying: QIn Barcelona, the last preparations have been made for the 
big post-Kyoto conference in Copenhagen in December.  The omens 
could not be worse because the members of the global community are 
completely at odds with one another.Q  The paper states:  QThe U.S. 
government is rhetorically withdrawing from climate protection. 
 
¶8.    Iranian Protests 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/5) commented: QThis time around, the 
celebrations of the criminal kidnappers got out of control.  Apart 
from the official demonstrations, there were violent clashes between 
the security apparatus and the opposition forces, which have not 
given in since the controversial presidential elections last summer. 
 The Islamic Republic of Iran is seething with unrest. 
 
Die Welt (11/5) editorialized: QFor the rulers in Tehran, it is 
bitter irony that the opposition turned the QholidayQ that marks the 
Islamic Revolution more than many other days, upside down.  After 
the redefinition of the anti-Israeli Al Quds day, it was the second 
time that the opposition exploited such days for its own purposes. 
Reformers were similarly clever when they picked green, the color of 
the prophet, as the symbolic color of their movement.  This 
demonstrates that the opposition is persistently pursuing its goals. 
 It does not currently have the power to seriously threaten the 
regime, but neither is the theocracy completely managing to quell 
the protest.  There are two reasons: the leaders are divided and 
the moral conviction of the protesters has grown.  Even hardliners 
realize that excessive violence against protesters undermines the 
legitimacy of the regime.  The history of the fall of the Wall shows 
what consequences can occur when the moral foundation of a regime is 
steadily eroded. 
 
Berliner Zeitung (11/5) analyzed: QThere is no credibility or 
consensus any more.  The rifts in Iranian society are becoming 
larger; they are sharply dividing Iranian youth from the theocracy. 
AhmadinejadQs government hardly has the power to make decisions. 
This has recently become clear in the nuclear dispute.  Ahmadinejad 
expressed willingness to reach a compromise with the West to enrich 
uranium abroad, but conservative parliamentarians, representatives 
of students and even opposition leaders accused Ahmadinejad of going 
down on his knees before America.  Obviously not every reformer 
favors normal relations with the United States and certainly not at 
any cost.  Conservatives and opposition supporters are united in 
their desire for improved relations with the U.S.  They want mutual 
respect and transparent meetings.  U.S. President Obama promised 
this when he commemorated the events of 30 years ago.  Whether he 
can keep this promise depends not just on the attitude of the 
Iranian government towards the nuclear dispute and the democratic 
movement, but also on the role played by the U.S. Congress and 
electorate.  The takeover of the Embassy was a humiliation the 
majority of Americans have psychologically not yet overcome. 
 
 
¶9.    Afghanistan 
 
Several papers carried factual reports noting that an QAfghan police 
officer killed five British trainersQ (Berliner Zeitung).  There are 
no editorials on this incident, but Damir Fras of Berliner Zeitung 
(11/5), who has recently been on a US-NATO tour in Afghanistan, 
remarked in an editorial: QGermany must debate whether to deploy the 
Bundeswehr in the heavily embattled south of the country.  There is 
no reason to avoid this debate.  GermanyQs allies have been making 
this request for a long time.  And Germans have the right to get a 
response. 
 
 MURPHY