09BERLIN196
MEDIA REACTION: Afghanistan, Pakistan, Obama Clinton,
Tue Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 171324Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3323
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000196 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/AGS, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: Afghanistan, Pakistan, Obama Clinton, 
U.S.-Economic, Iraq, Venezuela, Kosovo, France-UK, Disarmament 
 
*1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused on new data protection laws, the future of Opel, 
and the "Family Report 2009," presented by the Ministry for Family 
Affairs.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast Heute and ARD-TV's early 
evening newscast Tagesschau opened with reports that the government 
would adopt new, tougher data privacy laws only during the next 
term. 
 
*2.   (Afghanistan)   Holbrooke Trip 
 
Die Welt (2/14) argued: "With sophisticated logistics and high 
precision, the fanatic religious warriors are today again able to 
launch considerable strikes against international forces in 
Afghanistan.  But the comeback of the Taliban requires a base among 
the people.  It is the cardinal mistake of the West in the Hindu 
Kush that it has never conquered this base.  To the extent that Iraq 
gains stability through wise tactics and a massive increase of 
allied forces, Afghanistan is about to be lost.  NATO and the United 
States have recognized this risk and are trying to vehemently 
counter this development with more forces and modified tactics.  And 
it will be more important than ever that the Afghans really feel an 
improvement of their economic situation and that they witness peace 
and security.  It is all or nothing in Afghanistan and time is 
running out." 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/16), "Richard Holbrooke wants 
to 'listen and learn' during his first trip to the region.  At least 
that is what he said.  But even though he had to tell the Afghan 
president something, he could not do so in public.  The 
democratically legitimized Afghan president, who wants to be 
re-elected in August, cannot easily be politically damaged, even 
though he is responsible for the fact that his government does not 
reach the people, while corruption and drug trafficking are 
thriving.  Every one knows what they have in him, but not who or 
what would come after him." 
 
*3.   (Pakistan)   Re-Introduction of Sharia 
 
Sueddeutsche judged: "The Taliban refer to an Islam which they 
themselves have perverted, and now the self-appointed religious 
warriors will have their way in the Pakistani Swat valley. 
Obviously, the extremists have become so strong that the Pakistani 
government does not see any other way out but to make far-reaching 
concessions."  The daily also opined: "There will be no peace in the 
region for the foreseeable future if the Taliban are not integrated 
into talks.  But they need to be weakened first, and the people in 
the affected region must also start to get the feeling that their 
government, which is supported by the West, can guarantee security 
and offer an alternative.  But now it is making a concession from a 
position of weakness.  This is a bad signal." 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine, "the provincial government in 
Peshawar has now made peace with the Taliban and allowed them to 
introduce the Sharia.  Similar agreements in South and North 
Warziristan (in 2004 and 2006) have only resulted in the fact that 
the radicals were able to consolidate their position there even 
more." 
 
*4.   (U.S.)   Obama Team 
 
Sueddeutsche (2/14) judged: "Barack Obama must now seek a Commerce 
Secretary.  This is a debacle.  The chain of Obama's personnel 
policy missteps and the circumstances surrounding Gregg's withdrawal 
give the affair greater weight than previously might have been 
assumed.  Obama's [reputation] has now been damaged...primarily 
because the Republicans are gloomily determined to pursue a 
fundamentalist opposition course.  Obama must now try to implement 
his policy with the Democrats.  That is what the Americans elected 
him for. They were simply fed up with the Republicans." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/14) had this to say: "Judd Gregg deserves 
recognition because he does not want to give up his views in 
exchange for a job as secretary.  But Gregg must accept the reproach 
of not having realized this early enough.  Nothing has changed with 
respect to Obama's economic policy course over the past few weeks. 
Thus the impression is intensifying that the president does not have 
the right touch for selecting important aides." 
 
Financial Times Deutschland (2/16) noted: "Obama's attempt to lure 
the opposition can be considered a failure.  This is all the more so 
because of Commerce Secretary-designate Judd Gregg's withdrawal 
followed like a slap into the face after the agreement [on the 
economic stimulus package] in Congress.  In another respect, the new 
Washington Obama promised in the election campaign, looks like the 
old one.  He had promised greater transparency, an open information 
policy and a limit of the influence of lobby groups on the White 
House.  But during this first news conference, he read the names of 
the journalists, who should get the chance for a question, from a 
piece of paper." 
 
*5.   (U.S.-Asia)   Clinton Trip 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/16), "Hillary Clinton struck 
the right tone.  Unless an intolerable situation arises, Washington 
should pursue a policy of dtente.  At issue is no longer [North 
Korea's] nuclear program.  Kim Jong-il is keeping a tight hold on 
the reins again, but his days are numbered anyway.  The real crisis 
will come after the change of regime. The question could quickly 
arise as to who has greater influence on the peninsula.  China is 
seeking evidence that Northern Korea has always been part of its 
sphere.  After a reunification there would be totally new 
possibilities.  America must keep this in mind, too." 
 
Regional daily N|rnberger Zeitung (2/17) had this to say: "In 
Beijing and Tokyo, the governments see the canvassing of the U.S. 
government with scepticism rather than delight.  They assume that 
they will have to throw even more money after what has already 
disappeared down the dark hole of Wall Street - with the vague 
prospect for more political influence in return.  That is why Europe 
should take note of the U.S. change of course with a relaxed mood. 
Maybe this will increase its chance to develop its own independent 
political and economic visions." 
 
*6.   (U.S.)   Economic Package 
 
According to Tagesspiegel am Sonntag, "this was not an excellent 
week for Barack Obama...and the half-life of victories in U.S. 
politics has become eerily short.  But the pace (for adopting the 
stimulus) will come back to haunt the Obama administration. 
Protectionists were able to include formulations that are tantamount 
to excluding international companies from economic assistance. 
Hopes for a bipartisan coalition have also been shaken.  And because 
of the concessions to the three Republican dissenters, Democratic 
lawmakers are now refusing to support the package. But in the long 
run, only one thing is important: Will America's economy get back on 
its feet again?  Only then will Obama remain the winner." 
 
*7.   (Iraq)   Aftermath Of War 
 
Tagesspiegel (2/14) editorialized: "The ease with which President 
bama is able to direct the attention of the world to Afghanistan 
shows how far Iraq has come.  And the most recent suicide attack, 
which killed 30 people, is striking because it has been the 
bloodiest one in one year.  It may be possible that now that a new 
U.S. president is in office, he will assert a more distanced, cooler 
view on Iraq.  It is more useful to analyze successes and failures 
than to think in categories of victory and defeat." 
 
*8.   (Venezuela)   Chvez 
 
"Chvez Wants To Govern Until 2019 - For The Time Being," 
Frankfurter Allgemeine reported that "the referendum on the 
amendment of five articles of the country's constitution has now 
removed all obstacles for Chvez to run for re-election as often as 
he likes." 
 
Sueddeutsche noted that "Chavez's policy will cause weariness. 
Venezuela remains divided between friend and foe and will rush from 
one vote to the next.  In the long run, no country will be able to 
withstand this stress.  Chvez's challengers can only try to use 
reasonable arguments to present a serious candidate for the 
presidential elections in 2012.  Strikes and attempts to oust him 
will be of no use.  Nowhere in the region has an unlimited time to 
govern stood the test.  Hugo Chvez can only be defeated in 
elections." 
 
Berliner Zeitung judged: "This victory can be easily explained.  It 
is Chvez's historic merit that he tackled the social problems of 
the country:  poverty and malnutrition, bad schools and a disastrous 
healthcare system.   All this was not an issue before Chvez. 
Backed by the oil price bonanza of the past years, Chvez invested a 
lot of money in the social welfare system and more than half of the 
Venezuelans thanked him with veneration, loyalty, and votes." 
 
In the view of Die Welt, "One should not make the mistake of 
underestimating Hugo Chvez.  Many did this, and he took advantage 
of it.  Chvez is striving to succeed Fidel Castro and is already 
acting as the de-facto leader of the Latin American left, because he 
finances and supports them everywhere, in Cuba, Bolivia, Nicaragua, 
Paraguay, and Ecuador.  It is true that moderate Social Democrats 
pursue a different policy, but no one dares to start an argument 
with Chvez.  Probably cowardice and fear play a role:  those who 
start an argument with him have problems." 
 
*9.   (Kosovo)   Anniversary of Independence 
 
Under the headline: "The Barbed Wire Will Be Removed," Frankfurter 
Rundschau reported that "the feared unrest between Albanians and 
Serbs has not taken place, but everyday life has not become easier. 
Kosovo became independent one year ago, but nothing has changed 
either for the better or to the worse." 
 
Sueddeutsche wrote under the headline: "One Land, Two Nations" that 
the rift between Serbs and Albanians continues to exist - since 
independence, there have been no official contacts.  For Europe, 
still struggling with the financial crisis, Kosovo is currently not 
priority.  Still, everyone should be aware that the current 
situation is far away from being called 'ideal.'  As long as Serbia 
does not cooperate, it will be impossible to implement the 
constitution of the state, which means that there will be no 
stability." 
 
Regional daily Kieler Nachrichten argued: "Fifty-four countries have 
recognized the tiny state, and the U.S. president sent a telegram 
congratulating Kosovo.  But this cannot obscure the fact that Kosovo 
is still unable to stand on its own feet.  In this situation, Europe 
has the duty to help, but in Europe [the governments] would prefer 
to forget that all sides looked away when the situation in the 
Balkans escalated.  Even at that time, everyone knew that Kosovo was 
a special case...but all hoped secretly that the problem would 
resolve on its own.  It did not, and that is why we are still 
carrying the problem around--in an increasingly listless way." 
 
*10.   (France-UK)   Collision Of Submarines 
 
"If it were not so worrying, we could crack jokes about the 
collision of two submarines," Frankfurter Rundschau wrote and added: 
"but the laughter gets stuck in our throats when we think of the 
nuclear engine and the nuclear missiles aboard.  Then we have 
difficulty believing in the French and British statements that there 
has been no time any danger either for the crews or the environment. 
 Much too often have governments hushed up facts or even lied in 
connection with nuclear accidents." 
 
Regional daily Neue Osnabr|cker Zeitung observed: "It is really 
ludicrous that submarines equipped with nuclear missiles, can 
collide like two cars on a supermarket parking lot.  But apart from 
the collision, uncertainty remains whether the governments in London 
and Paris have really told the truth. Their previous information 
policy was very meagre.  Details are coming to the fore only little 
by little.  This is stirring up suspicion, because it must be feared 
that information about a real disaster could come very late and be 
incomplete.  That is why full information on the most recent case is 
all the more important." 
 
Regional daily Schwdbische Zeitung of Oberndorf commented: "The 
Atlantic Ocean is so large and two tiny submarines are unable to 
pass each other.  Somewhere in the dark, the two subs must have 
collided, but it remains a secret where.  At the same time, the 
governments in London and Paris are trying to appease the public. 
The citizens, however, should not hope for truthful information. 
This is all the more the case because this incident should be highly 
embarrassing for the both governments." 
 
*11.   (Disarmament)   New Talks 
 
In the view of Berliner Zeitung, there is enormous time pressure to 
talk about strategic, offensive nuclear weapons.  The START I Treaty 
expires on December 5, and, in 2010, a review of the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty is in the offing.  If both powers are 
really interested in strengthening the NPT regime, they must set an 
example: Washington should finally ratify the treaty and Moscow must 
exert effective pressure on its economic partner in Iran....  If 
countries everywhere again talk about disarmament, then this would 
be good, but the world is no longer a bipolar one.  There will be 
progress only if there is a Russian-U.S. dialogue and if new powers 
are also included in such talks.  But these countries are difficult 
actors.  For them a global balance is by far not at important as 
efforts to keep their neighbors at bay."