09BEIJING713
March 19 MFA Press Briefing: The Impeccable, AmCits on the
Thu Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4907
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0713/01 0782300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192300Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2970
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2473
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 1128
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0359
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4518
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000713 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EFIN MARR MASS PHUM CH KS KN FR JA ES
 
SUBJECT: March 19 MFA Press Briefing: The Impeccable, AmCits on the 
DPRK Border, Coca-Cola and Huiyuan 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 19 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The United States violated Chinese and International Law by 
conducting activities in China's Exclusive Economic Zone. 
 
-- China is investigating the incident involving American Citizens 
on the DPRK border. 
 
-- Ambassador Wu Sike, the Chinese Ambassador to Egypt, will replace 
Ambassador Sun Bigan as Chinese Special Envoy for the Middle East. 
 
-- The rejection of Coca-Cola's bid to purchase Chinese drink 
manufacturer Huiyuan is in keeping with China's anti-monopoly laws 
and is not protectionism. 
 
-- A group of Tibetan officials recently visited the United States 
to give "the true picture" of Tibet. 
 
-- While China would welcome the establishment of diplomatic 
relations with El Salvador, the one-China principle has not changed. 
 
 
-- Regulations prohibit Chinese citizens from independently 
reporting for foreign news organizations. 
 
-- China hopes France can take positive measures to bring bilateral 
relations back to normal development. 
 
-- China has taken note of the U.S. issuance of Treasury Bonds, and 
hopes that it is effective in stimulating the U.S. economy. 
 
Impeccable Incident and the South China Sea 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  "The USNS Impeccable violated international and Chinese law and 
conducted activities in China's exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in the 
South China Sea without China's permission," MFA spokesperson Ma 
Zhaoxu said at the regularly-scheduled March 19 MFA press briefing. 
He urged the United States to "take effective measures to avoid 
similar incidents in the future."  When asked about increasing 
Chinese patrols near the Spratly Islands, the spokesman said that 
China maintains "indisputable" sovereignty over the area and is 
justified in exercising its sovereign rights in the area. 
 
Americans on the DPRK Border 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked for confirmation of the abduction of two American citizens 
by North Korean soldiers, the spokesperson said that China is 
investigating the incident.  Asked specifically to confirm the 
nationalities of the people involved, as well as whether North 
Korean soldiers frequently cross into Chinese territory, the 
spokesman stated he had no further information on the matter. 
 
Kim Yong-il's Visit to China 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked about North Korean Premier Kim Yong-il's March 18 visit to 
Beijing and his meetings with Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi and 
Premier Wen Jiabao, the spokesman said that the two sides had 
in-depth discussions and exchanged views on bilateral relations and 
issues of common interest.  The increase in communication and 
coordination between the two sides will be conducive to regional 
peace and stability.  When asked specifically if the Six-Party Talks 
or North Korea's satellite test were discussed, the spokesman 
responded that Premier Wen Jiabao said the parties should "push for 
the Six-Party Talks" and that China wants to play a constructive 
role in the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.  Asked about 
timing of resuming talks and whether China is urging the DPRK to 
cancel its planned satellite test, the spokesman responded that 
China would like the Six-Party Talks to resume as soon as possible 
but that "conditions must be ripe" and all six parties must agree on 
a date.  China will continue to consult and coordinate with other 
parties to promote peace talks and contribute to denuclearization. 
 
 
Restrictions on Journalism Organizations 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked a question regarding a Human Rights Watch report that 
 
BEIJING 00000713  002 OF 003 
 
 
stated China is tightening controls on foreign journalism 
organizations by placing restrictions on their Chinese employees, 
the spokesman responded that relevant regulations in China stipulate 
that Chinese citizens may not independently report for foreign news 
agencies but can work in supporting roles.  "Conditions are not yet 
ripe" for Chinese citizens to do independent reporting.  China 
welcomes foreign news organizations and will continue to support 
them, and as such, the accusations are groundless.  Ma expressed 
hope that journalists will abide by all Chinese laws, which will be 
conducive to their reporting activities. 
 
Coca-Cola's Bid for Huiyuan 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. The rejection of Coca-Cola's bid to purchase Chinese drink 
manufacturer Huiyuan is in keeping with China's anti-monopoly laws 
and is not related to trade protectionism, the spokesman said. 
China's policies of reform and opening up have not changed, he said, 
noting that in the Chinese marketplace, Coke products compete with 
Chinese drinks as well as with beverages from all around the world. 
Asked if China feared a backlash against Chinese investments in 
sensitive industries around the world, such as mining, the 
spokesperson reiterated that the decision is not protectionism. 
China will continue its open market policies and continues to 
welcome foreign investment. 
 
Tibetan Leaders Visit the United States 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The delegation of officials from Tibet that visited the United 
States included deputies to the National People's Congress, the 
spokesman said.  The group held exchanges in political and academic 
circles to increase the understanding of Americans regarding the 
"true picture of Tibet." 
 
El Salvador to Recognize Both China and Taiwan? 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7. Asked about rumors that El Salvador's new president may consider 
establishing diplomatic relations with China while maintaining its 
relations with Taiwan, the spokesman said that no matter what 
changes occur in the world, the PRC's one-China principle will never 
change.  In the spirit of the UN Charter and the five principles of 
peaceful existence, China welcomes relations with El Salvador.  The 
Chinese people have friendly feelings towards the people of El 
Salvador and are ready to have mutual cooperation with them. 
 
Hu Jintao and Nicolas Sarkozy to Meet at G-20? 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶8. Asked whether Chinese President Hu Jintao and French President 
Nicolas Sarkozy would meet at the G-20 summit in London, the 
spokesman responded that both Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi and 
Premier Wen Jiabao have expressed China's position on relations with 
France.  While China has always placed great importance on its 
relations with France, the current problems in the bilateral 
relationship are known to all.  China hopes France can take positive 
measures to bring bilateral relations back to normal development. 
 
Issuance of U.S. Treasury Bonds 
------------------------------- 
 
¶9. China has taken note of the U.S. Government's attempt to increase 
liquidity through the issuance of Treasury Bonds, the spokesman 
said.  China hopes that the measures are effective in stimulating 
the U.S. economy and helping other countries in the world to develop 
their economies in a healthy manner.  He expressed hope that China's 
assets in the United States remain safe. 
 
Japan in the Fight Against Somali Piracy 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Regarding Japan sending ships from its Maritime Self-Defense 
Forces to help fight Somali piracy, the spokesman said that China 
upholds the view that within the UN framework and relevant 
international law, all countries should cooperate to help fight 
piracy. 
 
Chinese and Japanese Defense Ministers 
-------------------------------------- 
 
BEIJING 00000713  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶11. The spokesman said the Chinese and Japanese Defense Ministers 
will meet in Beijing March 20 for consultations.  Enhanced 
communication between the two sides will be conducive to the 
development of long-term bilateral relations, he said. 
 
New Special Envoy for the Middle East 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Ambassador Wu Sike, the current Chinese Ambassador to Egypt, 
will replace Sun Bigan as China's Middle East Envoy, the spokesman 
said. Prior to his position as Ambassador to Egypt, Ambassador Wu 
also served as the Ambassador to Saudi Arabia and the First 
Representative Plenipotentiary to the League of Arab Nations. 
 
¶13. VISITS: Kazakh Foreign Minister Marat Tazhin will visit China 
March 29-31. 
 
PICCUTA