09DAMASCUS49
SYRIA CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 2009
Thu Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
P 150544Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5816
INFO AMEMBASSY AMMAN 
AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 
CIA WASHDCUNCLAS DAMASCUS 000049 
 
 
FOR DS/IP/NEA, NEA/ELA 
AMMAN FOR RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER SY
SUBJECT: SYRIA CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 2009 
 
REF: 08 STATE 132056 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Damascus Crime and Safety Report follows (corrected 
to remove SENSITIVE caption): 
 
OVERVIEW 
-------- 
 
Syria is the only country designated by the United States 
Government as a state sponsor of terrorism to also maintain 
full diplomatic relations with the United States.  Syria 
remains so designated because of its hosting and support for groups 
identified by the United States as terrorist 
organizations such as Hamas, Hezbollah, Palestinian 
Islamic Jihad, and others. 
 
The Syrian Arab Republic Government (SARG) is controlled by 
the secular-oriented Ba'ath party.  Political power is 
largely concentrated among members of the minority Alawite 
sect, which is not associated with Islamist extremism.  While it 
tolerates the presence of the above-listed terrorist groups and has 
reportedly facilitated the flow of third-country terrorist "foreign 
fighters" into Iraq, the SARG also maintains a strong national 
security apparatus designed in part to monitor and neutralize 
extremist threats to the regime.  The SARG recognizes that terrorist 
operations against American and/or Western targets on Syrian soil 
run contrary to Syria's interests, especially given its efforts to 
expand ties to the West and develop its tourism industry, and it 
works to deter and counter threats of anti-Western terrorist acts in 
Syria. 
 
Events in 2008 demonstrated the danger of Syria emerging as a victim 
as well as a sponsor of terrorism.  Attacks by Sunni extremists 
against SARG targets in Damascus and beyond, significant crackdowns 
by SARG security forces against local Islamists, and calls by senior 
Al Qaeda leaders and other Sunni extremists to expand violence into 
the Levant all call into question prior assumptions that terror 
organizations could find safe haven in return for not conducting 
operations within Syria. 
 
Syria has remained in a state of declared war with Israel 
since 1948, and it continues to demand the return of the 
Golan Heights, occupied by Israel during the 1967 war.  Any 
escalation of tensions between Israel and Syria into armed 
conflict would likely have a direct and immediate impact on 
the safety and security environment for Americans in Syria.  In 
2008, the SARG and Israel participated in indirect talks through 
Turkish intermediaries, with direct peace talks possible for the 
future. 
 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
------------------ 
 
The reported October 26 operation by US forces in Syria to eliminate 
Al Qaeda in Iraq facilitator Abu Ghadyia sparked a series of 
backlashes from the Syrian government against US affiliated entities 
in Syria.  A large, SARG-organized demonstration featured thousands 
of civil servants and students dragooned by the regime to 
participate in a morning of anti-American speeches.  The SARG and 
government-controlled media issued statements and "news" regarding 
the incident designed to inflame public opinion against the United 
States. The U.S.-affiliated Damascus Community School was ordered 
closed and all teachers deported within a week.  The American 
Cultural Center and American Language Center were also closed by the 
SARG. 
 
On September 27, 2008 a large car bomb detonated at the Palestine 
Branch Office of the Syrian Military Intelligence in south Damascus. 
Seventeen people were killed and many more injured.  The bombing 
may have been "retaliation" by militants against the security 
services' more aggressive posture towards Sunni extremist 
activities, which the SARG views as a threat to the regime. 
 
The weeks following the bombing saw a large-scale crackdown during 
which several raids against suspected militants were reported 
throughout Syria.  These raids brought reported seizures of 
firearms, suicide vests, and explosive laden vehicles. 
 
The most recent direct attack on U.S. Government facilities in Syria 
was on September 12, 2006, when four terrorists armed with automatic 
weapons, hand grenades and crude vehicle-borne improvised explosive 
devices (VBIED) attacked the US Embassy in Damascus.  The 
terrorists, a Syrian police officer, and at least two bystanders 
were killed in the ensuing 30-minute firefight between the attackers 
and local authorities. 
 
Two high-profile assassinations further illustrate Syria's 
unpredictable political violence environment.  In February, 
Hezbollah operative and internationally pursued terrorist Imad 
 
Mughinyeh was killed in a car bomb blast in Damascus' Kafer Souseh 
neighborhood within a few hundred meters of several U.S. Embassy 
residences.  He was suspected of masterminding attacks on the US 
Marine barracks and Embassy in Beirut, along with several other 
incidents in the 1980s.  In August, senior Syrian Presidential 
advisor Mohamed Suleiman was shot dead outside a beach villa near 
the coastal city of Tartous in what appeared to be a very 
professional and well-coordinated assassination; the culprit has not 
been identified. 
 
The security environment in Syria is also closely tied to 
ongoing political developments in Lebanon.  In February 2005, Rafik 
Hariri, the former Prime Minister of Lebanon, was assassinated in 
Beirut.  Public unrest following this attack precipitated the 
withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon, the US recalled the 
ambassador to Syria in response to apparent SARG connections to the 
killing, and a United Nations investigation was launched. 
 
The UN investigation has encountered many setbacks, including the 
killings of key witnesses, but is widely believed to be on track for 
prosecution in the International Criminal Court at the Hague in 
early 2009.  If the prosecution extends to figures within the 
security services, the SARG may become more hostile toward western 
interests in Syria. 
 
Also having the potential to raise SARG defensiveness is the ongoing 
International Atomic Energy Commission investigation into the 
suspected Syrian nuclear facility bombed by Israel in 2007. 
 
Protest demonstrations are rare in Syria, unless organized by the 
government, and are subject to tight controls when permitted.  The 
SARG-organized demonstration against an alleged US military 
incursion in Syria, as well as protests against the U.S.-Iraq Status 
of Forces Agreement and the situation in Gaza were all staged well 
away from the U.S. Embassy, with extensive security coverage 
provided for diplomatic facilities.  In February 2006, however, mobs 
protesting the publication of cartoons depicting the prophet 
Mohammed caused significant damage to four Western embassies. 
Large, violent demonstrations against the U.S. Embassy occurred in 
1998 and 2000. 
 
CRIME THREATS 
------------- 
 
Syria enjoys a relatively low crime rate, due to strong 
cultural mores against property crime and to the pervasive 
police and security presence throughout the city.  Visitors 
should be aware, however, that "low crime" does not mean 
"crime-free." The last few years have seen an increase in reported 
crimes against Americans/Westerners in 
Damascus compared with the early 2000's: 
 
--In late 2007/early 2008 there was a string of acid attacks against 
women wearing western style jeans.  While no westerners reported 
being a victim of such attack, they fit the demographic that was 
targeted for wearing "un-Islamic" attire. 
 
In February 2008, a mission employee reported her neighbor who was 
the wife of a diplomat at another western mission was assaulted by a 
man she surprised loitering in the stairwell of her building.  The 
man was not apprehended, and his intentions are not known. 
 
In February 2008, a mission employee was verbally harassed and told 
"You Americans are not welcome here," after he avoided stepping on 
an Israeli flag that had been placed on the ground out of disrespect 
in a shopping area. 
 
In March 2008, a mission spouse was riding in a taxi and upon 
sensing an anti-American sentiment from the driver said she was from 
another country when asked where she was from.  Upon hearing this, 
the driver told her "Good, because if you were American I would kill 
you." 
 
In May 2008, while a mission member was jogging, a Syrian military 
vehicle pulled up next to him and mimicked actions of running him 
off the road. 
 
In June 2008, a mission employee's vehicle was broken into and 
contents stolen in a popular shopping district. 
 
In June 2008, the wife of a mission employee was followed and 
harassed as she walked in her upper scale neighborhood.  The 
perpetrator attempted to grab and kiss her before she could get into 
her building. 
 
In October 2008, during an open function, counterfeit 500 Syrian 
Pound notes were passed at the Marine Bar.  The Syrian police 
readily apprehended the culprit when he returned again to the Marine 
Bar. 
 
In addition, Syria is currently home to several US citizen children 
who have been abducted by parents who do not have legal custody in 
the US courts.  Syria is a non-signatory to the Hague Convention on 
the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. 
 
 
ROAD SAFETY 
----------- 
 
Driving in Syria can be a harrowing experience.  Many drivers are 
aggressive and there is only sporadic enforcement of traffic laws. 
Rights-of-way are confusing and traffic signs, lane markers, one-way 
streets, and even the directions of traffic policemen are routinely 
ignored.  Most Americans assigned to Damascus for two years or 
longer usually experience some sort of minor vehicle accident. 
Incidents involving injuries to vehicle occupants are relatively 
rare in the city, largely because Damascus' heavy traffic prevents 
cars from achieving high speeds.  Accidents involving pedestrians 
occur frequently, however, and have resulted in serious injuries and 
occasional fatalities. 
 
Outside Damascus vehicles routinely travel at high speed, and road 
construction areas are poorly marked.  Many vehicles in rural areas 
are not roadworthy, and overcrowded public transport vehicles are 
frequently involved in accidents involving multiple fatalities. 
Medical services and emergency response services in the rural areas 
are limited.  Driving outside of Damascus at night is strongly 
discouraged. 
 
Defensive driving is absolutely required throughout Syria, 
and seat belts should be worn at all times.  Motorists are 
advised to avoid using cell phones while driving, although it is 
important to keep a cell phone in the car to call for help in case 
of an accident or breakdown. 
 
An incident of road rage directed against an Embassy vehicle was 
reported in May 2008 in which the vehicle was followed and the 
occupants harassed for approximately an hour from near the Jordanian 
border into Damascus. 
 
If riding in a taxi which is involved in a vehicle accident, 
passengers should pay the fare and leave the area to avoid getting 
involved in any arguments over accidents. 
 
 
POST-SPECIFIC CONCERNS 
---------------------- 
 
Visitors to Damascus should scrupulously avoid illegal 
activities.  Failure to comply with local laws can result in arrest 
and detention for indeterminate lengths of time with no legal 
representation.  Local authorities aggressively prosecute drug 
offenses.  While alcoholic beverages can be legally bought and 
consumed in Syria, visitors should bear in mind that public 
intoxication is not well-regarded by the local population and police 
forces. 
 
Military areas or refugee camps should not be entered without clear 
official approval.  Photographing military 
installations, bridges, harbors, or other sensitive sites is 
prohibited.  Failure to follow restrictions against 
photography may result in a visitor being detained or deported. 
 
Entry into Syria without the proper visas and entry inspection is 
not tolerated.  In October 2008, two journalists who entered Syria 
without permission were detained for a week prior to being 
expelled. 
 
In addition to the property crimes reported above, there have been 
several recent reports of harassment of female Americans and other 
Westerners in downtown Damascus.  The victims reported being the 
object of loud taunting and whistling from groups of young men.  In 
a 2007 case, a female American reported being the victim of 
attempted sexual assault on two occasions while en route to Damascus 
via public transport.  In previous years, women have reported 
unwanted sexual advances from taxi drivers.  Visitors are advised to 
ride in the rear of taxicabs, on the far side from the driver. 
Female visitors are advised to dress conservatively in public and to 
travel in pairs when visiting shopping areas or crowded commercial 
districts where young males tend to loiter.  Shorts, for 
example, are not appropriate attire for men or women except in 
private settings with close associates. 
 
 
POLICE RESPONSE 
--------------- 
 
Despite a relatively high police-to-population ratio, Syrian law 
enforcement officers are generally ill-equipped and not trained to 
western standards of policing as their role differs from western 
police forces in that their primary objective is preservation of the 
regime.  Response time varies and can be lengthy depending on the 
type of incident; especially in rural areas, police may lack 
transport to crime scenes.   Few police officers speak English. 
 
Partly because many police officers subsist on less than a 
living wage, corruption has been reported among a number of 
Syrian law enforcement agencies.  Officers have repeatedly 
demanded payment for routine services and may be susceptible to 
bribery. 
 
If you are the victim of a crime, in addition to reporting to local 
police, contact the U.S. Embassy for assistance.  If you are 
arrested for any reason, make every effort to ensure that the 
Embassy is contacted on your behalf; the police and security 
services do not notify the Embassy of Americans in custody. 
 
 
MEDICAL EMERGENCIES 
------------------- 
 
The quality of medical care varies widely in Syria. 
Physicians and facilities offered by some of Damascus' 
private hospitals and clinics may approach U.S. standards, 
but public hospitals and rural facilities generally often 
lack the resources to provide a Western standard of care. 
Private Hospitals (all numbers preceded by country/city codes 
963-11) 
 
Shami Hospital (ambulance service provided)     373-5090 
Shifa Hospital                                  446-5340 
Italian Hospital                                332-6030 
Snan Hospital                                   224-1640 
Razi Hospital                                   611-8445 
 
Government Hospitals (all numbers preceded by country/city 
codes 963-11) 
 
Assad Hospital                                  212-650 
Children's Hospital                             224-5400 
Damascus Hospital                               221-3502 
Mouassat Hospital                               223-7800 
 
Government Ambulance:    Dial 110 (transport to the nearest 
government hospital) 
Syrian Red Crescent:     333-1441 
Ministry of Health:      331-1115 
 
 
TIPS ON HOW TO AVOID BECOMING A VICTIM 
-------------------------------------- 
 
General precautions useful in any large city will help one 
from becoming a victim of crime in Damascus.  Because 
newcomers are more susceptible to crime when they are still 
getting their bearings in an alien environment, visitors 
should maintain a high level of personal security awareness 
at all times. 
 
--Property crimes like pick-pocketing and purse-snatching are more 
likely to take place in shopping areas and other 
high-traffic locations where foreign visitors congregate. 
Maximum awareness is recommended in these areas. 
 
--Carry only as much cash as is required for the day's 
business, and store the remainder (along with passports, 
non-used credit cards and other valuables) in a secure 
location.  If you must carry a large amount of cash, break it up in 
different pockets so you don't display it all when making a 
purchase. 
 
--Keep a low profile, and avoid obvious displays of wealth or 
nationality. 
 
--To the extent possible, vary your travel routes and times 
for your morning commute and your other activities around 
town. 
 
--Avoid demonstrations and large gatherings of people. 
 
Emergency telephone numbers (as dialed within Damascus) 
 
Ambulance          110 
Police             112 
Fire Department    113 
Traffic Police     115 
 
American Embassy 
-Working Hours             (963 11) 3391-4444 
-After Hours Emergency     (963 11) 3391-3333 
 
-Regional Security Office  (963 11) 3391-3908 
 
NOVINGER