09GENEVA915
U) START FOLLOW-ON NEGOTIATIONS, GENEVA
Tue Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Mission Geneva
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGV #0915/01 3001629
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271629Z OCT 09
FM USMISSION GENEVA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9770
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/VCJCS WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO IMMEDIATE 5086
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/DTRA ALEX WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUESDT/DTRA-OSES DARMSTADT GE IMMEDIATE
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/DIRSSP WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUEHTA/AMEMBASSY ASTANA PRIORITY 2263
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV PRIORITY 1268
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 6459UNCLAS GENEVA 000915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR T, VC AND EUR/PRA 
DOE FOR NNSA/NA-24 
CIA FOR WINPAC 
JCS FOR J5/DDGSA 
SECDEF FOR OSD(P)/STRATCAP 
NAVY FOR CNO-N5JA AND DIRSSP 
AIRFORCE FOR HQ USAF/ASX AND ASXP 
DTRA FOR OP-OS OP-OSA AND DIRECTOR 
NSC FOR LOOK 
DIA FOR LEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KACT MARR PARM PREL RS US START
SUBJECT: (U) START FOLLOW-ON NEGOTIATIONS, GENEVA 
(SFO-GVA-VI):  JCIC AGREEMENT 56 AND EXCHANGE OF LETTERS 
 
REF: GENEVA XXX (SFO-GVA-VI-006) 
 
¶1.  (U) This is SFO-GVA-VI-005. 
 
¶2.  The text at paragraph 4 is Joint Compliance and 
Inspection Commission (JCJC) Agreement 56 on Principles and 
Procedures for the Completion of Continuous Monitoring 
Activity at Votkinsk.  The Agreement was signed by the 
Representatives of the United States and the Russian 
Federation on the margins of the START Follow-on Negotiations 
in Geneva at the U.S. Mission on October 21, 2009.  As the 
Agreement was only signed by Representatives of the United 
States and the Russian Federation, consent to be bound by 
this Agreement by the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, and Ukraine must be given by their Governments in 
accordance with paragraph 6 of Annex 1 to the Protocol on the 
JCIC.  The Representatives of the United States and the 
Russian Federation, in accordance with paragraph 7 of Annex 1 
to the JCIC Protocol, also agreed to temporarily observe this 
Agreement from the date of its signature until entry into 
force.  The Agreement was also provided to Representatives of 
the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, and 
Ukraine on October 20, 2009 (REFTEL), with an accompanying 
letter indicating that the Agreement was not signed by 
Representatives of their Governments, and that their consent 
to be bound by the Agreement must be given in accordance with 
the procedures of paragraph 6 of Annex 1 to the Protocol on 
the JCIC. 
 
¶3.  Paragraph 4 also contains the text of letters which 
modify Letters of the Representatives to the JCIC, dated 
March 20, 2002, on procedures for using ground transportation 
vehicles for transportation of cargo consisting of equipment 
and supplies to and from the monitored facility at Votkinsk 
and the text of the U.S. letter and the official translation 
of the letter signed by the Representative of the Russian 
Federation.  Paragraph 5 contains the text of letters that 
were also signed on October 20, 2009, that reflect the U.S. 
and Russian Federation agreement on procedures for settlement 
of accounts for activities conducted at the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk upon expiration of the START Treaty. 
Paragraph 5 also contains the text of the U.S. letter and the 
official translation of the letter signed by the 
Representative of the Russian Federation.  Paragraph 6 
contains the text of letters that were also signed on October 
20, 2009, that reflect a broader agreement between the United 
States and the Russian Federation on procedures for 
settlement of accounts for other START Treaty-related 
activity upon expiration of the Treaty. 
 
¶4.  Begin text (JCIC Agreement 56): 
 
         JOINT COMPLIANCE AND INSPECTION COMMISSION 
                    AGREEMENT NUMBER 56 
               RELATING TO THE TREATY BETWEEN 
              THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND 
          THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS 
              ON THE REDUCTION AND LIMITATION 
                OF STRATEGIC OFFENSIVE ARMS 
                     OF JULY 31, 1991 
 
                PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES 
     FOR COMPLETION OF CONTINUOUS MONITORING ACTIVITIES 
           AT THE MONITORED FACILITY AT VOTKINSK 
 
 
     The Government of the Republic of Belarus, the 
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Government of 
the Russian Federation, the Government of Ukraine, and the 
Government of the United States of America, hereinafter 
referred to as the Parties, 
 
     In accordance with the Treaty between the United States 
of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the 
Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms of July 
31, 1991, hereinafter referred to as the Treaty, 
 
     To improve the viability and effectiveness of the 
Protocol on Inspections and Continuous Monitoring Activities 
Relating to the Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the 
Inspection Protocol, 
 
     Have agreed as follows: 
 
                         Article One 
 
     The following provisions shall constitute Annex 16 to 
the Inspection Protocol: 
 
                         "ANNEX 16 
         PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES FOR COMPLETION OF 
     CONTINUOUS MONITORING ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED PURSUANT 
              TO PARAGRAPH 14 OF ARTICLE XI OF 
      THE TREATY AT THE MONITORED FACILITY AT VOTKINSK 
 
¶I.  General Provisions. 
 
     The Parties agree that for the purpose of completing 
continuous monitoring activities conducted pursuant to 
paragraph 14 of Article XI of the Treaty at the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk, no later than the date of expiration of 
the Treaty, or no later than the date the Treaty is 
superseded by a subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 
of Article XVII of the Treaty, whichever is earlier, the 
following shall be carried out: 
 
     (a)  The monitoring team leader shall provide the 
in-country escort with an official written continuous 
monitoring report for that month in the language of the 
inspecting Party, signed by the monitoring team leader and a 
member of the in-country escort, along with an unofficial 
translation of the report in the language of the inspected 
Party.  This report shall have the same content as the report 
provided for in paragraph 2 of Section XVIII of the 
Inspection Protocol.  Each Party shall retain one copy of the 
report. 
 
     (b)  The monitoring team at the monitored facility at 
Votkinsk shall cease its continuous monitoring activity and 
depart the territory of the inspected Party. 
 
     (c)  The inspecting Party shall ensure that the 
buildings, structures, equipment, supplies, and other 
property located at the monitored facility at Votkinsk, 
included in the list noted in Section III of this Annex, are 
dismantled if necessary and are removed from the territory of 
the inspected Party and from the territory of the transit 
State Party to the Treaty, or are transferred or returned to 
the inspected Party in accordance with this Annex. 
 
 
II.  Procedures for Completion of Continuous Monitoring 
Activities Conducted Pursuant to Paragraph 14 of Article XI 
of the Treaty at the Monitored Facility at Votkinsk. 
 
¶1.  Provision of logistical, transportation, and other 
support shall consist of the following: 
 
    (a)  The inspected Party shall provide, at the request of 
the inspecting Party, support and assistance for the 
completion of continuous monitoring activities conducted 
pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI of the Treaty at the 
monitored facility at Votkinsk.  Such support and assistance 
shall include: 
 
(i)    provision of surface handling and other equipment 
needed for the dismantlement, packing, removal, and transport 
of structures, equipment, supplies, and other property from 
the monitored facility at Votkinsk; 
 
(ii)   provision of materials needed for packing and 
preparing for the transport of structures, equipment, 
supplies, and other property from the monitored facility at 
Votkinsk.  The procedure for providing these materials shall 
be determined by agreement between the monitoring team leader 
and the in-country escort; 
 
(iii)  provision of ground transportation vehicles and 
related services needed for the transport of structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property to and from the 
monitored facility at Votkinsk; and 
 
(iv)   other support and assistance to be agreed between the 
monitoring team leader and the in-country escort. 
 
     (b)  The inspecting Party shall have the right to 
deliver to the monitored facility at Votkinsk structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property that are necessary 
for the completion of continuous monitoring activities 
conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI of the 
Treaty at that facility.  Such additional structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property shall be removed by 
the inspecting Party from the territory of the inspected 
Party no later than the date of expiration of the Treaty, or 
no later than the date the Treaty is superseded by a 
subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article XVII 
of the Treaty, whichever is earlier. 
 
     (c)  Ground transportation vehicles and related services 
provided by the inspected Party pursuant to subparagraph 
1(a)(iii) of this Section shall be provided in accordance 
with the provisions contained in the Letters of the 
Representatives to the JCIC on the Procedures for Using 
Ground Transportation Vehicles for the Transportation of 
Cargo Consisting of Equipment and Supplies to or from the 
Monitored Facility at Votkinsk, dated March 20, 2002, and the 
Attachment thereto, as well as the Letters of the 
Representatives to the JCIC dated June 7, 2005, and October 
20, 2009, hereinafter referred to as the Letters of the 
Representatives to the JCIC. 
 
     (d)  Ground transportation vehicles transporting 
structures, equipment, supplies, and other property from the 
monitored facility at Votkinsk, pursuant to subparagraph 
 
1(a)(iii) of this Section, shall depart the territory of the 
Republic of Belarus no later than the date of expiration of 
the Treaty, or no later than the date the Treaty is 
superseded by a subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 
of Article XVII of the Treaty, whichever is earlier. 
 
     (e)  The inspecting Party shall have the right to 
conduct flights of inspection airplanes to deliver to, or 
remove from, the monitored facility at Votkinsk, monitors, as 
well as structures, equipment, supplies, and other property 
associated with the completion of continuous monitoring 
activities at that facility.  Such flights shall be conducted 
into the airport associated with the monitored facility and 
shall be conducted in accordance with paragraph 4 of Section 
IV of the Inspection Protocol. 
 
     (f)  The inspected Party shall examine structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property to be removed from 
the monitored facility at Votkinsk.  This examination shall 
be conducted by the in-country escort and technical experts 
of the inspected Party when such items are being dismantled 
and prepared for transport to the territory of the inspecting 
Party.  Monitors shall be permitted to be present during such 
examinations. 
 
¶2.  Notifications provided in connection with the activities 
provided for in this Annex: 
 
     (a)  The inspecting Party shall provide to the inspected 
Party a notification containing a request for the support or 
assistance provided for in subparagraphs 1(a)(i) and 1(a)(iv) 
of this Section, no less than 10 days prior to the date 
specified in the request for such support or assistance.  The 
inspected Party shall respond to such a request no less than 
5 days prior to the date specified in the request for such 
support or assistance.  The Parties shall provide the 
notifications specified in this subparagraph through the 
Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers of the Russian Federation and 
the United States of America and through the National Agency 
for Verification and Inspections of the Republic of Belarus, 
using format number 144 ("Notification of Additional START 
Message"). 
 
     (b)  Notifications concerning the provision of ground 
transportation vehicles and related services, pursuant to 
subparagraph 1(a)(iii) of this Section, shall be exchanged by 
the Parties in accordance with the Letters of the 
Representatives to the JCIC. 
 
     (c)  The inspecting Party shall provide to the inspected 
Party notification of an intention to conduct flights of 
inspection airplanes pursuant to subparagraph 1(e) of this 
Section.  This notification, which shall be provided in 
addition to the notifications specified in paragraphs 17 and 
18 of Section III of the Inspection Protocol, shall be 
provided no less than 10 days prior to the date of arrival of 
the airplane at the airport associated with the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk.  This notification shall include a 
detailed listing of the additional structures, equipment, 
supplies, and other property intended for delivery to the 
monitored facility at Votkinsk.  This notification shall also 
include information specified in paragraph 17 of Section III 
of the Inspection Protocol.  The information provided in this 
notification shall be updated in subsequent notifications 
 
provided by the inspected Party in accordance with paragraphs 
17 and 18 of Section III of the Inspection Protocol.  The 
inspecting Party shall provide the notification specified in 
this subparagraph through the Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers 
of the Russian Federation and the United States of America 
and through the National Agency for Verification and 
Inspections of the Republic of Belarus, using format number 
144 ("Notification of Additional START Message"). 
 
¶3.  In addition to the provisions of paragraph 22 of Section 
V of the Inspection Protocol, the monitoring team leader and 
the in-country escort may, by agreement, arrange meetings 
between representatives of the mass media, monitors, and 
personnel of the inspected Party engaged in activities 
related to the completion of continuous monitoring activities 
conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI of the 
Treaty both at the monitored facility at Votkinsk and the 
point of entry.  Such meetings shall be arranged so as not to 
interfere with the completion of continuous monitoring 
activities. 
 
¶4.  Structures, equipment, supplies, and other property shall 
be transferred or returned using the following procedures: 
 
     (a)  The inspecting Party shall transfer to the 
inspected Party all structures, equipment, supplies, and 
other property used by the inspecting Party at the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk that the inspecting Party does not 
remove from the territory of the inspected Party at the 
completion of continuous monitoring activities.  Such 
structures, equipment, supplies, and other property may 
include those items that the inspected Party provided at the 
request and expense of the inspecting Party or structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property that the inspecting 
Party provided at its own expense at the monitored facility 
at Votkinsk.  The inspecting Party shall transfer such 
structures, equipment, supplies, and other property to the 
inspected Party, in a condition that is safe and suitable for 
further use, no later than the date of expiration of the 
Treaty, or no later than the date the Treaty is superseded by 
a subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 
XVII of the Treaty, whichever is earlier. 
 
     (b)  The inspecting Party shall ensure that the 
buildings used by the monitoring team at the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk under the Treaty that were originally 
constructed by the inspected Party and first used by the 
inspecting Party under the Treaty Between the United States 
of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the 
Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range 
Missiles of December 8, 1987, which include the monitoring 
team headquarters ("Roosevelt Building"), the building for 
storage of equipment and supplies ("warehouse"), and the 
buildings used by the monitors for permanent lodging and 
workspace ("Washington Building," "Jefferson Building," and 
"Lincoln Building") are returned to the inspected Party in a 
condition that is suitable for further operation.  The 
inspecting Party shall return these buildings to the 
inspected Party no later than the date of expiration of the 
Treaty, or no later than the date the Treaty is superseded by 
a subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 
XVII of the Treaty, whichever is earlier. 
 
¶5.  The inspected Party shall not exact taxes, levies, 
 
apportionments, or other payments on the value of the 
following buildings, structures, equipment, supplies, and 
other property in connection with the completion of 
continuous monitoring activities at the monitored facility at 
Votkinsk in accordance with this Annex: 
 
     (a)  structures, equipment, supplies, and other property 
of the inspecting Party that are transferred to the inspected 
Party pursuant to Section I of this Annex and subparagraph 
4(a) of this Section; 
 
     (b)  buildings that are returned to the inspected Party 
pursuant to Section I of this Annex and subparagraph 4(b) of 
this Section; and 
 
     (c)  structures, equipment, supplies, and other property 
of the inspecting Party that are removed from the territory 
of the inspected Party pursuant to Section I of this Annex. 
 
¶6.  The Parties understand that equipment, supplies, and 
other property controlled by the "dual key" system at the 
monitored facility at Votkinsk shall be returned to the 
territory of the inspecting Party, unless otherwise agreed by 
the monitoring team leader and the in-country escort. 
 
¶7.  The financial responsibilities of the Parties shall 
consist of the following: 
 
     (a)  Unless stipulated otherwise in this Annex, the 
inspecting Party shall bear the cost of goods and services 
provided by the inspected Party at the request of the 
inspecting Party in connection with the completion of 
continuous monitoring activities conducted pursuant to 
paragraph 14 of Article XI of the Treaty at the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk. 
 
     (b)  Unless stipulated otherwise in this Annex, the 
inspected Party and the inspecting Party shall use the 
procedures set forth in Annex 14 to the Inspection Protocol 
to settle accounts in connection with costs incurred in 
connection with the completion of continuous monitoring 
activities conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI 
of the Treaty at the monitored facility at Votkinsk. 
 
     (c)  The inspected Party shall bear the costs associated 
with structures, equipment, supplies, and other property of 
the inspecting Party that are transferred to the inspected 
Party after the completion of continuous monitoring 
activities pursuant to Section I of this Annex and 
subparagraph 4(a) of this Section. 
 
     (d)  The inspected Party shall bear the costs associated 
with buildings that are returned to the inspected Party after 
the completion of continuous monitoring activities pursuant 
to Section I of this Annex and subparagraph 4(b) of this 
Section. 
 
     (e)  The Parties shall use the procedures set forth in 
the Letters of the Representatives to the JCIC to settle 
accounts for costs incurred in connection with the provision 
of ground transportation vehicles and related services 
pursuant to subparagraph 1(a)(iii) of this Section. 
 
     (f)  The inspected Party and the inspecting Party shall 
 
agree on arrangements, based on the provisions of Annex 14 to 
the Inspection Protocol, for the settlement of accounts 
remaining after the date of expiration of the Treaty or after 
the date the Treaty is superseded by a subsequent agreement 
pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the Treaty, 
whichever is earlier. 
 
     (g)  The monitoring team leader and the in-country 
escort shall develop procedures on-site for keeping a record 
of goods and services that are provided by the inspected 
Party at the request of the inspecting Party pursuant to the 
provisions of this Annex. 
 
III.  List of Buildings, Structures, Equipment, Supplies, and 
Other Property. 
 
¶1.  The monitoring team leader, together with the in-country 
escort, shall develop a list, in two copies, one for the 
inspecting Party and one for the inspected Party, consisting 
of three sections, of buildings, structures, equipment, 
supplies and other property used by the monitoring team at 
the monitored facility at Votkinsk. 
 
¶2.  Structures, equipment, supplies, and other property of 
the inspecting Party that are to be removed from the 
territory of the inspected Party pursuant to Section I of 
this Annex shall be included in the first section of the list 
developed pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Section. 
 
¶3.  Structures, equipment, supplies, and other property of 
the inspecting Party that are to be transferred to the 
inspected Party pursuant to Section I and subparagraph 4(a) 
of Section II of this Annex shall be included in the second 
section of the list developed pursuant to paragraph 1 of this 
Section. 
 
¶4.  The buildings that are to be returned to the inspected 
Party pursuant to Section I and subparagraph 4(b) of Section 
II of this Annex shall be included in the third section of 
the list developed pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Section. 
 
                         Article Two 
 
¶1.  In subparagraph 1(a) of Section I of Annex 14 to the 
Inspection Protocol, the words and punctuation "Inspection 
Protocol; and" shall be superseded by the words and 
punctuation "Inspection Protocol;". 
 
¶2.  In subparagraph 1(b) of Section I of Annex 14 to the 
Inspection Protocol, the words and punctuation "Annex 5 to 
the Telemetry Protocol." shall be superseded by the words and 
punctuation "Annex 5 to the Telemetry Protocol; and". 
 
¶3.  The following provision shall constitute subparagraph 
1(c) of Section I of Annex 14 to the Inspection Protocol: 
 
     "(c) the costs of goods and services associated with the 
implementation of Annex 16 to the Inspection Protocol." 
 
¶4.  In subparagraph 12(a) of Section I of Annex 14 to the 
Inspection Protocol, the words "On-Site Inspection Agency of 
the United States of America" shall be superseded by the 
words "Defense Threat Reduction Agency of the United States 
of America." 
 
 
                        Article Three 
 
     The following provisions shall constitute paragraph 19 
of Section II of Annex 14 to the Inspection Protocol: 
 
"19.  Support and assistance associated with the completion 
of continuous monitoring activities conducted pursuant to 
paragraph 14 of Article XI of the Treaty at the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk: 
 
     (a)  Surface handling and other equipment needed for the 
dismantlement, packing, removal, and transport of structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property from the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk: 
 
(i)    type of equipment; 
 
(ii)   number of items of equipment of each type; 
 
(iii)  dates on which the equipment was provided; 
 
(iv)   number of hours for which such equipment 
       was provided; and 
 
(v)    estimated cost of the use of such equipment 
       per unit of time. 
 
     (b)  Materials needed for packing and preparing for the 
transport of structures, equipment, supplies, and other 
property from the monitored facility at Votkinsk: 
 
(i)    description and quantity of the materials 
       provided; and 
 
(ii)   estimated cost of the materials (for each 
       unit). 
 
     (c)  Other goods and services provided by the inspected 
Party at the request of the inspecting Party: 
 
(i)    description of the service provided; 
 
(ii)   dates on which the service was provided; 
 
(iii)  estimated cost of each service; 
 
(iv)   payments, if any, made when the service 
       was provided; 
 
(v)    description of equipment provided; 
 
(vi)   number of items of equipment of each type; 
 
(vii)  number of hours for which such equipment 
       was provided; and 
 
(viii) estimated cost of the use of such equipment 
       per unit of time (per day or per hour)." 
 
                        Article Four 
 
¶1.  This Agreement shall enter into force on the day when the 
United States of America, the Republic of Belarus, the 
 
Republic of Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, and Ukraine 
have consented to be bound by this Agreement and shall remain 
in force as long as the Treaty remains in force. 
 
¶2.  Signature of this Agreement for the Government of a Party 
shall express the consent of that Party to be bound by this 
Agreement.  The consent of the Republic of Belarus, the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, and Ukraine to be bound by this 
Agreement shall be expressed by their Governments in 
accordance with paragraph 6 of Annex 1 to the Protocol on the 
Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission Relating to the 
Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the JCIC Protocol. 
 
¶3.  This Agreement shall be temporarily observed by the 
United States of America and the Russian Federation pursuant 
to paragraph 7 of Annex 1 to the JCIC Protocol from the date 
of its signature until this Agreement enters into force. 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized by 
their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement. 
 
DONE at Geneva, Switzerland, on October 20, 2009, in five 
originals, each in the English and Russian languages, both 
texts being equally authentic. 
 
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
  SIGNED 
 
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION 
  SIGNED 
 
End text. 
 
¶4.  Begin text (Letters on Ground Transportation): 
 
                                      Geneva, Switzerland 
                                      October 20, 2009 
 
Mr. Sergey M. Koshelev 
Representative of the Government of the 
  Russian Federation to the Joint Compliance 
  and Inspection Commission 
 
Dear Mr. Representative: 
 
     In connection with the Letters of the Representatives to 
the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission dated March 
20, 2002, on the Procedures for Using Ground Transportation 
Vehicles for the Transportation of Cargo Consisting of 
Equipment and Supplies to or from the Monitored Facility at 
Votkinsk and the Attachment thereto, and the Letters of the 
Representatives to the Joint Compliance and Inspection 
Commission dated June 7, 2005, on such procedures, 
hereinafter referred to in the aggregate as the Agreement, on 
behalf of the Government of the United States of America, I 
have the honor to accept the letter of today's date to 
conclude an agreement on this issue, whose principal 
provisions are set forth below. 
 
     In connection with the completion of continuous 
monitoring activities conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of 
Article XI of the Treaty Between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Reduction 
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms of July 31, 1991, 
 
 
at the monitored facility at Votkinsk in accordance with the 
provisions of Annex 16 to the Protocol on Inspections and 
Continuous Monitoring Activities Relating to the Treaty, 
hereinafter referred to as the Inspection Protocol, the 
Russian Federation, the Republic of Belarus, and the United 
States of America shall continue to fully implement the 
provisions of the Agreement until all ground transportation 
vehicles transporting cargo consisting of structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property from the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk have departed from the monitored 
facility, arrived at and departed from the point of departure 
of the cargo, and have returned to the territory of the 
Russian Federation. 
 
     With respect to potential "points of departure of the 
cargo," the Government of the Russian Federation proposes the 
following changes to the Agreement: 
 
     ¶1.  For paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 of the Attachment to the 
Letters of the Representatives to the Joint Compliance and 
Inspection Commission dated March 20, 2002, on the Procedures 
for Using Ground Transportation Vehicles for the 
Transportation of Cargo Consisting of Equipment and Supplies 
to or from the Monitored Facility at Votkinsk, the words 
"point of departure of the cargo at Frankfurt am Main or 
Darmstadt" shall be superseded by the words "point of 
departure of the cargo at Frankfurt am Main, Darmstadt, or 
Kaiserslautern." 
 
     ¶2.  For paragraph 11 of the Attachment to the Letters of 
the Representatives to the Joint Compliance and Inspection 
Commission dated March 20, 2002, on the Procedures for Using 
Ground Transportation Vehicles for the Transportation of 
Cargo Consisting of Equipment and Supplies to or from the 
Monitored Facility at Votkinsk, the words "Frankfurt am Main 
or Darmstadt" shall be superseded by the words "Frankfurt am 
Main, Darmstadt, or Kaiserslautern." 
 
     This reply, together with your letter, shall constitute 
an agreement between our Governments, which shall enter into 
force on the date of the exchange of our letters and shall 
remain in force until all ground transportation vehicles 
transporting cargo from the monitored facility at Votkinsk 
have returned to the territory of the Russian Federation. 
This agreement may be terminated 12 months after notification 
to that effect by one of the Parties to the agreement. 
 
     Please accept, Mr. Representative, the assurances of my 
highest consideration. 
 
                                SIGNED 
 
                                Jerry A. Taylor 
                                Representative of the 
                                  United States of America 
                                  to the Joint Compliance and 
                                  Inspection Commission 
 
                                      Official Translation 
 
                                      Geneva, Switzerland 
                                      October 20, 2009 
 
Jerry A. Taylor 
 
Representative of the 
  United States of America 
  to the Joint Compliance and 
  Inspection Commission 
 
Dear Mr. Representative: 
 
     In connection with the Letters of the Representatives to 
the Joint Compliance and Inspection Commission dated March 
20, 2002, on the Procedures for Using Ground Transportation 
Vehicles for the Transportation of Cargo Consisting of 
Equipment and Supplies to or from the Monitored Facility at 
Votkinsk and the Attachment thereto, and the Letters of the 
Representatives to the Joint Compliance and Inspection 
Commission dated June 7, 2005, on such procedures, 
hereinafter referred to in the aggregate as the Agreement, on 
behalf of the Government of the Russian Federation, I have 
the honor to propose the following. 
 
     The Russian Federation understands that, in connection 
with the completion of continuous monitoring activities 
conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI of the 
Treaty Between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and 
the United States of America on the Reduction and Limitation 
of Strategic Offensive Arms of July 31, 1991, at the 
monitored facility at Votkinsk in accordance with the 
provisions of Annex 16 to the Protocol on Inspections and 
Continuous Monitoring Activities Relating to the Treaty, 
hereinafter referred to as the Inspection Protocol, the 
Russian Federation, the Republic of Belarus, and the United 
States of America shall continue to fully implement the 
provisions of the Agreement until all ground transportation 
vehicles transporting cargo consisting of structures, 
equipment, supplies, and other property from the monitored 
facility at Votkinsk have departed from the monitored 
facility, arrived at and departed from the point of departure 
of the cargo, and have returned to the territory of the 
Russian Federation. 
 
     With respect to potential "points of departure of the 
cargo," I have the honor on behalf of the Government of the 
Russian Federation, to propose the following changes to the 
Agreement: 
 
     ¶1.  For paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 of the Attachment to the 
Letters of the Representatives to the Joint Compliance and 
Inspection Commission dated March 20, 2002, on the Procedures 
for Using Ground Transportation Vehicles for the 
Transportation of Cargo Consisting of Equipment and Supplies 
to or from the Monitored Facility at Votkinsk, the words 
"point of departure of the cargo at Frankfurt am Main or 
Darmstadt" shall be superseded by the words "point of 
departure of the cargo at Frankfurt am Main, Darmstadt, or 
Kaiserslautern." 
 
     ¶2.  For paragraph 11 of the Attachment to the Letters of 
the Representatives to the Joint Compliance and Inspection 
Commission dated March 20, 2002, on the Procedures for Using 
Ground Transportation Vehicles for the Transportation of 
Cargo Consisting of Equipment and Supplies to or from the 
Monitored Facility at Votkinsk, the words "Frankfurt am Main 
or Darmstadt" shall be superseded by the words "Frankfurt am 
Main, Darmstadt, or Kaiserslautern." 
 
 
     If the foregoing is acceptable, this letter, together 
with your reply, shall constitute an agreement between our 
Governments, which shall enter into force on the date of the 
exchange of our letters and shall remain in force until all 
ground transportation vehicles transporting cargo from the 
monitored facility at Votkinsk have returned to the territory 
of the Russian Federation.  This agreement may be terminated 
12 months after notification to that effect by one of the 
Parties to the agreement. 
 
     Please accept, Mr. Representative, the assurances of my 
highest consideration. 
 
                                SIGNED 
 
                                Sergey M. Koshelev 
                                Representative of the Russian 
                                  Federation to the Joint 
                                  Compliance and Inspection 
                                  Commission 
 
End text. 
 
¶5.  Begin text (Letters on Procedures for Settlement of 
Accounts-Votkinsk): 
 
                                      Geneva, Switzerland 
                                      October 20, 2009 
 
Mr. Sergey M. Koshelev 
Representative of the Government of the 
   Russian Federation to the Joint Compliance 
   and Inspection Commission 
 
Dear Mr. Representative: 
 
     With respect to the settlement of accounts associated 
with the completion of continuous monitoring activities 
conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI of the 
Treaty Between the United States of America and the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics on the Reduction and Limitation of 
Strategic Offensive Arms, hereinafter referred to as the 
Treaty, at the monitored facility at Votkinsk, following the 
expiration of the Treaty or its supersession by a subsequent 
agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the 
Treaty, whichever is earlier, I have the honor to accept on 
behalf of the Government of the United States of America the 
proposal set forth in your letter of today's date to conclude 
an agreement on this issue, whose principal provisions are 
set forth below. 
 
     Under this agreement, our Governments would agree that, 
upon the expiration of the Treaty or its supersession by a 
subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article XVII 
of the Treaty, whichever is earlier, the accounts for goods 
and services provided within the framework of arrangements 
carried out by representatives of either Government in 
connection with the completion of continuous monitoring 
activities conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI 
of the Treaty at the monitored facility at Votkinsk, shall be 
settled on the basis of the provisions contained in Annex 14 
and Annex 16 to the Protocol on Inspections and Continuous 
Monitoring Activities Relating to the Treaty, hereinafter 
referred to as the Inspection Protocol.  Our Governments 
 
would further agree that additional arrangements consistent 
with the provisions contained in Annex 14 and Annex 16 to the 
Inspection Protocol may be agreed upon by our 
representatives, as necessary, to ensure the effective 
implementation of this agreement. 
 
     This reply, together with your letter, shall constitute 
an agreement between the Government of the United States of 
America and the Government of the Russian Federation, which 
shall enter into force on the expiration or supersession of 
the Treaty, pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the 
Treaty, whichever is earlier, and shall remain in force until 
all accounts associated with the completion of continuous 
monitoring activities at the monitored facility at Votkinsk 
have been settled. 
 
     Please accept, Mr. Representative, the assurances of my 
highest consideration. 
 
                              SIGNED 
 
                              Jerry A. Taylor 
                              Representative of the 
                                United States of America 
                                to the Joint Compliance and 
                                Inspection Commission 
 
                                      Official Translation 
 
                                      Geneva, Switzerland 
                                      October 20, 2009 
 
Jerry A. Taylor 
Representative of the 
  United States of America 
  to the Joint Compliance and 
  Inspection Commission 
 
Dear Mr. Representative: 
 
     On behalf of the Government of the Russian Federation, I 
have the honor to propose an agreement between our 
Governments on the settlement of accounts in connection with 
the conclusion of continuous monitoring activities conducted 
pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI of the Treaty Between 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States 
of America on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic 
Offensive Arms, hereinafter referred to as the Treaty, 
following the expiration of the Treaty or its supersession by 
a subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 
XVII of the Treaty, whichever is earlier. 
 
     The Russian Federation suggests that, following the 
expiration of the Treaty or its supersession by a subsequent 
agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the 
Treaty, whichever is earlier, statements for goods and 
services, provided within the framework of measures 
implemented by representatives of either Party in connection 
with the completion of continuous monitoring activities 
conducted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Article XI of the 
Treaty at the monitored facility at Votkinsk, be settled on 
the basis of the provisions of Annex 14 and Annex 16 to the 
Protocol on Inspections and Continuous Monitoring Activities 
Relating to the Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the 
E 
 
Inspection Protocol.  Further, the Russian Federation 
suggests that additional measures conforming to the 
provisions of Annex 14 and Annex 16 to the Inspection 
Protocol be agreed upon, as necessary, by our representatives 
to provide for the effective realization of this agreement. 
 
     If the foregoing is acceptable, this letter, together 
with your reply, shall constitute an agreement between the 
Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of 
the United States, which shall enter into force on the 
expiration or supersession of the Treaty, pursuant to 
paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the Treaty, whichever is 
earlier, and shall remain in force until all accounts 
associated with the completion of continuous monitoring 
activities at the monitored facility at Votkinsk. 
 
     Please accept, Mr. Representative, the assurances of my 
highest consideration. 
 
                              SIGNED 
 
                              Sergey M. Koshelev 
                              Representative of the Russian 
                                Federation to the Joint 
                                Compliance and Inspection 
                                Commission 
 
End text. 
 
¶6.  Begin text (Letters on Settlement of Accounts-General): 
 
                                      Geneva, Switzerland 
                                      October 20, 2009 
 
Mr. Sergey M. Koshelev 
Representative of the Government of the 
  Russian Federation to the Joint Compliance 
  and Inspection Commission 
 
Dear Mr. Representative: 
 
     On behalf of the Government of the United States, I have 
the honor to propose an agreement between our Governments on 
the settlement of accounts in connection with the Treaty 
Between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics on the Reduction and Limitation of 
Strategic Offensive Arms, hereinafter referred to as the 
Treaty, following the expiration of the Treaty or its 
supersession by a subsequent agreement pursuant to paragraph 
2 of Article XVII of the Treaty, whichever is earlier. 
 
     Under this agreement, our Governments would agree that, 
following the expiration of the Treaty or its supersession, 
the provisions contained in Annex 14 to the Protocol on 
Inspections and Continuous Monitoring Activities Relating to 
the Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the Inspection 
Protocol, as modified by the provisions of Annex 16 to the 
Inspection Protocol, shall serve as the basis for the 
settlement of accounts for goods and services in connection 
with: 
 
     (a) the costs of goods and services borne by the 
inspecting Party pursuant to paragraph 13 of Section IV of 
the Inspection Protocol; 
 
 
     (b) the costs of goods and services associated with the 
purchase of tapes and the copying of telemetric information 
onto such tapes pursuant to the Thirty-fifth Agreed Statement 
in the Annex to the Treaty on Agreed Statements, with the 
providing of training, maintenance, service, spare parts, and 
replacement parts relating to telemetry equipment pursuant to 
paragraph 7 of Section I and paragraph 8 of Section II of 
Annex 1 to the Telemetry Protocol, and subparagraphs 4(d) and 
4(e) and paragraph 6 of Annex 4 to the Telemetry Protocol, 
and with the implementation of Section III of Annex 5 to the 
Telemetry Protocol; and 
 
     (c) the costs of goods and services borne by the 
inspected Party pursuant to paragraph 18 of Section V, 
paragraph 13 of Section IV (that pertains to parking and 
security protection for inspection airplanes at the point of 
entry) and subparagraph 19(a) of Section V (that pertains to 
transportation of monitors at the point of entry) of the 
Inspection Protocol that are reimbursed by the United States 
of America in accordance with the statements of policy 
concerning reimbursement of inspection costs exchanged by the 
Governments of the United States of America, Republic of 
Belarus, Republic of Kazakhstan, and Ukraine on February 3, 
1995, in Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
     Our Governments would further agree that additional 
arrangements consistent with the provisions contained in 
Annex 14 and Annex 16 to the Inspection Protocol may be 
agreed upon by our representatives, as necessary, to ensure 
the effective implementation of this agreement. 
 
     If the foregoing is acceptable, this letter together 
with your reply shall constitute an agreement between our 
Governments, which shall enter into force on the date of the 
expiration or supersession of the Treaty, pursuant to 
paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the Treaty, whichever is 
earlier, and shall remain in force until all accounts related 
to the Treaty have been settled. 
 
     Please accept, Mr. Representative, the assurances of my 
highest consideration. 
 
                              SIGNED 
 
                              Jerry A. Taylor 
                              U.S. Representative to the 
                                Joint Compliance and 
                                Inspection Commission 
 
                                      Official Translation 
 
                                      Geneva, Switzerland 
                                      October 20, 2009 
 
Jerry A. Taylor 
Representative of the 
  United States of America 
  to the Joint Compliance and 
  Inspection Commission 
 
Dear Mr. Representative: 
 
 
     With respect to the settlement of accounts associated 
 
with the Treaty Between the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics and the United States of America on the Reduction 
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, hereinafter 
referred to as the Treaty, following the expiration of the 
Treaty or its supersession by a subsequent agreement pursuant 
to paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the Treaty, whichever is 
earlier, I have the honor to accept on behalf of the 
Government of the Russian Federation the proposal set forth 
in your letter of today's date to conclude an agreement on 
this issue, whose principal provisions are set forth below. 
 
     Upon the expiration of the Treaty or its supersession by 
a subsequent agreement, the provisions of Annex 14 to the 
Protocol on Inspections and Continuous Monitoring Activities 
Relating to the Treaty, hereinafter referred to as the 
Inspection Protocol and modified by the provisions of Annex 
16 to the Inspection Protocol, will serve as the basis for 
the settlement of accounts for goods and services, associated 
with: 
 
     (a) the costs of goods and services borne by the 
Inspecting Party in accordance with Section IV, paragraph 13 
of the Inspection Protocol; 
 
     (b) the costs of goods and services, associated with the 
purchase of tapes and the copying of telemetric information 
onto such tapes in accordance with the Thirty-fifth Agreed 
Statement of the Annex to the Treaty "Agreed Statements", 
with services related to training, support, maintenance, and 
delivery of spare parts and replacement parts as relating to 
telemetric equipment in accordance with paragraph 7 of 
Section I and paragraph 8 of Section II of Annex 1 to the 
Telemetry Protocol, and subparagraphs 4(d) and 4(e) and 
paragraph 6 of Annex 4 to the Telemetry Protocol and in 
connection with the execution of Section III of Annex 5 to 
the Telemetry Protocol; and 
 
     (c) expenses, associated with goods and services, borne 
by the Inspecting Party pursuant to paragraph 18 of Section 
V, paragraph 13 of Section IV (as concerns parking and 
security of inspection airplanes at the point of entry) and 
subparagraph 19(a) of Section V (as concerns providing 
monitors with transportation while monitors are at the point 
of entry) of the Inspection Protocol, which are reimbursed by 
the U.S. in accordance with statements regarding policy 
concerning the reimbursement of expenditures for inspections, 
which were exchanged by the Government of the U.S., the 
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, and Ukraine 
February 3, 1995, in Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
     To ensure the effective implementation of this 
agreement, additional agreements may be reached, as 
necessary, by our representatives, in accordance with the 
provisions contained in Annex 14 and Annex 16 to the 
Inspection Protocol. 
 
     This reply, together with your letter, shall constitute 
an agreement between our Governments, which shall enter into 
force on the expiration or supersession of the Treaty, 
pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article XVII of the Treaty, 
whichever is earlier, and shall remain in force until all 
accounts associated with the Treaty have been settled. 
 
     Please accept, Mr. Representative, the assurances of my 
 
highest consideration. 
                               . 
                                SIGNED 
 
                                Sergey M. Koshelev 
                                Representative of the Russian 
                                  Federation to the Joint 
                                  Compliance and Inspection 
                                  Commission 
 
End text 
 
¶7.  Gottemoeller sends. 
GRIFFITHS