09HARARE325
ZIMBABWE: GOODS PRODUCED WITH FORCED OR EXPLOITATIVE CHILD
Mon Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO3759
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0325/01 1100550
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200550Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4391
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/S FOR BWALCH 
AF/EPS for MZIKRY 
DRL FOR NWILETT, MMITTELHAUSER, AND TDANG 
G/TIP FOR SSTEINER AND RYOUSEY 
EEB FOR BBROOKS-RUBIN AND JWINKLER 
DOL/ILAB FOR LSTROTKAMP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PLAB PHUM PREF PGOV KTIP EMIN EAGR ZI
SUBJECT: ZIMBABWE: GOODS PRODUCED WITH FORCED OR EXPLOITATIVE CHILD 
LABOR 
 
Ref:  STATE 21472 
 
¶1. This cable provides additional details on goods produced in 
Zimbabwe with forced labor and exploitative child labor.  Reports 
from the government, the International Labor Organization, industry, 
and non-governmental organizations that follow labor issues indicate 
that the vast majority of child labor in Zimbabwe is not forced and 
occurs in a family work setting. 
 
¶2. The answers below are keyed in response to questions posed in 
paragraph 11 of reftel. 
 
 
¶A. Good: Diamonds 
 
-- Type of exploitation found in the production of the good: Forced 
labor of both adults and children and exploitative child labor. 
 
-- Sources of information and years:  Since late 2008 numerous 
credible NGOs, local chiefs, and villagers surrounding the Marange 
(also known as Chiadzwa) diamond field in eastern Zimbabwe have 
reported that both forced labor and exploitative child labor have 
occured in Marange.  International NGOs including Partnership Africa 
Canada have since conducted separate investigations, verifying these 
claims.  PAC's report "Zimbabwe, Diamonds and the Wrong Side of 
History" is available online at: 
http://www.pacweb.org/e/images/stories/docume nts/ 
18_zimbabwe-diamonds_march09-eng.pdf 
 
-- Narrative:  Between late 2006 and the present, villagers and 
children from communities surrounding the alluvial diamond field 
near Marange in Manicaland have abandoned jobs and school and 
engaged in small-scale diamond mining, primarily by digging.  Up 
until late 2008, this mining was not forced or exploitative. 
Children and adults alike dug and sold diamonds to local syndicates. 
 
 
Around October 2008, security forces moved in to allegedly "clean 
up" the diamond field and expel the illegal miners.  NGOs estimate 
that between October and December at least 200 people were killed in 
this operation; some bodies were taken to the morgue in nearby 
Mutare and others were buried in mass and individual graves near the 
diamond fields.  During the take-over by security forces, soldiers 
and police have formed "syndicates" of illegal diggers.  According 
to reports, these syndicates are formed mostly by men, but they also 
include children--mostly boys--as young as 11, who come to Marange 
of their own will to dig.  Schools in the surrounding area are 
reportedly empty, giving credence to the claims that children prefer 
mining to school.  Forced and exploitative labor occurs when these 
security forces force the miners to dig until meeting a quota or 
beat miners severely if they are suspected of stealing or if they 
are not able to meet the quota.  Soldiers also reportedly fire 
"warning shots" to force the miners, including children, to dig 
faster.  Some workers have fled the area on foot, walking many miles 
to escape the area.  Soldiers reportedly allow the diggers to keep 
lower-grade industrial diamonds while taking the higher-grade 
gem-quality diamonds for themselves.  NGOs also report that security 
forces have sometimes rounded up people from the streets, taken them 
to Marange, and forced them to dig under armed guard. 
 
Because the military has sealed off all roads leading to the area 
and many people fear for their lives if they disclose activities 
occurring in Marange, accurate information on the labor situation is 
difficult to obtain and nearly impossible to confirm.  Reliable 
local NGOs have provided this information either verbally or in 
Qlocal NGOs have provided this information either verbally or in 
written reports. 
 
Incidence:  The Marange/Chiadzwa diamond field is one of three 
diamond mining sites in Zimbabwe and is the only diamond site where 
forced labor and exploitative child labor is believed to exist. 
There are two other diamond mines in Zimbabwe -- Murowa Mine and 
River Ranch Mine.  Murowa Mine is owned by Murowa Diamonds, a member 
of the Rio Tinto Group of Companies.  River Ranch is the subject of 
a property dispute; however, the dispute has not led to the lawless 
situation experienced in Marange/Chiadzwa. 
 
-- Host government, industry, or NGO efforts specifically designed 
to combat forced labor of adults or children in production of goods: 
The transitional government has reportedly attempted to regain 
control of the area and peacefully eliminate all illegal activity, 
including forced and child labor.  However, Post continues to 
receive reports that security forces are beating illegal diamond 
diggers, sometimes fatally.  We do not know to what extent children 
have been affected. 
 
HARARE 00000325  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶3. In addition to diamonds, there are other Zimbabwean goods that 
may be produced with child labor and warrant further research. 
However, it is unknown if this child labor was exploitative or not. 
Currently there is only one small NGO, the Coalition Against Child 
Labor in Zimbabwe (CACLAZ) dedicated to researching and combating 
child labor.  CACLAZ lacks adequate resources to conduct research to 
verify these claims of exploitative child labor to produce goods. 
 
¶4.  The following goods may be produced with child labor (NOTE: Post 
can not confirm incidents of exploitative child labor. END NOTE): 
 
-- Tea.  Zimbabwe's largest tea company, Tanganda Tea Estates, 
employs children 15 and older in a government-sanctioned 
"earn-and-learn" program.  Under the program, children are paid 
US$30 per month to work four hours per day picking tea.  In return, 
Tanganda also provides the children with free education, including 
school fees, school supplies, and teacher allowances.  NGOs and 
children working at Tanganda report that some children under 15 are 
employed through the program.  Tanganda has been certified by the 
international organization Ethcal Tea Partnership (ETP), which 
seeks to identify companies engaging in unethical practices. 
Tanganda executives told us they are currently addressing some 
concerns raised by ETP during its routine monitoring of labor 
practices on the estate, such as the provision of protective 
clothing for "earn-and-learn" workers and the provision of potable 
water for workers. Post does not have enough information to confirm 
the ages of children working at Tanganda nor to determine if labor 
at the tea estates is exploitative. 
 
-- Timber products.  Reports indicate children are used to move logs 
after they have been cut.  However, Post has not been able to 
confirm this. 
 
-- Cotton.  The vast majority of cotton producers are small-scale. 
Children routinely work on their families' plots, although cotton 
producers do not believe this has interfered with their education. 
 
 
-- Gold.  Children help their families with small-scale gold panning 
and may help during the chemical processing of gold, which often 
includes cyanide.  However, there is limited public information on 
child labor involving use of dangerous chemicals in gold mining. 
Post does not have reports of forced labor in larger-scale 
commercial gold mines. 
 
-- Tobacco.  Preliminary reports indicate children, including those 
under 14, may be used in picking tobacco and in removing worms from 
tobacco leaves. 
 
-- Crocodile leather and meat.  There are unconfirmed reports to 
indicate children may be working on some crocodile farms near Lake 
Kariba.  At least one firm reportedly employs children under the age 
of 15 to clean crocodile skins and to clean crocodile pens, even 
while crocodiles are in the pens.  The company reportedly told an 
NGO that the crocodiles are tame and "have small brains" and will 
consequently not attack the workers. 
 
MCGEE