09HILLAH37
SECOND PRT-SUPPORTED BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT CONFERENCE
Wed May 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO7677 
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK 
DE RUEHIHL #0037/01 1261329 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
R 061329Z MAY 09 
FM REO HILLAH 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1187 
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE 
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 1260UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HILLAH 000037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: SECOND PRT-SUPPORTED BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT CONFERENCE 
MOBILIZES BUSINESS COMMUNITY 
 
REF: HILLAH 22 
 
 
¶1. Summary: At the second Business Environment Conference 
(BEC2) on April 25, participants agreed on the need for the 
business community to advocate for solutions with regard to 
corruption, the need for improved infrastructure, better credit, 
and critical economic legislation. Co-hosted by the PRT, Babil 
Chamber of Commerce (BCOC) and Babylon Center for Business 
Community Development (BCBCD), the conference advanced 
proposals, such as forming a business community lobbying group, 
undertaking public awareness campaigns and sponsoring economic 
studies -- which participants were eager to follow up through 
continued public-private partnership. Attendance was 50 percent 
higher than expected, drawing at least 150 attendees, including 
newly elected Governor Al Zargani making his first official 
appearance in which he spontaneously composed and read a poem. 
End Summary. 
 
 
------------------------- 
Building Sustainability for Business Dialogue 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. BEC2 was held on April 25 as a follow-up to an earlier 
business conference (BEC1) (reftel). The idea behind BEC1 was 
to start a process that would lead to; a dialogue between key 
business stakeholders to identify common obstacles, the 
development of an action program to address such obstacles, and 
the implementation of the program. Participants at BEC1 
identified financial services/access to credit, weak 
infrastructure, poor economic legislation, and corruption as the 
key obstacles to doing business in Babil. 
 
¶3. While the PRT took the lead in organizing and hosting BEC1, 
Iraqi partners assumed much of the responsibility for BEC2. The 
BCOC and BCBCD helped develop BEC2's agenda and invitee list and 
organized the venue, a conference hall at the ruins of Babylon. 
The PRT trained BCOC and BCBCD staff to help facilitate working 
group roundtable discussions on overcoming the obstacles 
identified in BEC1. Like BEC1, BEC2 was held entirely in 
Arabic. As the BEC process continues, the PRT will turn over 
increasing responsibility to Iraqi partners to help ensure 
national ownership and sustainability. 
 
¶4. Participants uniformly told us that the conferences 
facilitated discussions that otherwise would not occur, 
particularly between the public and private sector. The working 
group sessions were particularly effective at getting new ideas 
on the table. A visiting Director General from Baghdad said the 
roundtable format was something he now planned to emulate in his 
ministry. 
 
---------------------------- 
Moving Towards Solutions to Business Concerns 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. The theme of BEC2 was "Moving Towards Solutions." In the 
first session the audience heard from speakers who addressed the 
need for increased credit, better infrastructure, and stronger 
economic legislation. The theme of corruption was raised by all 
speakers as a common problem that needed to be addressed. 
 
¶6. In roundtables, facilitators helped four working groups 
think about ways in which the business community could address 
the obstacles identified in BEC1. Participants agreed that the 
fundamental question was how the business community could make 
its collective voice heard on issues of fundamental importance 
to the private sector. Three common approaches emerged from the 
working groups: create a business lobbying group that could 
reach out to the government at the provincial and national 
levels; promote studies and analyses related to areas of 
economic concern, and; work through the media to increase public 
awareness of economic issues. 
 
¶7. Participants agreed on the usefulness of the conference and 
pledged to continue the dialogue. The next conference, 
tentatively set for mid-June, should create entities from within 
the business community to address government lobbying, economic 
studies, and public awareness campaigns as well as developing 
action programs for each entity. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
All Rows of Seats Full While Governor Asks About the Roses 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8. Although only about 100 invitations went out, over 150 
participants showed up at the conference. Every seat was full 
and the overflow crowd watched and listened from the sides. In 
addition to the parties that attended BEC1, Babil's new Governor 
(and outgoing Governor), Deputy-Governor, and Deputy-Provincial 
Council Chairman also joined the conference. Provincial 
Directorate heads, as well as one DG from the Oil Ministry from 
Baghdad, also attended. 
 
¶9. Newly elected Governor Salman Taha Al-Zargani highlighted 
the importance of the conference by making his first public 
appearance as governor. Al Zargani actively participated in a 
working group discussion. Moved by the conference, Al Zargai 
Salman took the microphone and read a poem composed on the spots 
in which he asked the question "Where are the beautiful gardens 
and roses full of the promise of my town?" 
 
¶10. Babil's media put on a full-court press with newspaper, 
radio and television coverage. During the two-hour working 
group sessions politicians and business association heads 
conducted multiple interviews. Local press reports of the 
conference were positive and noted the importance of the 
conference and the PRT role in organizing it. Still, the high 
attendance and press coverage was something of a double-edged 
sword: while it focused attention on the conference it also 
meant that some participants were more inclined to make speeches 
than engage in dialogue. 
 
------------------------ 
Conclusion: Bottom-Up Policy Dialogue 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. National policies and law -- e.g. on land ownership, 
foreign investment and credit -- define the macro-business 
environment. But the BEC process has begun to create a 
sustainable public-private partnership for grass-roots advocacy 
in favor of legislation and policy decisions that improve the 
business environment. 
 
HILLASK