09ISTANBUL53
ANNUAL CRIME EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE (ACEQ)
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Istanbul
P 301127Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8742
INFO AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 
CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
FBI WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
DIA WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS ISTANBUL 000053 
 
 
DS/IP/ITA, DS/IP/EUR, DS/OSAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: ANNUAL CRIME EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE (ACEQ) 
 
REF: 08 STATE 7551 
 
ANNUAL CRIME EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE (ACEQ) 
 
¶A.  Below are responses to the Annual Crime Evaluation 
Questionnaire for Istanbul 
 
1) Crime Mobility (In official neighborhoods): B. Criminal 
elements generally concentrate their activities in high crime 
areas, but sometimes enter nearby neighborhoods to burglarize 
residences. 
 
Comment: Historically, most crime has occurred in specific, 
high crime areas.  However, over the past year, there is 
evidence that criminals have been targeting more affluent 
areas.  The Etiler District, home to many diplomats, is one 
such area. Police report that there has been an increase in 
the number of street and property crimes in recent years. 
 
2)  Crime Ambiance (around Consulate neighborhoods): A. 
Surrounded by low-crime buffer zones, which deter criminal 
elements from entering Consulate neighborhoods. 
 
Comment: Consulate officials and their families are housed in 
seven separate guarded (private - non USG) residential 
compounds in four different neighborhoods.  An increase in 
the level of crime has been noted in buffer zones surrounding 
two of these neighborhoods. 
 
3)  Aggressiveness of Criminals: B.  Commit street crimes and 
burglaries, but rely on stealth during burglaries. 
 
Comment: The majority of the crime reported in the Consulate 
residential areas is common street crime. Personnel reside in 
guarded residential communities and burglaries to Consulate 
residences have been rare.  There has not been a burglary of 
a Consulate residence in over eight years. The Consulate's 
LGP roving patrols are an added deterrent in these areas. 
 
4)  Arming of Criminals:  B. Criminal perpetrators usually 
are armed with knives or lethal cutting weapons. 
 
Comment: Edged weapons or force are used to threaten victims 
during street crimes in Istanbul but not normally in areas 
where Consulate employees reside. 
 
5)  Aggregation of Criminals:  B. Criminal perpetrators 
usually operate in groups of two to four individuals; are 
prepared to be confrontational, but generally avoid 
gratuitous violence. 
 
Comment: Commonly, two or more male criminals will work in 
concert to commit a street crime.  One criminal often 
approaches a victim, with a partner waiting to assist if the 
victim resists.  Brandishing a knife is a common method of 
operation used by criminals in Istanbul.  Distraction 
techniques such as a staged fight, someone asking for the 
time or spilling something on the victim are also used while 
an accomplice steals a purse or wallet. Another ruse is to 
draw an unsuspecting tourist into a bar, threaten them and 
then force them to pay an exorbitant bill. 
 
6)  Deterrence/Response of Police: B. Local police or 
neighborhood associations are partially effective in 
deterring crime. 
 
Comment: A physical presence, often a security guard, will 
generally deter crime. 
 
7)  Training/Professionalism of Police: C. Police in Istanbul 
vary in degrees of professionalism and effectiveness. 
 
Comment:  Some sections of the Istanbul TNP are effective and 
professional, while others are not.  The effectiveness is 
also dependent on the section or district's leadership. 
While sections like narcotics and counter-terrorism in 
Istanbul boast successes, other units remain ineffective. 
 
 
Wiener