09JAKARTA318
WE CAN COOPERATE, INDONESIANS TELL U.S. CLIMATE ENVOY
Wed Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO1476
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #0318/01 0560103
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250103Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1574
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS COLL
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 3600
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JAKARTA 000318 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/MTS AND OES 
COMMERCE FOR NOAA 
USAID FOR RDMA/BANGKOK AND ANE 
NSC FOR HAROLD VARMUS AND CEQ 
 
E.O. 12598: N/A 
TAGS: SENV KGHG EAID AORC EFIS PREL ID
SUBJECT: WE CAN COOPERATE, INDONESIANS TELL U.S. CLIMATE ENVOY 
 
REF: JAKARTA 0266 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Special Envoy on Climate Change Todd Stern 
reassured senior Indonesian officials that the United States will be 
"ready" for Copenhagen.  They welcomed U.S. leadership on climate 
change under President Obama and offered to help the USG in any way 
possible, including as an intermediary with countries like India and 
China.  Closer to home, they expressed concern about climate change 
impacts on oceans and archipelagic countries like Indonesia.  They 
were enthusiastic about U.S.-Indonesia cooperation on ocean issues, 
particularly marine research, and invited Stern to the World Ocean 
Conference.  Stern signaled U.S. willingness to consider financing 
mechanisms for avoided deforestation, as well as greater science and 
technology cooperation to build Indonesian capacity for climate 
change adaptation.  End Summary. 
 
Flexibility, not Orthodoxy Needed in Climate Talks 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Dr. Emil Salim, Indonesia's elder statesman on 
environmental issues, and Agus Purnomo, Head of the National Climate 
Change Council Secretariat, said that they have been "waiting" for 
U.S. leadership on climate change.  During a meeting in Jakarta on 
February 19, Stern reassured them that the U.S. would be ready and 
willing to reach a strong and robust agreement in Copenhagen. 
Purnomo warmly welcomed Stern's statement that the Administration 
views climate change as a matter of serious importance and urgency, 
and that negotiations and agreements had to be guided by science. 
Dr. Salim and Purnomo appreciated Stern's comments that despite 
fears about the global economy, the important point is that current 
economic woes should not impede movement to a greener economy; 
rather it should help catalyze this shift. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Responding to a question from Purnomo, Stern said that the 
U.S. is open to different base years (instead of 1990) against which 
to measure commitments and actions.  The important thing, Stern 
emphasized, is that all parties should avoid a doctrinal stance; 
instead of sticking to orthodoxies that have failed us in the past, 
we need creativity and flexibility to achieve a meaningful 
post-Kyoto agreement.  This is important not only when discussing 
developing country positions, but also understanding the U.S. 
position.  If Congress does not pass comprehensive domestic climate 
change legislation before December, other countries should be 
pragmatic and realize that any agreement at COP-15 has to be one 
acceptable to Congress. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Salim and Purnomo affirmed the need for pragmatism and 
flexibility.  They agreed with Stern's assessment that many 
countries are unwilling to commit internationally to less than what 
they are in fact willing to take action on domestically.  A global 
agreement should motivate countries to take action, not deter 
action.  Communicating effectively with countries like China and 
India (the "framing" or "packaging" of expectations regarding major 
developing countries' actions/commitments) is vital to a 
comprehensive, successful agreement. 
 
Palatable Major Economy Commitments: "Packaging" Key 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Stern emphasized that while not all developing countries' 
actions will be controversial, actions or commitments by major 
developing economies will be a real issue for Copenhagen.  He 
welcomed suggestions on how to package or frame issues in a way 
palatable to China, India and other major developing economies. 
Purnomo frankly admitted that China and India seem to take different 
positions at different times.  He thinks they are willing to take 
action but hesitant to state commitments out of fear they will be 
pushed into a corner during UNFCCC negotiations.  Indonesia can help 
with the "packaging", he said. 
 
¶6. (U) Salim and Purnomo wanted to clarify that the USG does not 
expect developed and developing countries to take on comparable 
commitments.  Stern responded to Salim's reiteration that climate 
actions by Indonesia should not sacrifice economic development by 
noting that the world needs to make the shift from high to 
low-carbon growth, where change is a driver of economic growth. 
This should be viewed as an opportunity, not an obstacle.  Salim and 
Purnomo did not indicate what Indonesia could commit to but said "we 
want to act".  Salim hinted at resource constraints to taking 
domestic actions. 
 
 
JAKARTA 00000318  002 OF 003 
 
 
Ocean and Climate: Serious Indonesian Concern 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Stern recognized Indonesia's particular concerns about 
climate change impacts on the ocean.  Climate change is matter of 
survival for Indonesia, Dr. Salim emphasized, as sea level rise 
threatens to submerge thousands of Indonesia's islands.  He and 
Purnomo talked of the impact rising sea temperatures and coral 
bleaching will have on the fisheries that support millions of 
Indonesian livelihoods.  Dr. Widi Pratikto, Secretary General of the 
Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries, who also attended the 
meeting, invited Stern and a high-level USG delegation to the World 
Ocean Conference (WOC) and Coral Triangle Initiative Summit that 
Indonesia is hosting this May in Manado (reftel).  (Note: The 
Indonesians specifically mentioned again their interest in 
participation from new NOAA Administrator Dr. Jane Lubchenco.  End 
Note) The WOC will focus attention on the relationship between the 
ocean and climate change, and culminate in the issuance of the 
Manado Ocean Declaration by marine/fisheries and environment 
ministers from around the world. 
 
¶8. (U) Dr. Widi expressed Indonesian commitment to a long-term 
cooperative partnership between the USG and Indonesia on research 
and capacity building for marine conservation, fisheries management, 
and climate change adaptation. He highlighted the extensive 
cooperation that his ministry has had with USAID and NOAA, and 
emphasized Indonesia's desire to continue (and expand) this 
cooperation. 
 
Avoided Deforestation: Flexibility Needed, at First 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Special Envoy Stern also informed Dr. Boen Purnama (another 
participant and the Secretary General of the Ministry of Forestry) 
that the USG is very sympathetic to Indonesia's position on avoided 
deforestation.  The USG is open to discussing reducing emissions 
from deforestation and degradation (REDD), but there are outstanding 
methodological issues and uncertainties that need to be clarified. 
In response, Agus Purnomo urged flexibility on REDD, as trials are 
conducted, adjustments made, so that countries like Indonesia can 
begin to tap at least voluntary and regional markets before every 
single issue is resolved -- something that could take a very long 
time. 
Indonesia is now in the process of getting its domestic REDD regime 
ready, he said (in time for the Bonn climate talks this June). 
 
¶10. (U) Dr. Boen emphasized Indonesia's leadership on forestry 
issues.  Indonesia is focused on the linkage between sustainable 
forest management and climate change, he said.  He noted that 
President Yudhoyono launched the Forest Eleven (F-11) forum of 
countries with large tropical forests, but these countries are still 
discussing respective positions.  Dr. Boen pointed out that he is 
the current chair of the U.N. Forum on Forest (UNFF).  Its 8th 
session in New York this April is focusing on forest financing 
mechanisms and strategies, and forests and climate change.  A 
successful outcome of UNFF-8 is important to the U.S., and will 
build more momentum for the run up to Copenhagen. 
 
Working with Indonesia: Yes, We Can 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Dr. Salim and Agus Purnomo were eager to offer assistance 
to the USG to reach an agreement in Copenhagen, including as an 
intermediary with developing countries like India and China. 
"Anything we can do to help, we will" they said, offering to host 
special discussions during the World Ocean Conference, or even to 
convene a climate summit in the U.S. prior to Copenhagen.  Special 
Envoy Stern welcomed their willingness to be a constructive partner. 
 In particular, he said he was open to any suggestions about how to 
package developing country commitments.  Indonesia can help, he 
said, because Indonesians understand the urgency of taking action 
and know that we are all in this together.  Indonesia can help other 
developing countries be flexible and creative in seeking a global 
climate change agreement. 
 
S&T Cooperation: Building Vital Indonesian Capacity 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶12. (U) When asked about Indonesia's needs to face the challenge of 
climate change, the Indonesian officials emphatically agreed that 
increased science and technology cooperation is vital for building 
 
JAKARTA 00000318  003 OF 003 
 
 
Indonesian scientific capacity, particularly capacity for marine 
science and climate change adaptation.  They expressed interest in 
joint research with NOAA's premier research ship, the Okeanos 
Explorer.  They emphasized marine and forest science related to 
climate change impacts, and measuring and studying greenhouse gas 
emissions, sequestration, and capture.  We need further help on 
capacity to continue improving REDD, they said, including assistance 
on a REDD baseline, a national carbon accounting system, and 
educational programs for Indonesian scientists. 
 
¶13. (U) Special Envoy Todd Stern has cleared this message. 
 
HUME