09JERUSALEM255
Al Quds University Freezes Official Cooperation with
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO4774
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #0255 0371132
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061132Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4057
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS JERUSALEM 000255 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, and NEA/PPD 
NSC FOR SHAPIRO/PASCUAL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PINS SCUL KPAL KWBG KPAO
SUBJECT: Al Quds University Freezes Official Cooperation with 
Israeli Institutions 
 
REF: Jerusalem 200 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In response to the IDF operations in Gaza, the 
University Council of Al Quds University voted to put a moratorium 
on official cooperation with Israeli academic institutions.  The 
decision was endorsed by the university President, Dr. Sari 
Nusseibeh, generally a strong advocate of co-existence projects. 
Nusseibeh told the Consul General February 3 that he views the 
boycott as a way of attracting greater international attention and 
pressure to achieve a two-state solution.  The decision by Al Quds, 
the only Palestinian university to have any official relations with 
Israeli universities, will end significant interactions between 
Palestinian and Israeli students and academics.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The University Council of Al Quds University decided on 
February 1 to put an end to all official cooperation and 
partnerships with Israeli academic institutions.  According to Dr. 
Hasan Dweik, Executive Assistant to the President, this decision 
does not suspend any ongoing programs with Israeli partners, but 
prohibits any new contracts, agreements, or cooperation with the 
Israeli partners.  The Palestinian academic community was surprised 
by the decision, which came at the specific recommendation of the 
university's president, Sari Nusseibeh, a long-time advocate of 
normalization programs. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In an official statement, the Board said the moratorium is 
"in response to the prior Israeli onslaught [on Gaza]; the acts and 
policies of Israeli governments over the past ten years, including 
settlement construction in East Jerusalem; the tightening of the 
siege on the occupied territories; and thwarting [by Israel of] any 
negotiated peace process that will lead to an independent 
Palestinian state living in peace alongside Israel."  The statement 
went on to say that "If the two-state solution is as far away today 
as it was ten years ago, there is no justification for continued 
academic cooperation..." 
 
¶4. (SBU) The moratorium on cooperation with Israeli institutions is 
a temporary six-month measure, according to Assistant Professor Musa 
Bajali, an advisor to Nusseibeh.  Currently, 42 professors at Al 
Quds are engaged in academic and research projects with Israeli 
academic institutions.  Nusseibeh said these professors can choose 
to continue their cooperative programs, but only as individuals and 
not under the auspices of Al Quds University.  No official 
agreements may be signed by any academic department with an Israeli 
partner in the name of Al-Quds University.  Al Quds professors 
cannot publicly advertise any individual partnerships that may 
continue. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Nusseibeh told the Consul General February 3 that he views 
the boycott as a way to attract greater international attention to 
Palestinian grievances and to generate increased pressure for a 
two-state solution to the conflict.  He said the university will 
reevaluate the boycott in six months to see if it is achieving its 
objective.  He called the election of President Obama a window of 
opportunity and said explicitly that Al Quds will not boycott the 
U.S. or USG programs.  End Note.] 
 
¶6. (U) The Al Quds statement, which was featured on the university's 
website immediately after the Board meeting, received widespread and 
prominent media coverage and the full text of the University Council 
decision was subsequently printed in the local dailies. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT: Al Quds University has been the only Palestinian 
university to have any official relations with Israeli academic 
institutions.  The university was frequently criticized for its very 
public support for normalization programs.  By putting a stop to 
such cooperation, Al Quds is ending significant interactions between 
Palestinian and Israeli students and academics.  End Comment. 
WALLES