09JERUSALEM218
JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (02/02):  PALESTINIAN ALARM OVER
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO0629
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #0218/01 0331023
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021023Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4001
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEADWD/DA WASHINGTON DC//DAS-ZD/DACS-ZK//
RUEAHQA/CSAF WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
RHMFIUU/CMC WASHINGTON DC
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 7521
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 4506
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4354
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 5848
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4270
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2842UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 JERUSALEM 000218 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS BBG 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR ABRAMS 
CMC WASHINGTON DC FOR POLAD 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON FOR HKANONA AND POL - TSOU 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAL KWBG KPAO IS
SUBJECT: JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (02/02):  PALESTINIAN ALARM OVER 
JERUSALEM AREA SETTLEMENTS 
 
------------- 
Main Stories: 
------------- 
Al Quds leads with Israeli plans to build 3,500 new housing units on 
the "E1 block" between Jerusalem and the Ma'ale Adumim Jerusalem 
area settlement, "despite Israeli promises to the U.S."  The story 
receives front page coverage in all papers, which highlight that the 
new settlement would seal off Jerusalem from the West Bank.  The 
papers also report that Israel has declared the conclusion of 
infrastructure projects to allow for the E1 settlement plan to move 
forward.  The papers also front page statements by the PLO calling 
on President Obama to take immediate action to stop the planned 
settlement activities. 
Al Ayyam leads with February 1 Israeli strikes on Gaza and 
statements made by Israeli Prime Minister Olmert, threatening a, 
"disproportionate Israeli response," to Palestinian rocket attacks, 
after rocket fire from Gaza injured three Israelis on February 1. 
The story receives front page coverage in all papers, which also run 
a statement issued by Fatah, denying responsibility for the rocket 
fire and stating that Fatah is focused on reestablishing Palestinian 
national unity.  Al Quds adds that one Palestinian died of injuries 
sustained in a previous Israeli strike on Gaza. 
Al Hayat Al Jadida leads with a story which appears on the front 
pages of all dailies, quoting Palestinian Authority President Abbas 
rejecting talks with those [Hamas] who reject the authority of the 
PLO.  The papers further note that the PLO's legislative body, the 
Palestinian National Council (PNC), will meet on February 3 in 
Ramallah to discuss Hamas' calls for establishing a substitute body 
for the PLO.  The news follows weekend coverage of a January 31 
emergency PNC meeting in Amman, at which the body condemned Hamas 
leader Misha'al's call for a substitute body.  Coverage also noted 
Hamas leaders' Hamad and Al Shair rejecting Misha'al's call. 
 
In U.S. policy news, Al Quds' front page cites AFP in reporting that 
advisors to President Obama have begun dialogue "behind the scenes" 
with officials in both Iran and Syria.  Another AFP story runs 
inside Al Hayat Al Jadida and Al Ayyam about Obama replying to a 
letter he received from the Secretary General of the Organization of 
the Islamic Conference, congratulating Obama on his inauguration. 
In his written reply, Obama expressed interest in working with the 
Islamic organization for a "safer world," according to reporting. 
In a third inside story, Al Hayat Al Jadida cites AFP, in reporting 
on differences between President Obama and Secretary of Defense 
Gates in regards to nuclear weapons.  Obama seeks a world free of 
nuclear arms, while Gates seeks to modernize the U.S nuclear 
arsenal, according to AFP.  Finally, Al Quds runs an inside story 
citing Aviation Week Magazine about the U.S. preventing Israel from 
boarding an Iranian ship destined for Gaza with arms for Hamas. 
 
Al Quds and Al Ayyam front page an AFP story on statements made by 
Turkish President Gul in Saudi Arabia on February 1, calling on 
Hamas to engage in the peace process.  Gul is also quoted 
"understanding" the need for Palestinian unity and the need for 
Hamas to be part of the regional peace process.  In related news, Al 
Quds carries on an inside page, a Washington Post interview with 
Turkish Premier Erdogan, following an incident at the World Economic 
Forum in Davos, where he left the stage in protest of Israeli 
policies toward the Palestinians.  Erdogan is quoted describing 
Palestine as a "big prison" and claiming that the current Israeli 
government does not deal with Turkey in a rational way. 
The three papers run front page coverage of the collapse of an UNRWA 
school classroom floor located near the Al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem, 
suggesting it was caused by the controversial Israeli excavations 
near the mosque.  17 girls were injured when the floor collapsed, 
 
JERUSALEM 00000218  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
reporting notes. 
Al Quds' front page cites AFP in quoting Iranian Foreign Minister 
Mottaki calling for the lifting of the Gaza "siege" and 
reconstruction of Gaza under the, "legitimate Hamas government." 
His statements were made on February 1 while receiving Hamas 
Political Chief Khalid Misha'al in Tehran.  Al Quds' front page runs 
a second AFP story on differences between the Israeli Defense 
Minister Barak and Foreign Minister Livni on Egypt's role in any 
truce agreement with Hamas.  The paper further reports that a Hamas 
delegation will arrive in Cairo on February 2 to convey Hamas' 
response to the Egyptian truce proposal.-------------- 
WEEKEND NEWS: 
-------------- 
Sunday, February 1 
Front page coverage of Special Envoy's Mitchell's visit to the 
region continued:  All papers reported that Jordan's King Abdullah 
warned Mitchell against initiating a "new peace process" and called 
instead for the re-launch of "effective" Israeli-Palestinian 
negotiations based on the two-state solution.  Papers noted that 
during the King's January 31 meeting with Mitchell, Abdullah 
commended the positive tone set by the new American administration 
towards achieving regional peace and building relations with the 
Arab and Muslim worlds based on mutual interest and respect.  For 
his part, Mitchell stated that the American administration is 
prioritizing Middle East issues and is serious about resuming 
Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations to reach a two-state 
solution, according to reporting.  Finally, Al Quds' coverage made 
mention of the January 30 Washington Post editorial noting that the 
Obama administration seems "to tend towards" following Mitchell's 
recommendations from his 2001 report. 
Al Quds' and Al Ayyam's front pages covered Middle East Envoy Tony 
Blair's January 31 remarks that Hamas should participate, in some 
form, under certain conditions, in the Middle East peace process. 
Blair noted that the policy of isolating Hamas has not yielded 
results.  Papers also highlight Blair's comment that the designation 
of George Mitchell as Special Envoy for Middle East Peace is 
evidence of strong U.S. commitment to the process.  Meanwhile, 
reporting also noted that Hamas has responded to the Quartet 
requirement that Hamas renounce violence and recognize Israel as, 
"ridiculous." 
All front pages highlighted that Palestinian Authority President 
Abbas postponed his visit to the Czech Republic,upon "surprise 
developments" and traveled to Cairo for follow-up talks on the Gaza 
truce and reconciliation efforts with Palestinian factions.  The 
papers also reported that Egypt expects Palestinian factions to 
deliver their responses to the proposed Gaza truce and Palestnian 
reconciliation this week.  Coverage continued that Abbas will meet 
with French President Sarkozy on February 2 in Paris to discuss 
conditions in the Palestinian Territories, means of consolidating 
the Gaza ceasefire, and Gaza reconstruction efforts. 
 
Saturday, January 31 
 
All front pages reported that Special Envoy Mitchell announced that 
the United States is committed to working towards a permanent peace 
between Israel, the Palestinians and all Arab countries.  Al Quds 
led coverage with a photo of Mitchell and U.N. officials at the 
UNRWA warehouse.  The papers ran extensive excerpts from Mitchell's 
January 30 statement, delivered at the UNRWA warehouse in Jerusalem. 
 Papers noted that the "pessimistic assessment" by Mitchell came 
after two days of discussions with Israeli and Palestinian officials 
regarding the consolidation of a fragile ceasefire in Gaza. 
Mitchell's announcement that, "President Obama has ordered this week 
the allocation of a total amount of $20.3 million," in assistance to 
 
JERUSALEM 00000218  003 OF 004 
 
 
Gaza, was also highlighted in all dailies. 
 
Al Ayyam and Al Hayat Al Jadida ran front page headlines quoting 
U.S. Ambassador to the UN Rice calling on Israel to launch its own 
investigation into possible violations of international law 
committed by its military during recent operations in the Gaza 
Strip.  Rice added in her first address to the Security Council that 
Hamas, too, has violated international law with rocket attacks on 
Israeli civilians and the use of civilian structures as shields for 
its terrorist attacks.  Rice also told the Security Council that 
several accusations against Israel were simply inflammatory. 
 
Al Quds' front page cited a report published by Israeli daily 
Haaretz regarding settlement activities.  Haaretz covered a detailed 
report prepared by the Israeli security agency on, "illegal 
construction inside settlements," which reveals that construction in 
most settlements is conducted without the required permits or in a 
manner that violates permit stipulations.  The report also revealed 
that buildings and infrastructure such as roads, synagogues, 
schools, religious schools, and police stations- in more than 30 
settlements- were established on privately-owned Palestinian land. 
The report was prepared by the Israeli authorities to provide 
documented and reliable information in preparation for lawsuits that 
are expected to be filed by Palestinians, human rights 
organizations, and Israeli left-wing groups against settlement 
activities, according to reporting. 
 
All front pages ran headlines of Palestinian Abbas January 30 
statements noting, "Our terms of reference for peace are the Arab 
peace initiative, UN resolutions, and President Bush's vision. The 
coup in Gaza will not be repeated in the West Bank and efforts to 
destroy the PLO will not succeed."  Abbas added that, "if Israel 
wants peace, it could be reached and implemented in a short period 
of time by allowing our people to regain their lands, ending the 
occupation, solving the question of refugees, and establishing East 
Jerusalem as the capital of the state of Palestine."  Abbas also 
noted that the Hamas coup in Gaza only succeeded, "because we did 
not want armed confrontations."  Abbas dismissed recent comments by 
Hamas leader in Damascus Khalid Misha'al about replacing the PLO, 
stating, "Misha'al will not be able to destroy this entity because 
no one will support him, neither the Palestinians nor others." 
-------------- 
BLOCK QUOTES: 
-------------- 
 
1)  Al Quds editorial is titled, "Al Aqsa [mosque]... and 
settlements!!"(02/02):  "The collapse of a classroom floor at an 
UNRWA school near the Al Aqsa mosque and the injury of 17 female 
students due to ongoing Israeli excavations under and around the 
Jerusalem sanctuary, highlights once again the dangers of these 
excavations that threaten the Al Aqsa mosque on the one hand, and 
nearby Palestinian houses and organizations on the other... [These 
excavations] threaten... [to cause] a catastrophe if Israel does not 
immediately stop these excavations, and if the international 
community does not intervene to stop these illegitimate practices 
carried out by an occupying power in territories considered by the 
international community as occupied..." 
 
2) Khalid Hroub writes in Al Ayyam under the title, "Yes to ending 
division and occupation"(02/02):  "Fatah should provide a new 
strategic vision and a political platform based on evaluating 
negotiations from the past 15 years, its loss in elections and 
Hamas' rise and electoral victory, control over Gaza and results of 
the recent war... Hamas,too, should put forward a new strategic 
 
JERUSALEM 00000218  004 OF 004 
 
 
vision and political program based on evaluating the resistance of 
the last 20 years... Hamas could adopt a political program... that 
is based on the goal of, "ending occupation with all means," which 
could provide a common meeting point for policy with Fatah. 
WALLES