09KABUL958
AFGHANISTAN: LOCAL GOVERNANCE DIRECTORATE
Thu Apr 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO1724
OO RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0958/01 1061356
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161356Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8430
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000958 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM, INR 
STATE PASS USAID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM EAID AF
SUBJECT: AFGHANISTAN: LOCAL GOVERNANCE DIRECTORATE 
CONCERNED ABOUT PARTISAN IMAGE 
 
REF: A. KABUL 812 
     ¶B. KABUL 637 
 
¶1.   (SBU)  Summary:  At an April 13 meeting with the DCM, 
Independent Directorate of Local Governance (IDLG) Deputy 
head Barna Karimi expressed concern that both Afghans and 
International Community representatives in Kabul now view the 
IDLG as highly partisan and focused on President Karzai's 
re-election.  He insisted this impression is false and asked 
for advice on how best to go about changing perceptions. 
Karimi also asked for -) and received -- clarification with 
regard to rumors circulating to the effect that the U.S. 
plans to dispatch thousands of civilians to the provinces and 
set up offices there.  He indicated he hopes to complete a 
full draft concept paper for governor-led reconciliation in 
the coming days and plans to share and discuss it with the 
Embassy prior to passing it on further to the rest of the 
International Community.  Finally, he reiterated IDLG 
concerns over the delay of expected U.S. funds for the 
Afghanistan Social Outreach Program (ASOP).  End Summary 
 
-------------------------- 
IDLG a Re-Election machine? 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  During his farewell call on outgoing DCM Dell, 
Karimi noted that practically every contact he has these days 
with embassies in Kabul (aside from the U.S.) involves hardly 
veiled comments about the IDLG,s purported efforts on behalf 
of President Karzai,s re-election.  He insisted this 
perception is false and expressed frustration that it is 
detracting from support for the IDLG,s ongoing efforts to 
improve sub-national governance.   Noting his agency,s lack 
of public relations expertise as only part of the problem, he 
solicited suggestions on how the IDLG could So long as governors and district 
administrators remain political appointees, it is difficult 
to imagine how the situation could be otherwise.  It will be 
telling to see whether any of the suggestions offered up for 
the IDLG to help maintain a level playing field are 
implemented.  In any event, we continue to believe it is 
worthwhile to offer help to properly directed and monitored 
IDLG sub-national governance initiatives. End Comment. 
RICCIARDONE 
 
KABUL 00000958  002 OF 002 
 
 
positions but stressed that it is still in the discussion 
phase.  As far as offices are concerned, he pointed to 
prospects for setting up a symbolic U.S. presence in the 
north and west. 
 
--------------- 
Funding Concerns 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Karimi raised continuing concerns over the delay 
of U.S. funding for ASOP programs in Ghazni, Kapisa and 
Logar, resulting in a delay in the rollout in those 
provinces.  He also expressed worries about continued U.S. 
bridge funding for the ongoing ASOP program in Wardak 
province (USAID clarified that U.S. funding for Wardak is 
assured through the end of May, with funds for additional 
months identified).  DCM assured Karimi that ASOP and other 
IDLG funding requests are getting the serious consideration 
they deserve in Washington, but the new team needs time to 
review the proposed projects to make sure they fit with the 
updated U.S. strategy for Afghanistan. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Ongoing IDLG Action to Strengthen Sub-national Governance 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  According to Karimi, the IDLG is making good 
progress on implementing plans for basic orientation for 
sub-national level officials.  It has just completed its 
seventh and final orientation/evaluation conference for 
district administrators, with the series of conferences 
collectively attended by all but 36 chiefs of the country,s 
364 official districts.  The IDLG will soon be publicizing 
the findings of its inventory of sub-national resources, 
information largely gleaned through these conferences. 
Karimi indicated that approximately 100 district 
administrators failed to meet minimum requirements and will 
need to be replaced at some point. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Next on the agenda for the IDLG will be a series of 
conferences for the country,s governors and the start of 
similar sessions for the country,s 153 mayors.  In 
anticipation that half the provincial council members will be 
re-elected, the IDLG also wants to conduct training for PC 
members, both to derive some lessons learned from those 
currently serving as well as to provide some guidance on the 
nature of the PC,s expanded responsibilities under the new 
sub-national governance policy. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Karimi complained of constant attempts (sometimes 
successful) of members of Parliament to interfere in 
sub-national appointments (Popal has voiced identical 
complaints ) ref a), particularly of district 
administrators.  He is now attempting to come up with a new, 
merit-based appointments mechanisms, ideally involving the 
Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service 
Commission, that would be intended to blunt such outside 
influence.  He lamented that the current mechanism, with the 
participation of the Senior Appointments Panel, is 
ineffective in doing this.  At the same time, he would also 
like to institute fixed terms of appointment (possibly three 
years) to give incumbents a stake in doing a good job.   The 
IDLG is likely to look to the U.S. and others for support for 
this initiative. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Comment:  We credit Karimi and others at the IDLG 
with sincerely trying to improve governance at the 
sub-national level.  At the same time, we hear too many 
reports about actions by Popal and others in government in 
furtherance of the President,s re-election to believe that 
the IDLG and its cadre of sub-national officials are totally 
above the fray.  So long as governors and district 
administrators remain political appointees, it is difficult 
to imagine how the situation could be otherwise.  It will be 
telling to see whether any of the suggestions offered up for 
the IDLG to help maintain a level playing field are 
implemented.  In any event, we continue to believe it is 
worthwhile to offer help to properly directed and monitored 
IDLG sub-national governance initiatives. End Comment. 
RICCIARDONE