09KABUL1675
IEC: A CREDIBLE ELECTION IS OUR RESPONSIBILITY
Sat Jun 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO0527
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #1675/01 1780606
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 270606Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9729
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 001675 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: IEC: A CREDIBLE ELECTION IS OUR RESPONSIBILITY 
 
¶1.  Summary:  On June 22, Ambassador Eikenberry visited the 
Independent Election Commission (IEC), toured operational 
elements and after a private meeting, participated in a joint 
press conference with IEC Chairman Dr. Azizullah Lodin.  IEC 
workers and officials echoed security concerns, but the 
strongest message was the desire of the Afghan people for 
their democracy to succeed. The Ambassador took advantage of 
a question about his meetings with candidates to challenge 
the media to encourage an issues based debate to help voters 
to decide how to cast their ballots in this milestone 
election.  End Summary. 
 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Afghans Working for an Afghan Election 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Ambassador's first stop at the IEC was the massive 
data entry center (DEC).  Filled with computers, scanners, 
workers and boxes of voter registration (VR) material 
retrieved from the provinces, the data center is a hub of 
activity.  Chief Electoral Officer Dr. Najafi noted that the 
IEC received over 10,000 applications for the 300 data entry 
jobs.  The DEC is currently counting, reviewing and scanning 
VR materials into the IEC's voter registration database. 
Many workers explained their specific jobs to the Ambassador 
- from reviewing biometric information to checking the forms 
against the scanned information - and expressed their pride 
at contributing to a key milestone in their nation's 
democratic process.  The DEC explained that the data entry 
process will help identify multiple registrations using a 
single set of biometrics, allowing the IEC to reduce 
duplicate registrations. 
 
---------------------- 
Concerns for Security 
---------------------- 
 
¶3.  The Operations Center (OC), the central node that 
coordinates the efforts of the 34 field offices, was the next 
stop.  The regional officers, supported by UN technical 
advisors, work in the map-filled OC, each with responsibility 
for two provinces.  They act as liaisons between the 
provincial election officials (PEOs) and headquarters, 
sending instructions, receiving information and disseminating 
and alerting both sides to operational problems and concerns 
and working on resolutions.  As a group, the regional 
officers agreed that security poses the great challenge for 
election day.  At the Public Outreach center, Najafi 
highlighted the importance of getting the message out to the 
electorate, noting that the Afghan people want change and 
need to understand that the election is the way to for that 
to occur. 
 
¶4.  In their meeting, the Ambassador complimented IEC 
Chairman Dr. Lodin on the IEC's professionalism, 
high-standards and motivation, but pointed out that the 
challenge is in implementation of the sophisticated voting 
process.  He noted that while soldiers may win the war, it is 
the IEC that must lead in winning the peace and commended the 
IEC on leading the first Afghan-run election.  Lodin asserted 
that the Afghan people, having experienced democracy, will 
want more, but reiterated that lack of security remains the 
biggest threat to the elections. 
 
-------------------------- 
Sending a Message of Hope 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The Ambassador and Dr. Lodin ended the event with a joint 
press conference.  The Ambassador emphasized the critical 
role of the IEC in providing a secure, inclusive and credible 
election to the Afghan people.  He acknowledged that security 
is an issue and stated that Afghan and NATO coalition forces 
will try to ensure security on election day.  He applauded 
Afghans for taking the lead in the election, noting that in 
2005, the election was run by the international community 
that now only plays a supporting role.  Dr. Lodin 
acknowledged the critical role of the IEC, noting that it 
bears responsibility to ensure a credible and inclusive 
election for the Afghan people. 
 
¶6.  In response to a question about voting in districts not 
under Afghan National Security Force control, Lodin 
referenced the Electoral Law, noting that in certain 
circumstances, the IEC has the authority to delay elections 
if the security situation required.  NOTE: This comment was 
picked up by the Afghan media and misreported as a statement 
that elections would be delayed in certain districts.  At a 
subsequent meeting, Lodin clarified that he has no intention 
of recommending a delay to any part of the election but was 
only noting the authority of the electoral law to describe 
the range of options.  END NOTE. The Ambassador closed  by 
 
KABUL 00001675  002 OF 002 
 
 
encouraging the media to support a vigorous policy debate 
among candidates so that the people of Afghanistan could 
decide on a way forward. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY