09KABUL625
SUCCESSFUL WOMEN'S DAY EVENTS HELD ACROSS AFGHANISTAN
Tue Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO2280
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0625 0760726
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170726Z MAR 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7795
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 000625 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV AF
 
SUBJECT:  SUCCESSFUL WOMEN'S DAY EVENTS HELD ACROSS AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1.  In honor of International Women's Day (IWD) on March 8, many of 
Afghanistan's provincial governors hosted events focused on the role 
of women in Afghan society.  Activities included speeches by 
prominent politicians and women, roundtable discussions, handicraft 
fairs, choral performances, youth theater, and the provision of 
humanitarian assistance.  Speakers generally highlighted themes of 
education, work opportunities, and legal rights and protections for 
women and girls.  Both male and female participants emphasized the 
Quran's grant of rights to women, which has been perverted by some 
to the detriment of women, but some of the male speakers also 
emphasized the need to preserve the traditional role of women in the 
household.  In many cases, attendance at events was higher than 
anticipated and the gatherings sparked enthusiasm and renewed 
commitments by participants to support opportunities for women and 
girls.  There were no reports of violence or security incidents to 
mar the activities, and PRTs reported positive coverage by local 
media. 
 
¶2. In Kabul, the Parliament, UNAMA, the Ministry of Women's Affairs, 
political parties, civic organizations, and the Embassy hosted IWD 
celebrations, each attended by 500-1000 women.  During the Afghan 
Republican Party-hosted celebration, party leader Sebghatullah 
Sanjar spoke in support of the 8/20 election date and encouraged 
government negotiations with Taliban who would accept the Afghan 
constitution.  The leader of the National Journalists Union of 
Afghanistan (NJUA), M. Hashem Esmatullahi, told 500 female 
journalists, authors, and students attending the NJUA event that 
independent journalists will play an essential role in guaranteeing 
the integrity of the electoral process.  Ambassador Wood and 
Minister of Women's Affairs Ghazanfar spoke at the Embassy's event 
which also included a performance by former Afghan Star contestant, 
Elaha. 
 
¶3. Highlights of the activities across the nation included: 
-- More than 600 women gathered in Uruzgan Province, and the event's 
opening roundtable entitled "Progress for Women is Progress for All" 
brought together both men and women in this highly conservative 
province despite earlier predictions that men would not attend the 
event. 
-- Large gatherings of men and women were held at different venues 
in Herat Province.  Activities included a mix of speeches, poetry 
and sports contests, exhibition of crafts, Quran recitations, prayer 
services, and distribution of food to impoverished women and those 
in women's hospitals and prisons. 
-- More than 500 women gathered at the Helmand Provincial Council 
Hall and, in keeping with the rights granted through Islam and the 
Afghan Constitution, were encouraged by the Deputy Governor to seek 
an official Government position. 
-- Kapisa's governor Abu Baker pressed women to educate their 
daughters all the way through high school and railed against the 
practice of giving young daughters away for marriage, but tempered 
those comments with a more traditional message on the role of women 
in the home. 
-- In Badghis Province, activities were held throughout the week, to 
include radio interviews, an event hosted by the Governor that 
brought together about 150 participants, and a handicraft fair. 
-- With the theme "Men and Women Uniting for Afghan Women's Rights", 
more than 150 women and several men in Wardak Province participated 
in a day of activities hosted by the Governor, to include speeches, 
cooking classes, and provision of humanitarian assistance. 
-- Paktya Province's event brought together 200 women and about 50 
men.  Of note, the provincial police chief called for female 
volunteers to join the Afghan National Police (ANP) and some women 
stood up to answer the call, receiving rousing applause from the 
audience. 
-- In Paktika Province, 112 women gathered at an event in the 
capital city of Sharana. 
-- Approximately 300 women and 50 men gathered at a women's shura in 
downtown Khost City, which was a well-attended event for the 
conservative province. 
-- Northern Provinces of Takhar and Kunduz held uncontroversial and 
well-attended events, which included participation by the German MFA 
Rep for Women's Issues in Kunduz. 
 
WOOD