09KABUL2367
LAGHMAN: ALINGAR, ALLIHANG VILLAGERS EXPRESS SUPPORT FOR
Sun Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3572 
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL 
DE RUEHBUL #2367 2280508 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
R 160508Z AUG 09 
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0837 
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 002367 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: LAGHMAN: ALINGAR, ALLIHANG VILLAGERS EXPRESS SUPPORT FOR 
ELECTIONS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Villagers in areas of reported anti-Afghan forces 
(AAF) activity expressed support for the August 20 presidential and 
Provincial Council elections. A large shura in Alishang District, 
at which the provincial governor and police commander spoke, 
appeared to be a notable success, with speakers calling on residents 
to support the national and provincial governments. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On August 4 the Mehtarlam Provincial Reconstruction Team 
(PRT) supported the holding of a shura (tribal council) in Watangatu 
village in the Alishang District, an area reported to have AAF 
elements actively discouraging locals from participating in the 
upcoming elections. Governor Lutfullah Mashal and several other 
high-ranking provincial officials attended the event, including 
Afghan National Police (ANP) Provincial Commander General Omeryahr 
and Afghan National Army (ANA) Colonel Mohammed. Participating 
locals numbered about 300, and included attendees from more than ten 
surrounding villages. Officials said the shura was one of the 
largest government-supported shuras ever held in Laghman. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The general mood of the audience was quite positive, with 
numerous elders saying their residents intended to vote. No 
expression of support for any particular candidate was made, 
although several speakers urged locals to meet and debate the merits 
of the various contenders. Several speakers were enthusiastic about 
the strengthening of the local and provincial governments, and 
recognized the importance of the elections for that purpose. Locals 
asked the governor and ANP commander for increased security, and 
requested help in resolving local disputes, including some violent 
clan feuds. 
 
¶4. (SBU) On August 6, the PRT visited two small villages in Alingar 
District, areas also reportedly frequented by AAF forces. Each 
village was home to an estimated 300 to 400 families. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In the first village, the PRT spoke first to several dozen 
male residents age 18 to about 30. They all said they intended to 
vote, although they did not indicate which party or candidates they 
preferred. Shortly thereafter, the PRT was approached by a small 
group of much older men, who proclaimed themselves to be the elders 
of that village and another neighboring settlement. In an impromptu 
shura of approximately 12 elders, they indicated that they supported 
the elections, and claimed that "all" adult males and females in 
their villages had registered. Those interviewed knew where their 
polling place would be located. The (very) small village store had 
several posters for provincial council candidates displayed. No 
anti-government slogans or other symbols were on display. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Asked about the village's needs, elders asked for a 
piped-in water source, and for the paving of the road to their 
village. Although they knew the name of their provincial council 
representative, attendees claimed that he had never visited them, 
and seemed to have little idea of whom they could contact in the 
provincial government to make requests for water and road 
improvement. 
 
¶7. (SBU) There was somewhat less activity in the second village, 
which had no store and fewer adult males in evidence. However, the 
villagers referred the PRT to an individual they identified as the 
village headman. That individual received the PRT cordially, and 
conducted a small shura with the PRT and a cluster of about 20 
locals under the shade of a tree outside his residence. Treating 
the attendees to tea and snacks, he said that his village intended 
to participate in the elections, and claimed that all male and 
female adults had registered to vote. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Just like the residents of the first village, the headman 
said that he had no contact with the provincial council, but said 
that campaigners for council candidates had been through the area. 
He expressed gratitude for the efforts and sacrifices of "foreign 
friends" and enmity for those "bad people" who encouraged locals not 
to support their national government. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment. Other sources have indicated that AAF activity 
and threats against locals and against the election are very real, 
and the villagers' support for the elections and the Afghan 
government may not be as simple as they would appear to be. 
However, the evidence of campaign activity, the locals' knowledge of 
the election process, and their willingness to engage with the PRT 
would seem to be evidence at least that AAF forces do not completely 
control the area or the actions of its residents. End comment. 
 
¶10. (U) This cable has been reviewed by PRT Mehtarlam Commander 
Lt.Col. Ungerman. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY