09KABUL3056
DEPUTY SECRETARY LEW REVIEWS CIVILIAN INCREASE IN HELMAND
Thu Oct 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO8787
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #3056/01 2740740
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010740Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1777
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 003056 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MCAP MOPS SNAR PREL PGOV PTER PHUM AF
 
SUBJECT: DEPUTY SECRETARY LEW REVIEWS CIVILIAN INCREASE IN HELMAND 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  During a September 9 visit to PRT Lashkar Gah in 
Helmand Province, Deputy Secretary of State Lew, USAID Administrator 
Fulgham and Ambassador Eikenberry reviewed current PRT operations 
and examined the impact of additional U.S. officers and their life 
support requirements.  Supporting U.S. officers' freedom of movement 
was a key concern and they examined different options.  Governor 
Mangal briefed on a successful past year and highlighted the 
reduction in poppy cultivation and improved security infrastructure. 
 The Governor welcomed continued U.S. support, adding that 
additional U.S. civilians were needed to work in areas recently 
cleared of enemy forces. END SUMMARY. 
Support at the PRT and District Levels 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Deputy Secretary Lew visited PRT Lashkar Gah on September 
9, receiving an update on its current operations.  UK and U.S. PRT 
leadership briefed on the ongoing work of their stabilization 
officers, who were first based at the district level in January 2008 
and now there are officers in seven district centers.  Joint teams 
of UK and U.S. officers are working well together in Nawa, Garmsir 
and Kanashin, working with local officials improving security and 
governance, and directly supported by the UK-led PRT based in 
Lashkar Gah.  Officers work with the UK and U.S. development 
agencies to support reconstruction efforts, obtaining funding from 
the PRT or the U.S. military. 
 
Registration Materials Required 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Secretary Lew asked how the PRT arranges transport for 
officers at the PRT and district levels and the impact this has on 
regular freedom of movement.  PRT leadership reported that movement 
of UK, Danish, Estonian and U.S. staff based at the PRT is provided 
in part by a UK civilian contractor, Armor Group International, as 
well as by a USAID implementing partner's personal security contract 
with Global Services.  This service also provided security for 
stabilization officers in Garmsir, Gereshk and Nad Ali, when 
visiting the PRT, and will be important to enhanced operations at 
the district level.  The PRT briefers emphasized the important role 
the security group plays in ensuring mobility of U.S. civilians 
helping build governance capacity in Helmand.  Officers based at the 
PRT conduct the bulk of their meeting in government facilities and 
attend Afghan functions as the support permits.  They emphasized 
that the security support allows broad freedom of movement in the 
larger district centers and, as security expands, can adjust the 
area of operation as needed.  (Note: The Global Services private 
security contract has since ended, following the completion of the 
USAID implementing partner's contract.  The loss of this contract, 
in addition to the dramatic increase in U.S. staff at the PRT and 
District Support Teams (DSTs), has reduced mobility of U.S. 
civilians in Helmand by more than three-quarters from prior to the 
civilian increase.) 
 
Mangal Highlight Success 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Governor Mangal welcomed Secretary Lew, delivering a 
detailed list of his administration's achievements over the past 
year.  Helmand poppy reduction was a historic achievement for all 
those involved, he said, showing provincial residents that their 
government can deliver support and help farmers adjust their crops 
to legal agriculture.  He thanked USAID for their excellent support 
in completing the Bost Airfield, noting that the return of civilian 
air service to Helmand was badly needed.  Helmand residents welcomed 
the completion of this project and the subsequent commercial air 
services now using the Airfield.  Mangal also noted that the 
completion of the Provincial Police Headquarters was a great benefit 
to the Afghan Security forces and helped coordinate security efforts 
across the Province. 
 
Additional Support Required 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Secretary Lew asked Mangal if additional U.S. civilians 
could help support stabilization efforts across Helmand.  Mangal 
replied that U.S. officers at the PRT had been involved in every 
stabilization effort and the State PRT officer had played a key role 
in the Kanashin operation.  Stabilization officers support the local 
officials and help bring together district councils that help plan 
the redevelopment of the badly damaged areas.  He reported that 
District Councils in Nad Ali, Garmsir and Gereshk, are functioning 
and ready to implement larger programs if they can receive more 
support from Kabul.  Mangal concluded that with PRT support his 
administration had improved governance from the provincial to the 
district level but more help was needed from all ministries in 
Kabul.  He emphasized that increased assistance and technical 
expertise would help him expand governance and that an increased 
 
KABUL 00003056  002 OF 002 
 
 
presence of Afghan National Security Forces would help broaden the 
secure areas around Helmand and Southern Afghanistan. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Secretary Lew's visit highlighted the successful growth in 
U.S. officer presence in Helmand but also demonstrated that security 
and logistical concerns must be addressed if the civilian increase 
is to have an impact.  Freedom of movement for new staff is critical 
to implementing U.S. policy on the ground and extra security 
resources are needed at the provincial and district levels. 
 
 
Eikenberry