09KABUL1729
KARZAI CRITICIZES FOREIGN INTERFERENCE IN ELECTIONS
Thu Jul 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO4737
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #1729 1830905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 020905Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9914
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS KABUL 001729 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT: KARZAI CRITICIZES FOREIGN INTERFERENCE IN ELECTIONS 
 
REF: KABUL 1657 
 
¶1.  In a June 27 press conference, President Karzai took on a 
variety of issues including voter participation in the August 
presidential and provincial council elections, foreign 
interference in Afghanistan, and his choice of Marshall Fahim 
as his running mate.  Karzai asserted that free and 
transparent elections provide the opportunity to strengthen 
national unity, peace and a new government with a mandate of 
support from the people.  He called on the international 
community not to interfere with the elections, reiterating an 
earlier theme (reftel). 
 
------------------------------------- 
Even Taliban Welcome to Participate 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Karzai opened the conference by calling on all eligible 
Afghans to register with the IEC and vote on August 20, 
noting that the election is the people's opportunity to boost 
stability and encourage development.  Karzai asked members of 
armed groups - Taliban or other - to give up fighting, both 
during the elections and permanently, to register as voters 
and to take part in the elections.  He noted that in voting 
for their choice for president and provincial council 
representatives, they could contribute to peace and the 
reconstruction process.  He raised the important role of 
women as both candidates and voters and welcomed ways to 
improve women's involvement in government. 
 
----------------- 
Candidate Behavior 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  Karzai called on presidential and provincial council 
candidates to conduct their campaigns in a way that will 
promote the national interests of Afghanistan.  Although he 
did not mention the IEC's Candidate Code of Conduct or 
UNAMA's Essential Guidelines Applicable for the Electoral 
Process, he encouraged adherence to key principles from both 
by calling for positive campaigning that presents 
candidates, stances on issues to the people. 
 
---------------------------- 
Criticizing Internationals 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Karzai briefly noted that agencies of the Afghan 
government, particularly security organizations, should 
remain neutral during the campaign and not interfere in the 
people's ability to vote.  However, he quickly transitioned 
to demanding the international community should remain 
neutral and do nothing that raises suspicion, a topic that 
dominated the remainder of the event.  In response to follow 
up questions, Karzai expounded the point, and built on a 
recent theme from the palace (reftel), suggesting that 
candidate discussions of platforms, particularly 
controversial proposals, in the presence of foreign 
ambassadors implied meddling of foreigners in domestic 
matters. 
 
¶5.  Karzai closed by elaborating on his decision to choose 
Marshall Fahim as his running mate for first vice-president. 
Having witnessed attempts to weaken Afghanistan, he cited the 
unity and solidarity of the nation as key factors in his 
decision and suggested capriciousness in foreign criticism. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY