09KABUL3743
Afghan Clean Energy and Water Supply Programs: Meeting
Sun Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO5146
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #3743 3260850
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220850Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3359
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 003743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS AID/ANE; AID/EGAT 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: EAID ENRG SENV AF
SUBJECT: Afghan Clean Energy and Water Supply Programs: Meeting 
Community Needs and Achieving COIN Effects 
 
REF: Kabul 2670 
 
¶1.  Summary: This message summarizes two new USAID programs 
addressing critical energy and water needs that will rely on 
Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) officers to identify and 
prioritize specific projects in the field.  These two programs are 
flexible, responding to on-the-ground, demand-driven assessments 
that reflect community needs and are tied directly to 
counter-insurgency effects.  At the Embassy, our national-level 
working groups are coordinating this assistance to avoid duplication 
of effort while leveraging PRT knowledge with USAID, State, and 
military budgets.  In addition, we are tracking the regional 
distribution of these projects to identify and address the needs of 
any underserved populations, thereby avoiding the creation of 
developmental "blind spots" that could constitute recruitment areas 
for insurgent groups.  End Summary. 
 
Clean Energy and Sustainable Water Supply 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  USAID's new Afghan Clean Energy Program (ACEP, USD 83 million 
over four years) and Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation project 
(SWSS, USD 52 million over three years) will support efforts by 
Provincial Reconstruction Teams(PRTs) and other key stakeholders 
throughout Afghanistan to help the needs of Afghan communities. 
ACEP and SWSS will design, install and operate renewable energy 
sources (solar, wind, and micro-hydro), sustainable potable water 
systems, sanitation facilities and hygiene education.  Activities 
will focus primarily on rural areas, and local communities working 
with PRT staff will propose projects. 
 
Technical Assistance Team Provides Engineering Expertise 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  Based on the initial SWSS and ACEP site selection criteria, PRTs 
will propose projects to their respective Regional Commands (RC). 
Nominations are to be submitted quarterly; over a dozen renewable 
energy activities have already been submitted and nearly 50 water 
and sanitation activities.  RC/East has been particularly active. 
Among these are solar power for a rural clinic, cold storage 
facilities run by micro-hydro power to support agricultural sales, 
wind turbines for domestic lighting and small industry development, 
many water supply and latrine construction projects.  PRT officers 
have reported that CERP (Commander's Emergency Response Program) 
funds and community labor are available to support these projects. 
 
 
¶4.  Project coordinators will favor projects that leverage funds 
from other sources.  A USAID technical assistance team will visit 
approved sites to gather additional information and develop an 
annual work plan.  Each project site will have an agreement 
describing roles and responsibilities of USAID, the PRT, local 
community and other stakeholders.  Local communities must operate 
and maintain the systems, and sustainability will require good 
commercial practices (i.e., communities must collect fees to pay 
ongoing expenses). 
 
Infrastructure Working Group 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  The Mission's multi-agency Infrastructure Working Group (IWG) 
coordinates input from PRTs, local communities and other key 
stakeholders in the design and implementation of infrastructural 
project activities.  The IWG will also ensure its activites mesh 
with other Mission strategic objectives, including anti-corruption 
efforts.  A core group of the Kabul IWG met recently with RC-South 
civilian and military representatives in Kandahar and with RC-East 
representatives in Bagram.  Inclusive IWG participation will allow 
for better leverage of USAID, State and military budgets while 
avoiding duplication of effort. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  As PRT officers arrive in the field on an almost daily basis, 
these programs make the most of officers' local knowledge and 
influence.  These two programs are the first of a new generation of 
programs that respond to on-the-ground, demand-driven assessments 
that reflect community needs and are tied directly to 
counter-insurgency effects.  We will be working intensively with 
PRTs to track the distribution of projects launched under these 
programs to ensure they do not create underserved population groups 
that could constitute recruitment areas for insurgent groups. 
 
Eikenberry