09KABUL987
CODEL MCCONNELL
Mon Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3712
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0987 1100330
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 200330Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8527
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 000987 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/PPD, SCA/A 
STATE FOR IIP 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL AF
SUBJECT: CODEL MCCONNELL 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Senators McConnell, Chambliss, Risch, and Barrasso 
all urged Afghan political leaders to hold a free, fair, and 
transparent election this summer.  Their meetings with President 
Karzai, Minister of Interior Atmar, and several potential 
presidential candidates received widespread media coverage in 
Afghanistan, particularly McConnell's statements about transparent 
elections, significantly advancing U.S. policy goals. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U)  The delegation and Karzai discussed Afghanistan's upcoming 
election and challenges of curbing corruption.  Senator McConnell 
affirmed the Administration's position that the United States seeks 
a level playing field for candidates competing in the August 
election.  He welcomed news that Karzai would soon sign a decree 
directing Afghan military and police not to interfere with the 
electoral process.  McConnell also recommended against Afghanistan 
setting campaign spending limits, arguing that all voices should be 
heard.  When asked about corruption, Karzai called for stronger 
cooperation between the United States and Afghanistan on fighting 
corruption and narcotics trafficking, suggesting that the United 
States has made accusations in the past and had not followed through 
in assisting Afghan investigations.  ) 
 
¶3.  (U)  Minister of Interior Atmar told the Congressional 
delegation on behalf of the Afghan people that they are "enormously 
grateful" for the very generous U.S. contributions of troops and 
financial resources to help reconstruct the country and fight the 
insurgency.  He said that as Minister of Interior he was very happy 
with the recently announced results of the U.S. strategic review of 
our approach on Afghanistan, noting the many challenges he faces in 
providing security to the Afghan people.  With Presidential and 
provincial elections coming up in August, Minister Atmar was most 
focused on securing polling sites, protecting candidates, and 
providing a secure environment for election officials, international 
observers, and journalists covering the event.  The delegation asked 
probing questions on the fight against the drug trade and corruption 
within the ranks of the Afghan National Police.  Atmar discussed 
preventing poppy cultivation instead of just focusing on 
eradication, and noted that more than 400 police officials have been 
brought up for disciplinary action on corruption charges in his 
brief tenure. 
 
¶4. (U)  The delegation met with three likely presidential candidates 
to discuss proposals to create a level playing field for all 
candidates in this summer's election.  Former Foreign Minister 
Abdullah Abdullah and former Finance Ministers Anwarul al-Haq Ahadi 
and Ashraf Ghani Ahamdzai all called for greater international role 
in monitoring election fraud and improper use of government 
resources to benefit Karzai's re-election campaign.  Senator 
McConnell said he supported efforts to create the grounds for a 
free, fair, and transparent election, beginning with removing 
restrictions on candidates raising funds for their campaigns.  All 
three candidates agreed, adding that passage of the media law and 
better monitoring of Afghan security forces' and the Independent 
Election Commission's neutrality would also level the playing field 
for all candidates. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Following their meeting, the Senators and the potential 
candidates held a joint press conference.  The story was the lead 
story in Afghan media the following day, with media quoting Senator 
McConnell saying that the U.S. supports fair and transparent 
elections in Afghanistan. McConnell also said that the international 
community will watch closely the second round of elections in 
Afghanistan - which are even more important for a new democracy than 
the first set of elections. 
 
RICCIARDONE