09KABUL544
KHOST-GARDEZ PASS ROAD SHURA IN KHOST
Wed Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO5985
OO RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0544/01 0700630
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 110630Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7670
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS USAID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
NSC FOR WOOD 
OSD FOR WILKES 
CG CJTF-101 POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM AF
SUBJECT: KHOST-GARDEZ PASS ROAD SHURA IN KHOST 
 
Summary and Comment 
------------------- 
 
¶1. (U) Khost Governor Qalandarzai hosted over 800 elders and 
leaders from Khost, Paktya and Paktika provinces at a March 4 
shura to showcase the benefits of USAID's $120 million paved 
road from Khost City to Gardez, Paktya.  Qalandarzai, along 
with the Paktya and Paktika governors, emphasized the road's 
positive impact on the region and urged residents to support 
the project, including by helping with security.  Once 
completed in 2010, the 101km road will link key centers of 
commerce in eastern Afghanistan with each other, Kabul and 
the Pakistan border.  The project, which employs 1,500 
workers and disrupts enemy transit routes, has been attacked 
by insurgents as well as locals upset that work was 
subcontracted to an Indian company.  Shura participants sent 
a unified message that the road is in everyone's interest, 
bringing improved access to schools, clinics and markets. 
 
¶2. (U) With work on the Khost-Gardez (K-G) Road proceeding on 
the Khost side during the mild winter, Task Force Currahee 
encouraged Governor Qalandarzai to hold a shura to mark 
progress.  Qalandarzai, appointed in January, invited fellow 
governors, tribal leaders from Khost, Paktya and Paktika, 
parliamentarians, ministers, the Independent Directorate for 
Local Governance (IDLG) and UNAMA.  TF Currahee provided 
transportation and lunch for the event, held at ANA's Camp 
Parsa in Khost.  The event was a companion to an August 2008 
shura on the Paktya side marking the road's groundbreaking. 
 
GOVERNORS CALL FOR UNIFIED SUPPORT 
---------------------------------- 
¶3. (U) In his remarks, Qalandarzai noted the psychological as 
well as physical impact of development projects.  He asked 
the crowd to support the K-G Road project, adding that a 
mullah recently asked him to proceed with the road even if it 
requires relocating mosques along the route.  "This is 
allowed by Islam," he said.  Qalandarzai praised the Louis 
Berger Group (LBG), USAID's contractor for the project, and 
asked elders to provide whatever assistance LBG needs, 
including good quality materials.  He told the audience he 
was looking for funding to widen an additional four 
kilometers of road near the western entrance to Khost City 
not covered by the current USAID project.  Pointing out that 
education, health care and jobs all stem from good security, 
Qalandarzai said a joint ANSF coordination center may be 
established on the Paktya-Khost border. 
 
¶4. (U) Paktya Governor Hamdard called on the crowd to work 
together, as Afghans from Khost, Paktya and Paktika did when 
the region was known as Loya Paktya.  By supporting USAID and 
uniting behind a project as important as the K-G Road, elders 
will add their names to Afghanistan's history.  He said he 
discussed with USAID the need to hire workers from families 
displaced by the road's route.  Noting that the enemy is 
trying to disrupt security along the road, Hamdard asked for 
greater coordination and support from ANSF, Coalition Forces 
(CF) and the people, singling out Zadran communities in Khost 
and Paktya.  He urged elders to persuade young Afghans to go 
to school or join the ANSF and work for peace in Afghanistan. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Paktika's recently appointed governor, Abdul Qayum 
Katawazay, echoed Hamdard's call for Loya Paktya Afghans to 
unite in support of the road project.  Although the road does 
not go through his province, Katawazay said its completion is 
one of his top priorities because of the benefits it will 
bring to Paktika.  He pointed out the road will reduce time 
required for transporting goods throughout the region, 
including to the Ghulam Khan border crossing point. "Please 
support this road; it's for your benefit," he concluded. 
 
LOCAL OFFICIALS ASK ELDERS TO HELP WITH SECURITY 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶6. (U) Other speakers from Paktya and Khost praised the road 
project for connecting the people of the region, and urged 
elders to help with security efforts and prevent attacks 
against LBG workers.  Paktya Wolesi Jirga MP Sharifa Zormati 
congratulated the elders and officials for fulfilling the 
people's request for the road.  "We asked for this project 
and it is happening," she said, adding, "If we stay united, 
we can reach our goal."  She noted the workers are from Loya 
Paktya, asked the audience to support them and LBG and 
prevent the enemy from killing them, and pointed out that 
tribal forces (arbakai) are helping protect the road.  She 
also praised the few women who had come to the event and 
reminded the audience of the importance of Afghan women. 
 
KABUL 00000544  002 OF 002 
 
 
Khost Women's Affairs Director Rugwal Zadran stressed the 
project's economic importance, bringing jobs to poor 
families, improving security and bringing the people closer 
to their government. 
 
¶7. (U) The Khost Provincial Council Chair recommended that 
ANSF reduce the number of checkpoints on the road and stop 
taking money from drivers.  The council chair added, "We are 
sick of fighting.  We are sick of enemy activity.  We want 
peace and security in our area and good reconstruction 
projects like in other countries."  Complaining that Loya 
Paktya has no minister in the central government despite the 
region's strong support for President Karzai, he urged elders 
and mullahs to choose someone to represent the region.  "We 
should have a minister from Loya Paktya," he demanded to 
applause, adding, "No one can tell you who to vote for; vote 
for whoever you think will be good for Afghanistan."  Several 
tribal leaders called for greater coordination within the 
ANSF and between the ANSF and CF.  Khost Police Chief Abdul 
Qayum Bakazoi emphasized the ANP is working to protect 
Afghans, with recent returnees from the Focused District 
Development program conducting daily patrols, searches and 
checkpoints to improve security and be more responsive. 
 
A FEW COMPLAINTS 
---------------- 
¶8. (U) While supportive of the K-G Road, Haji Nasim Zadran, 
an elder from Nadar Shah Kot in Khost, complained that poor 
Zadran tribal members are not being hired to work on the 
project.  Quoting a Pashtun proverb, he said, "You say come 
and eat but then you don't give food."  He continued, "What 
has the government done for us in Khost in seven years?" What 
will they do in the next seven years?"  He called on the 
three governors to consult first with the Zadran tribes, 
which predominate along the K-G Road, before meeting with 
other tribes.  (Jalaluddin and Sirajudin Haqqani retain a 
power base in their home district of Gerda Serai in Paktya.) 
If they do, Zadran elders can help with security, including 
by providing tips about enemy activities in the area. 
 
¶9. (U) Paktya MP Zormati also struck a mildly sour note with 
her remark that no ministers had bothered to attend the day's 
event and continue to ignore the region.  She added that they 
would have flocked from Kabul to the event if it been in 
Bamayan or Badakhshan. 
WOOD