09KHARTOUM609
Confronting Challenges to Humanitarian Operations in West
Sun May 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0597
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0609/01 1301535
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101535Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3725
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 000609 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A A/S CARTER, AF/C 
NSC FOR MGAVIN AND CHUDSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: Confronting Challenges to Humanitarian Operations in West 
Darfur 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) From April 15 to 17, USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign 
Disaster Assistance (USAID/OFDA) field officers visited El Geneina, 
West Darfur, for the first time since July 2008. There they 
discussed  the impact of the early March non-governmental 
organization (NGO) expulsions on humanitarian programs in West 
Darfur and remaining organizations' plans to address gaps in 
assistance.  The team met with USAID/OFDA-funded NGOs including 
Medair, Catholic Relief Services (CRS), International Medical Corps 
(IMC), and Tearfund, as well as UN agencies including the UN World 
Health Organization (WHO), the UN Joint Logistics Center (UNJLC), 
the UN World Food Program (WFP), and the UN Department of Safety and 
Security (UNDSS).  Partners reported that insecurity in West Darfur 
remains a major constraint to program implementation in the area, 
hampering the provision of humanitarian assistance to 
conflict-affected populations.  According to USAID/OFDA discussions 
with remaining NGOs, the latter  plan to expand areas of operation 
and programs to fill the gaps left by expelled NGOs in West Darfur, 
including in food security, food and emergency relief supply 
distributions, health, nutrition, protection, and water, sanitation, 
and hygiene (WASH).  Despite remaining organizations' attempts to 
address gaps in the health sector, health partners report that the 
lack of acknowledgement of gaps from the West Darfur State Ministry 
of Health (SMOH) together with weak coordination by the UN health 
sector cluster lead has delayed the remaining health sector partners 
from quantifying gaps, assessing the available capacity to address 
gaps, and coordinating a timely response.  End Summary. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
mapping department conceptually divides West Darfur State into 
western West Darfur and eastern West Darfur for logistical reasons. 
Western West Darfur houses the capital of El Geneina, the seat of 
the government for all of West Darfur State.  This area comprises 
the northern corridor, the area north of El Geneina town; the 
southwest corridor, the area directly to the south of Geneina; the 
southern corridor, the area stretching from El Geneina south to 
Habila and on to Foro Baranga; and the eastern corridor, the area 
east of El Geneina to Zalingei.  The eastern part of West Darfur 
includes the Zalingei, Wadi Salih, Mukjar, Um Dukhum, and Jebel 
Marra areas.  As some humanitarian agencies working in the eastern 
region of West Darfur access programs through South Darfur for 
logistic reasons and do not have a presence in El Geneina town, 
communication and travel have been limited to El Geneina and 
discussions with partners based in the town focus mostly on the 
western region of West Darfur State. 
 
---------------------------------- 
USAID/OFDA PARTNERS IN WEST DARFUR 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) USAID/OFDA currently supports seven international NGOs in 
West Darfur including World Relief, Concern, Terre Des Hommes, CRS, 
Tearfund, IMC, and Medair; several UN agencies also provide basic 
services to conflict-affected populations.  From April 15 to 17, 
USAID/OFDA field officers traveled to West Darfur to meet with 
partners CRS, IMC, Medair, Tearfund, UNJLC, WHO, WFP, and UNDSS.  In 
western West Darfur, Save the Children/U.S. (SC/US) was a key 
USAID/OFDA partner prior to the organization's expulsion in early 
March.  Following the expulsions, the closure of SC/US programs in 
all four geographic corridors in western West Darfur created 
significant humanitarian gaps in the food security and agriculture, 
coordination, health, nutrition, protection, education, and WASH 
(Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene) sectors, as well as the provision 
of emergency relief supplies.  In addition, USAID/OFDA partner CARE, 
which was also expelled in March, supported transportation of 
emergency relief supplies for the Non-Food Item (NFI) Common 
Pipeline and NFI distributions in limited locations in the northern 
and eastern corridors of western West Darfur.  CARE also supported 
food distributions in the Wadi Salih, Mukjar, and Um Dukhum areas of 
eastern West Darfur, and expelled NGO Mercy Corps supported NFI 
distributions and WASH programs in Wadi Salih, Mukjar, Um Dukhum, 
and Zalingei. 
 
----------------------- 
POTENTIAL "GAP Filling" 
----------------------- 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00000609  002 OF 004 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) USAID/OFDA-funded partner CRS is considering significantly 
increasing operations and doubling capacity in West Darfur to 
address gaps in assistance resulting from the expulsions, 
predominantly in WASH, food security, food and NFI distributions, 
and shelter.  CRS currently operates north of El Geneina along the 
northern corridor; however, to address gaps left by SC/US, CRS is 
considering expanding activities in areas such as Beida to the 
southeast of El Geneina and areas in the southern corridor, such as 
Habila and Foro Baranga.  CRS is also considering filling gaps in 
Wadi Salih, Mukjar, and Um Dukhum left by expelled NGO partners CARE 
and Mercy Corps in food security, provision of NFIs, and WASH.  CRS 
is currently a WFP implementing partner in the northern corridor and 
has a beneficiary load of 160,000 individuals.  Following the 
expulsions, CRS signed a cooperative agreement with WFP to assume 
control of 27 food distribution points in the southern corridor, 
which will add a further 263,000 beneficiaries to the organization's 
caseload.  CRS currently distributes dry rations as well as supports 
health messaging in supplementary feeding programs (SFP) for 7,000 
beneficiaries in the northern corridor.  In cooperation with WFP, 
the organization plans to increase its  caseload to support 14,000 
new beneficiaries in SFPs in the new areas of operation.  CRS has 
also signed agreements with the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) to 
construct 1,350 latrines, provide support for solid waste 
management, distribute soap, and promote hygiene for 45,000 
beneficiaries in the southern corridor and Mukjar areas. 
 
¶5.  (U) CRS is working with UNJLC to distribute NFIs to 10,000 
beneficiaries prior to the onset of the annual May/June to September 
rainy season.  Since mid-March, CRS has successfully dispatched ten 
international staff from its  regional office in Kenya to support 
the Sudan team with internal operations, assessments, and 
recruitment of eight senior national staff employees.  CRS 
anticipates establishing three sub-offices located in Habila, 
Mukjar, and Um Dukhum to adequately address the program expansions. 
State-level officials from all appropriate line ministries in El 
Geneina have approved CRS' technical agreements, and CRS is 
coordinating with appropriate UN cluster leads in the various 
sectors on potential expansions. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Over the past six months, insecurity has limited 
Tearfund's ability to maintain a physical presence in Beida locality 
in the southwest corridor, the current location of the 
organization's USAID/OFDA-funded activities.  In Beida, Tearfund has 
had to balance the provision of humanitarian assistance with safety 
amid tensions between Arab and African ethnic groups and nomadic 
populations.  On March 22, Tearfund relocated staff from the area 
due to threats of potential international staff abductions. 
Subsequently, on April 14, UN security canceled Tearfund's attempts 
to resume one-day visits to the area due to reports of significant 
movements of Chadian armed opposition groups in the area and 
possible incursions into Chad.  Tearfund confirmed that while the 
NGO has been able to implement and monitor USAID/OFDA-funded 
programs remotely from El Geneina, the programs have suffered from 
decreased output and quality due to lack of direct supervision. 
Tearfund is currently conducting an internal assessment and analysis 
on ways in which the organization can address humanitarian gaps; 
however, Tearfund has not yet developed any concrete plans to expand 
operations. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Historically, international NGOs in West Darfur have 
benefited from supportive Sudanese government officials, including 
the El Geneina Humanitarian Aid Commission (HAC), as well as line 
ministries, according to USAID/OFDA partners in the area.  Due to 
this supportive atmosphere, NGOs in West Darfur typically have been 
able to implement humanitarian programs relatively easily compared 
to other Darfur states, where NGOs experience significant 
bureaucratic obstacles to program implementation.  For instance, the 
Government of National Unity Office of Water and Environmental 
Sanitation in West Darfur, with support from UNICEF as the sector 
lead, has actively facilitated access for NGOs that have expressed 
an interest in conducting assessments aimed at filling gaps. 
However, during USAID/OFDA's recent visit, both Medair and IMC 
reported that the SMOH has been reluctant to permit NGOs to conduct 
assessments in West Darfur to quantify gaps in the health sector. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) According to Medair and IMC, the SMOH is unwilling to 
admit the existence of gaps in the health system created by the 
expulsion of SC/US.  The SMOH indicated that government-sponsored 
agencies are addressing all gaps in the health sector created by the 
expulsions and that national NGOs are expected to take over and 
support programs in the long-term.  Although both Medair and IMC 
have applied for permits to assess health gaps in various locations, 
the West Darfur State HAC has denied both partners access.  The SMOH 
stated that Sudanese doctors working in Darfur until the end of 
 
KHARTOUM 00000609  003 OF 004 
 
 
April and the Egyptian doctors, who are expected to imminently 
arrive in Darfur, will be able to fill the gaps.  The SMOH's 
approach has alarmed the UN World Health Organization (WHO), as the 
NGO expulsions interrupted referral systems and disrupted early 
warning systems, reducing the health sector's capacity and ability 
to respond to health-related emergencies.  According to a WHO 
report, only six of the 15 primary health care centers located in 
West Darfur previously supported by expelled NGOs were functioning 
as of mid-April. 
 
¶9.  (U) While doctors arriving from Khartoum were tasked to fill 
health gaps in the three Darfur states, most have preferred to 
remain in urban areas, leaving rural areas and non 
government-controlled areas without essential medical services. 
Furthermore, it remains unclear how rapidly the Egyptian doctors 
will be able to depart for Sudan and become operational upon 
arrival.  In a meeting with the WHO Emergency Coordinator on April 
27, WHO mentioned that the federal MOH had requested assistance from 
WHO to provide logistical support for the team of Egyptian doctors 
once they arrive in Sudan. 
 
--------------- 
UN SECTOR LEADS 
--------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The UN in Sudan officially adopted the cluster approach 
to programming under the 2009 Work Plan for Sudan.  The main 
objective of the cluster system is to ensure coordination among UN 
agencies through joint programming, information sharing, knowledge 
sharing on technical and policy issues, and the joint formulation of 
sector/thematic strategies.  This approach to programming is also 
aimed at synergizing program implementation by combining support and 
common services and provides a mechanism for the UN to interface 
with the government on thematic issues as they relate to broader 
policy strategies and program implementation.  WHO is the health 
sector lead under the cluster approach.  Despite the organization's 
role as sector lead, partners in West Darfur expressed frustration 
with WHO's lack of leadership capacity in coordination and 
information sharing, noting that the health sector lacks a 
coordinated approach to responding to the current gaps in 
humanitarian assistance. 
 
-------- 
SECURITY 
-------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Lack of access to conflict-affected populations due to 
insecurity continues to hamper the delivery of humanitarian 
assistance in West Darfur.  Between April 1 and 15, the UN reported 
an upsurge in security incidents in the state, including 
carjackings, temporary staff abductions, banditry, robberies, and 
assaults on humanitarian premises.  According to UN security 
officials, assailants broke into 13 humanitarian compounds in El 
Geneina from late February to March 2009, compared to almost no 
assaults on compounds in 2008.  To decrease the likelihood of 
carjackings, the UN has reverted to using minivans in town and 
traveling in convoys when possible.  Although the curfew in El 
Geneina town is 2000 hours local time, WFP requires that all 
vehicles  return inside the compound by 1630 hours.  Due to 
heightened insecurity, partners reported that NGOs accessed most 
projects via air. 
 
¶12. (SBU) During the USAID/OFDA visit to West Darfur, Tamer Saad El 
Derini, head of UNDSS in West Darfur, reported a relatively calm 
security situation in El Geneina town.  However, on April 12, 
Sudanese government security officials alerted the UN of a potential 
kidnapping threat targeting foreign humanitarian aid workers.  While 
the security officials did not disclose the source or extent of the 
threat, the UN is actively monitoring security in El Geneina and has 
increased surveillance monitoring systems to allow UN security to 
respond efficiently and rapidly to potential incidents.  In 
collaboration with local police and security officials, UNDSS has 
established police checkpoints in areas of town with high 
concentrations of NGOs.  UNDSS has also equipped police at the 
checkpoints with VHF radios programmed with the UN frequency, so 
that police can directly contact the UN radio room.  Furthermore, 
all international NGOs have programmed radios to contain the 
U.N.-African Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) frequency on a 
dedicated channel to initiate quick response in event of a security 
incident.  UNAMID and the Sudanese government have also increased 
the number of joint patrols throughout the night in El Geneina. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) El Derini reported that El Geneina is currently 
experiencing a visible increase in the movement of armed elements 
 
KHARTOUM 00000609  004 OF 004 
 
 
within the town.  On April 13, the Sudanese government and Sudanese 
Armed Forces (SAF) put on a show of force, demonstrating an increase 
in military equipment and other assets by flying four fighter jets 
from  the airport and conducting a parade through town.  The heavy 
presence and build-up of Chadian armed opposition forces in West 
Darfur towns pose a threat to NGOs' security and have limited 
program implementation in the area.  For example, on April 14, CRS 
was forced to suspend an assessment mission to Foro Baranga due to 
insecurity.  In Beida, UN security observed a similar increased 
presence of armed military personal during a security assessment of 
the area during the week of April 5.  In early to mid-April, UN 
security also received confirmed reports that approximately 5,000 
members of Chadian armed opposition groups were moving from Habila, 
West Darfur, into Chad.  El Derini notes that troop movement across 
the borders is not unusual prior to the onset of the rainy season, 
as this period is the optimum time for military operations on both 
sides.  The UN is concerned about  a potential eruption of violence 
should either side attempt to exercise force. 
 
----------------------- 
COMMENTS AND CONCLUSION 
----------------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The mid-April visit by OFDA to El Geneina confirmed the 
presence of significant gaps in humanitarian assistance created by 
the expulsion of key NGO partners, particularly SC/US, CARE, and 
Mercy Corps, in food security, food and NFI distributions, WASH, 
health, nutrition, and protection.  Remaining international and 
national NGOs are coordinating and cooperating with government 
authorities and UN agencies to address critical gaps while at the 
same time planning, strategizing, and seeking funds to support 
longer-term solutions.  The majority of line ministries, supported 
by UN cluster leads, are demonstrating a willingness to coordinate 
and facilitate assessments and future planning with NGO partners, 
with the notable exception of the SMOH, which continues to deliver 
the message that government interventions are adequately addressing 
current gaps, and national NGOs will cover future gaps.  As the 
health sector lead, WHO has been unable to effect change in the 
SMOH's view or policy.  As a result, plans for long-term solutions 
in the health sector remain pending. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) The visit also confirmed that the fragile security 
situation in El Geneina has had a marked impact on humanitarian 
operations.  A pervasive atmosphere of anxiety and tension exists 
among international and local humanitarian workers due to the 
military build-up, movements along the Sudan-Chad border, and 
increased criminality.  The militarization of West Darfur, due 
largely to the Sudan-Chad proxy war, continues to be an impediment 
to humanitarian service delivery in this fragile area. 
 
FERNANDEZ