09KHARTOUM358
EXPAT FUR INTELLECTUAL URGES ROOM FOR CIVIL SOCIETY IN
Mon Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0530
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0358/01 0751224
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161224Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3256
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000358 
 
DEPT FOR AF A A/S CARTER, AF/SPG, AF/C 
NSC FOR MGAVIN AND CHUDSON 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: EXPAT FUR INTELLECTUAL URGES ROOM FOR CIVIL SOCIETY IN 
DARFUR 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Darfuris can solve the crisis in their homeland if 
the international community presses the GOS to allow Darfuri civil 
society to operate there, according to Dr. El Tigani Sesei, one of 
Darfur's preeminent expatriate intellectuals.  El Tigani 
characterized Abdul Wahid as "catastrophic," and Khalil Ibrahim is 
"finished;" he said  that the international community should not 
rely on them to achieve peace.  Instead, El Tigani advises a 
concerted civil society effort, saying, "The people of Darfur can 
frustrate the Sudanese strategy of dividing Darfur by conducting 
dialogue with the Arabs."  El Tigani urged the U.S. to exert 
"tremendous pressure" on Sudan to force it to reverse its decision 
to expel major NGOs.  El Tigani intends to return to Sudan, but did 
not offer a concrete date for his return. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Deputy Director of the UN Economic Commission for Africa 
and senior advisor at the Partnership for African Development, El 
Tigani has lived in Addis Ababa since fleeing Sudan in 1990, where 
he was jailed while serving as the governor of North Darfur. El 
Tijani organized a large meeting of Darfuri civil society leaders in 
Addis Ababa in late 2008 and is recognized as one of the more vocal 
members of the Darfuri Diaspora.  Currently in London engaging with 
the Sudanese community there, El Tigani met with poloff on February 
27 in Addis Ababa, and has continued to offer his views on events in 
Darfur over the last turbulent month. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Speaking with poloff by telephone after the GOS to expelled 
thirteen international NGOs from Sudan, El Tigani called this a 
further example of official "bullying," with Darfuri IDPs suffering, 
as a result, at the hands of the Government of Sudan (GOS).  "I 
don't believe this move was based on the ICC - it was timed to it, 
but not related," he said.  Disappointed that the UN Security 
Council was unable to agree on a unified position regarding the 
expulsions, he added of the GOS, "They consider this an opportunity 
to kick out the aid agencies knowing that China and Russia will 
support them in the Security Council."  He advised the U.S. of the 
need for "tremendous pressure" to force the GOS to reverse the 
decision before the Darfur rainy season begins in the summer. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
REGIONAL ACTORS UNHELPFUL, BASSOLE "FINISHED" 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) El Tigani did not hide his disdain for regional Arab 
leaders, having returned to Addis from Libya at the end of February 
after witnessing Libyan President Moammar Qaddafi blame Israel for 
the destruction in Darfur.  "Qaddafi entered the meeting only to 
tell us that Israel was to blame for the problems in Darfur. He 
looked right at me when he was speaking!"  El Tigani dismissed the 
Qataris and the February talks in Doha as a useless exercise in 
deal-making between two parties bent on each other's destruction, 
consequently undermining the credibility of the Joint Chief 
Mediator. "Bassole is finished," he said unhesitatingly, adding that 
JEM's participation in the talks also compromised the Islamist rebel 
group in the eyes of Darfuris.  By negotiating with the NCP, El 
Tigani said, "JEM made a mistake at Doha, and Darfuris will not 
accept JEM.  Even now all JEM soldiers are in Chad, and if the 
Chadian rebels take N'Djamena, JEM is finished."  He also cautioned 
the international community from negotiating with armed actors, and 
urged that political legitimacy in Darfur should not be defined by 
the use of force.  "It is a mistake to think that every rebel should 
be recognized," he reasoned. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
ABDUL WAHID CATASTROPHIC, FUR TRIBE NEEDS TO ENGAGE ARABS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Describing himself as one of the harshest critics of Fur 
rebel leader-in-exile Abdul Wahid el Nur, El Tigani called Abdul 
Wahid's presence at peace talks in Abuja "catastrophic."  "I have 
been saying since 2006 that he is a waste of time.  He is using the 
plight of the IDPs to advance his own agenda."  El Tigani sees Abdul 
Wahid's  recent public embrace of Israel as a mistake.  He added 
that the latter seemed unaware that the implications of his actions 
would reverberate through an Arab world, which was unprepared for 
such a move.  "He did what every other Sudanese opposition 
politician does in secret," El Tigani added.  Questioning the power 
and influence of Abdul Wahid's faction of the Sudanese Liberation 
Army, he urged the international community not to engage with him 
seriously, claiming his movement is strongly anti-intellectual and 
unprepared for political negotiations. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Instead of relying solely on Abdul Wahid and his failed 
movement, El Tigani instead is advising the Fur people in Darfur to 
engage directly with Darfuri Arabs. .  "The people of Darfur can 
 
KHARTOUM 00000358  002 OF 002 
 
 
frustrate the Sudanese strategy of dividing Darfur by conducting 
dialogue with the Arabs," he said.  Unity among the Fur and the Arab 
tribes in Darfur, he claimed, has long been a GOS "stumbling block" 
for what he called the "expansionist Islamist agenda" of the NCP in 
Africa, much as the Kobe Zaghawa of Chadian President Idris Deby has 
kept Khartoum's Islamists from connecting with their Arab brethren 
resident in West Africa.  Yet as much as the NCP has marginalized 
the Fur tribe, El Tigani also remains concerned that Khartoum may 
act against the Arabs in Darfur in a similar fashion as it seeks to 
establish dominance in the restive region.  "Since 1987, the 
National Islamist Front has tried to undermine the Arabs in Darfur, 
and soon they will use them again, as they consider that they are 
expendable."  He believes Fur civil society can isolate the warring 
Arabs easily to reach the Arab tribes, who are as much at risk as 
the Fur themselves. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
MORE ROOM NEEDED FOR DARFURI CIVIL SOCIETY 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) El Tigani urged the international community, and the U.S. 
in particular, to reach out to Darfuri civil society for 
comprehensive solutions, a move which would require the U.S. to 
pressure the GOS to provide more room for non-violent actors to 
operate in Darfur.  Saying the West has underestimated the power of 
those who scorn violent action, he boasted in complete seriousness, 
"I could start a battalion now if I want, and we would have funding, 
with enough men from my family coming to fight with me."  In concert 
with other civil society leaders in 2008, El Tijani's plan is to 
gather Darfuri groups and tribes together to establish a set of 
common negotiation positions, then put the agenda to the rebels. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Poloff asked El Tigani whether he intends to return to 
Darfur, and he unhesitatingly answered "yes."  However, in numerous 
conversations, El Tigani  has been unable to say exactly when.  "Now 
the Darufri community is too polarized, but I promise I will return, 
because I cannot do my work from here in Addis."  After traveling to 
London in late March, he will return to Ethiopia to resume his 
position with the UN Economic Commission for Africa.  (Note: In a 
recent meeting in February with two young Fur leaders, Nasredeen 
Abdulbari and Ismail Abdullah, both junior professors at Khartoum 
universities, said they regard El Tigani's return as imperative for 
the Fur community.  "Dr. El Tigani is one of the best, very 
well-respected in Darfur and Sudan," said Abdulbari. "All Fur are 
talking about unity now. We would advise him to come back to Sudan." 
Recently, El Tigani has been in frequent contact with Abdulbari and 
Abdullah.  End note.) 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment: The UN/AU Chief Mediator would gain much from 
consulting with Fur civil society leaders such as El Tigani, and 
ultimately any peace deal arrived at in Darfur would have more 
legitimacy if it included the input of El Tijani and his colleagues. 
 In most conflicts there is no substitute for a ceasefire between 
the government and the rebels.  Darfur, though,  is an unusual 
conflict in that some of the rebel groups have little legitimacy in 
the eyes of Darfuris, and the strongest rebel group (JEM) doesn't 
control any territory.  SLA/AW controls swaths of Jebel Mara.  It 
lately has been left untouched by the GOS because it does not 
threaten the government in a significant way, and has not attacked 
government installations in the recent past.  Given the reality in 
Darfur, a political solution should include input from civil society 
leaders such as El Tijani as well as consultations among tribal 
leaders.  As El Tijani suggests, direct discussions between unarmed 
Fur and Arab leaders would contribute dramatically to the peace 
process in Darfur, but could also unify the region against Khartoum. 
 For this reason, the NCP regime often tries to block such 
initiatives as its hold on Arab tribes is tenuous.  End comment. 
 
FERNANDEZ