09KHARTOUM536
SENATOR KERRY MEETS WITH UNMIS SRSG QAZI AND AEC CHAIRMAN
Tue Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4802
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0536/01 1110751
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 210751Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3578
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 000536 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A A/S CARTER, AF/E, AF/C 
NSC FOR MGAVIN AND CHUDSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM SOCI KPKO ASEC AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT: SENATOR KERRY MEETS WITH UNMIS SRSG QAZI AND AEC CHAIRMAN 
PLUMBLY 
 
Refs:  A) Khartoum 512 
B) Khartoum 477 
C) Khartoum 306 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Assessment and Evaluation Commission (AEC) 
Chairman and former UK Ambassador to Egypt Sir Derek Plumbly and 
UNMIS Special Representative to the Secretary General (SRSG) Ashraf 
Qazi told Senator John Kerry that the USG should continue its course 
of positive engagement and its leverage with the Government of Sudan 
(GoS) and use it to urge both the North and the South to urgently 
implement the CPA.  Qazi and Plumbly noted that since the signing of 
the CPA, the National Congress Party (NCP), the Sudan People's 
Liberation Movement (SPLM), and the international community have 
shifted their attention away from the north/south peace agreement 
and focused instead on other issues such as the ICC and Darfur. 
They urged that all parties not lose sight of the importance of CPA 
implementation (nor the potentially disastrous consequences if it 
fails), and warned that potential north/south flashpoints such as 
border demarcation, Abyei, and post-2011 wealth-sharing must be 
solved before the 2011 southern Sudan referendum.  Chairman Plumbly 
applauded Special Envoy Gration's idea of instituting high-level 
trilateral (USG, NCP, and SPLM) talks to get movement on CPA 
implementation.  Both diplomats said that now is the time for the 
U.S. to make progress on the CPA implementation and other issues, 
particularly with the NCP, and recommended that the USG do so by 
using carrots rather than sticks.  End Summary. 
 
ENCOURAGE THE PARTIES TO RE-FOCUS ON THE CPA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶2. (SBU) The strong message conveyed to SFRC Chairman John Kerry by 
both UNMIS SRSG Ashraf Qazi and AEC Chairman Sir Derek Plumbly was 
that the U.S. must find a way to encourage the National Congress 
Party (NCP) and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) to 
re-focus on and re-commit to the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
(CPA).  On April 16, AEC Chairman Plumbly told Kerry that the 
attention of both parties, as well as the international guarantors 
of the CPA, has shifted away from CPA implementation to the more 
immediate pressures of Darfur and the ICC.  With only 20 months left 
until the 2011 referendum on self-determination for the South (and 
the end of the CPA's interim period), neither of the parties can 
afford to be distracted from implementing vital pieces of the 
agreement that are imperative to keeping the north/south peace. If 
the CPA is ignored and ultimately unravels, and there is a return to 
war, Sudan could face a huge humanitarian catastrophe, warned AEC 
Chairman Plumbly. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Plumbly described the partnership between the NCP and the 
SPLM as "ragged", plagued by great mistrust and skepticism. 
Both parties easily misread signals, he said.  Neither party desires 
a return to war because of the economic and developmental 
ramifications it would have, but they consistently try to undermine 
each other politically, he continued.  SRSG Qazi agreed that neither 
the SPLM nor the NCP want a return to war, but pointed out that the 
parties are not always in control of what happens on the ground. 
"Tensions build at the local level and draw in elements of the Sudan 
Armed Forces (SAF) and the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA), 
their headquarters, and hardliners within the parties" and incidents 
occur that the parties are not able to control, he explained. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Plumbly told Senator Kerry that he should highlight the 
importance of engagement in his meetings with the NCP.  Special 
Envoy Gration "helped us [the international community] recover from 
our loss of credibility" due to the ICC indictment of GNU President 
Al-Bashir, thus you should engage with the parties on the CPA 
deliverables that immediately need to be handled:  the census 
outcome, the results of the Abyei arbitration, wealth-sharing, and 
border demarcation.  Plumbly characterized border demarcation and 
Abyei as the most difficult items for the parties to resolve (the 
Abyei issue also requires border demarcation).  He noted that while 
wealth-sharing has been the most successfully-implemented CPA 
benchmark to date, its functionality is in jeopardy because of the 
worldwide economic crisis coupled with falling oil prices, which has 
left Sudan with very little money, and both the North and the South 
in bad economic shape (particularly the South).  Plumbly stated that 
at the end of 2008, the North owed the South approximately USD 306 
million in oil arrears (which have still yet to be paid).  According 
to the Chairman, managing the census outcome will be the least 
difficult CPA benchmark for the parties to achieve because of a 
political deal for power-sharing they have already worked out.  He 
warned, however, that "All of these things put the elections and the 
referendum at risk if they are not resolved." 
 
¶5. (SBU) SRSG Qazi emphasized that it is also important for the 
 
KHARTOUM 00000536  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
parties to resolve pending legislation on media/press, national 
security, and the referendum.  Reformed legislation on media/press 
and national security will increase the capacity for free and fair 
elections.  Qazi stated that the parties should be encouraged to 
reach agreement very soon on the referendum law for southern Sudan. 
Currently, there is no movement on the law because the NCP has 
demanded that the SPLM negotiate on post-2011 arrangements for oil 
revenue sharing, water-sharing, debt repayment, and other items 
before agreeing to the modalities of the law (i.e. - who has the 
right to vote in the referendum, where the Referendum Commission 
should be based, the make-up of the Commission, etc.).  If the 
referendum law is not passed soon, the referendum risks being 
conducted significantly behind schedule, just like the national 
elections. [Note:  The CPA envisioned elections by July 2009, but 
they have been rescheduled for February 2010 due to GNU legislative 
delays and a lack of will by both parties to hold elections at all. 
End note].  Both Qazi and Plumbly noted that the outcome of the 
referendum vote for southern Sudan will almost certainly result in 
separation. 
 
SUPPORT FOR A USG-LED TRILATERAL CPA MECHANISM 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶6. (SBU) Plumbly provided an overview of the consensus-based AEC 
structure for Senator Kerry.  He said that the AEC has found that 
the only way to move things forward between the parties is to avoid 
apportioning blame.  The only real AEC achievement he could point to 
during his time as Chairman was the group's submission of a mid-term 
report.  He added that the AEC has also been useful in bringing the 
parties to the table when an urgent crisis - such as the May 2008 
fighting in Abyei and the April 2008 delay of the census by the 
South - occurred.  Kerry asked Plumbly if it would be helpful for 
the USG to engage the SPLM and the NCP in a consistent high-level 
three-party discussion on CPA implementation.  Plumbly responded 
that such a mechanism would be "extremely helpful," and pledged that 
the AEC would cooperate with such a structure.  "The ICC indictment 
of Bashir caused the international community to lose most of its 
leverage with the Government of Sudan (GoS)," said Plumbly.  "SE 
Gration's visit restored a great deal of that leverage," he 
continued.  With Gration's visit and offer of U.S. engagement with 
the GoS, the "North expects that things could get better for them" 
even after the blow of the ICC.  Plumbly said the international 
community dealt a blow to the GoS regime with "the biggest stick it 
could craft" by indicting GoS President Al-Bashir.  Plumbly noted 
that (likely) as a result the wounded Bashir did not once mention 
the word "CPA" in his opening speech to Parliament on April 13, 
partly as a punishment to the SPLM for its stance on the ICC issue 
(ref A).  Al-Bashir did, however, have good things to say about the 
Obama Administration.  This is the time for the USG to use carrots, 
not sticks, Plumbly recommended. 
 
THE DARFUR FACTOR 
- - - - - - - 
¶7. (SBU) Senator Kerry asked Plumbly and Qazi how Darfur, and in 
particular the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) rebel group, 
might play into an unraveling CPA scenario.  Qazi noted that JEM 
would certainly capitalize on such a turn of events and referred to 
JEM's April 2008 attack on Omdurman, which took even the GoS by 
surprise.  JEM is "essentially a military force" based in Chad that 
has very little political support in Sudan and even in Darfur, said 
Qazi.  It constitutes an isolated military threat, but not a 
political threat, to the NCP.  CDA Fernandez added that while the 
NCP seeks to "neutralize" JEM, the SPLM "plays footsie" with it (and 
other rebel groups) in event of a serious negative turn in relations 
with the North.  CDA made the point that both the NCP and the SPLM 
look at the bigger (north/south) picture when deciding how to engage 
with the rebels. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Senator Kerry asked the AEC Chairman and the SRSG what it 
would take to restore humanitarian aid capacity to 100 percent in 
Darfur following the GoS' expulsion of 13 INGOs and dissolution of 
three national NGOs on March 4 (refs B and C).  Qazi noted that SE 
Gration's effort to bring four reconstituted NGOs back (Qazi was 
briefed on this plan by DSRSG for Humanitarian Affairs Ammerah Haq) 
will cover a considerable part of the gap that was created by the 
expulsions.  Qazi stated that at no stage will the GoS reverse its 
decision regarding the expelled NGOs, but guessed that if 10 of the 
13 expelled organizations could be brought back to Sudan in one form 
or another, 100 percent capacity would be restored.  He added that 
the international community's primary goal should be to "make sure 
that the vulnerable population does not suffer as a result" of the 
GoS' expulsions.  Senator Kerry said that he would convey a message 
to GoS officials that the USG would consistently track the 
humanitarian situation in Darfur. 
 
KHARTOUM 00000536  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
WAYS THE USG CAN HELP MOVE CPA IMPLEMENTATION FORWARD 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶9. (SBU) Plumbly and Qazi told Senator Kerry that without a doubt, 
the U.S. has the greatest leverage with both CPA parties to push the 
process of CPA implementation (and other things, like Darfur) 
forward.  Plumbly said that China, because of its investment in 
Sudan, comes second, with the EU countries collectively a close 
third.  Qazi noted that the influence of Arab Gulf States and 
African Union countries should not be discounted, particularly since 
the ICC indictment.  CDA Fernandez noted that different players have 
different ties with the parties on different issues.  For example, 
Ethiopia and Uganda have clout with and support the SPLM, while 
Kenya and South Africa play a more balanced game with the CPA 
partners. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Senator Kerry asked the two diplomats what he should push 
for with the parties during his visit.  SRSG Qazi recommended that 
Kerry link all issues to the CPA and note that the future of the CPA 
is in jeopardy because of its non-implementation.  Furthermore, the 
parties should be reminded that they own the CPA process, but there 
are other stakeholders willing to help them succeed in its 
implementation (namely the international guarantors of the CPA). 
Qazi said that it is important that the USG reach out to both CPA 
parties "on an equal basis."  He recommended that the USG and other 
external players deal with the issue of the ICC "quietly and 
privately."  "Don't jeopardize justice for peace," he advised. 
Plumbly added that the USG should allow the NCP to see "the light at 
the end of the tunnel (in whatever form that may take)" while 
prodding it to move forward on CPA implementation and other issues. 
He also remarked that the USG should find a way to encourage the 
parties to "come back to the CPA."  "You turned a new page" for this 
regime, said Plumbly.  "You resumed engagement with the regime 
almost immediately after the ICC indictment, which is critical." 
You also have a new Administration, he added.  Both Qazi and Plumbly 
urged the Senator to take advantages of this positive new engagement 
to move the parties forward on CPA implementation and developing 
arrangements for a peaceful pre-and post-2011. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Comment:  Plumbly and Qazi both raised serious and 
immediate concerns - that unless CPA implementation becomes a 
priority for the parties and the international community, there is a 
real and present danger of it failing - and there are many issues 
that could trigger this at any time.  Given the GoS' perceived 
acceptance of the Obama Administration and Special Envoy Gration, 
the USG should capitalize on the cautious good graces it finds 
itself in to get real movement (not just verbal recommitment) on CPA 
milestones from both the NCP and the SPLM in order to help Sudan 
from suffering a repeat of the north-south conflict that could this 
time be exacerbated by the crisis in Darfur and the nefarious 
intentions of some neighboring nations.  The creation of a 
high-level trilateral dialogue on CPA issues with the parties is a 
good first step in the right direction, if the CPA parties will 
truly commit to it.  End Comment. 
 
FERNANDEZ