09KHARTOUM1222
OCTOBER HIGH-LEVEL COMMITTEE MEETING FOCUSES ON DARFUR
Sun Nov 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5553
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #1222/01 3050441
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 010441Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4660
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 001222 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
UN ROME FOR HSPANOS 
NEW YORK FOR DMERCADO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI SMIG UN SU
SUBJECT:  OCTOBER HIGH-LEVEL COMMITTEE MEETING FOCUSES ON DARFUR 
SECURITY CONCERNS 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The expanded High-Level Committee (HLC) met on 
October 28.  Committee members discussed key challenges in the 
humanitarian operating environment in Darfur as a follow-up to the 
recent HLC visit to El Geneina, West Darfur.  Much of the discussion 
focused on  the October 24 abduction of an International Committee 
of the Red Cross (ICRC) international staff member near El Geneina, 
West Darfur.  The UN and donors including Deputy Chief of Mission 
Asquino called for an end to impunity for perpetrators of such 
crimes. 
End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
DONORS, UN CONDEMN WORSENING INSECURITY 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Meeting co-chair Deputy Special Representative to the UN 
Secretary-General (DSRSG) and UN Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator 
(RC/HC) Ameerah Haq thanked the Government of Sudan (GOS) for its 
arranging  the recent West Darfur HLC visit, noting that the visit 
was shortened and the delegation reduced to focus specifically on 
safety and security for humanitarian workers in the wake of the ICRC 
staff kidnapping.  Haq welcomed the release of two GOAL 
international staff members, whom kidnappers had held for more than 
100 days, and recognized GOS efforts to facilitate negotiations 
leading to their release.  However, the DSRSG noted that the 
escalating level of violence and the climate of impunity surrounding 
these attacks remained unacceptable, stating that "NGOs seeking to 
help the people of Darfur should be able to do so without fear." 
The DSRSG recommended the immediate establishment of a sub-committee 
comprising a smaller group of HLC members to address safety and 
security concerns facing humanitarian staff. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Debriefing the committee on the West Darfur HLC visit and 
echoing the DSRSG's comments, the head of the UK Department of 
International Development (DFID)/Sudan read a statement, which the 
USG and the European Union (EU) endorsed, identifying the ICRC 
kidnapping as a "new low" in the Darfur operating environment and 
calling for strong action to deter criminal actions and protect 
humanitarian workers.  The statement condemned impunity for 
perpetrators and noted that ransom payments to secure staff release 
are unacceptable and only encourage further abductions.  In 
addition, the statement referenced NGO messages during the HLC visit 
to El Geneina regarding the negative impact that insecurity 
continues to have on program delivery and outreach, particularly to 
rural areas.  Donors stressed that the deteriorating operating 
environment, particularly with regard to attacks on international 
relief staff, precludes development in Darfur, especially outside of 
IDP camps, and hampers humanitarian support for rural populations 
and possible returns. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
GOS RESPONDS WITH SECURITY ASSURANCES 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Responding to the UN and donor statements, GNU Humanitarian 
Aid Commission (HAC) Commissioner Hassabo Mohamed Abdul Rahman 
assured all parties of the GOS  commitment to the security of 
humanitarian agencies working in Darfur and to the safe release of 
hostages without payment of ransom.  However, several GOS 
representatives, including the HAC Commissioner, HLC co-chair and 
Minister for Humanitarian Affairs Haroun Lual Ruun, and the GOS 
Ministry of Interior representative, expressed frustration regarding 
what they claimed was a lack of NGO cooperation with the police, 
security officials, and judiciary on security issues. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) While commending NGOs for "doing a good job in a difficult 
security environment," Hassabo called for increased coordination on 
security issues on the part of humanitarian agencies.  He stressed 
that NGOs must cooperate with and defer to security officials when 
hiring local staff, including drivers and security guards, alleging 
that some of the kidnapping and banditry incidents could originate 
from within the NGOs.  (Note: NGOs already participate in a lengthy 
staff vetting process with the HAC to hire local and international 
workers. End note.)  The HAC Commissioner and Minister for 
Humanitarian Affairs both asserted that NGOs often do not fully 
participate in criminal investigations, stating that "without good 
information, we can't have justice." 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The GNU Ministry of Interior (MoI) representative 
supported the statements of the Minister and the HAC Commissioner, 
placing some of the blame for recent insecurity in Darfur on the 
international community.  The MoI official said international donors 
 
KHARTOUM 00001222  002 OF 003 
 
 
had failed to play the promised role in strengthening police 
capacity as outlined in the 2006 Darfur Peace Agreement (DPA). 
(Note: Provisions of the DPA have never been implemented due largely 
to non-compliance by the GoS and lack of support by rebel group 
non-signatories to the agreement. End note.)  In the MoI official's 
view, if donors had followed through with DPA provisions to improve 
rule-of-law in Darfur through establishment of police stations and 
police forces among internally displaced persons (IDPs), the current 
level of attacks on humanitarian staff would have been avoided. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In addition, the MoI official blamed the United 
Nations-African Union Hybrid Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) and 
humanitarian agencies for what he said was presence of armed 
movements operating openly in IDP camps.  He alleged that the camps 
served as training centers and safe havens for criminal elements. 
In closing, the official expressed support for the role that NGOs 
play in Darfur and asked for further cooperation to "remove these 
difficulties together." 
 
¶9. (SBU) DSRSG Haq responded by noting the need for future dialogue 
regarding security as part of the proposed HLC security 
sub-committee.  Haq highlighted the complexity of establishing 
security procedures among various government and international 
stakeholders due to the humanitarian principles involved in the 
Darfur context.  Later in the meeting, participants endorsed the HLC 
Monitoring Mechanism, including new sub-committees on security at 
the state and federal level. 
 
---------------------------------- 
GOVERNMENT CONFUSION ON PROTECTION 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Following the security discussion, the representative of 
the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) noted 
that the MoI's presentation had touched on issues related to 
security and humanitarian protection--distinct, yet sometimes 
interrelated concepts.  The GOS Ministry of Defense official stated 
that humanitarian agencies' definition of protection remains 
unclear, with various messages espoused by UNHCR, the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), and ICRC.  The defense official 
asked that the international community come to a consensus on the 
matter and share clear information with Sudanese government 
representatives.  UNHCR agreed to follow up with a protection 
workshop and training. 
 
¶11. (SBU) This lack of clarity on protection issues among Sudanese 
government representatives was highlighted during comments by HAC 
Commissioner Hassabo.  Hassabo strongly recommended a merger of the 
protection sector working group and the new security sub-committee, 
as, in his view, these groups were essentially discussing the same 
issues and comprised the same GOS stakeholders.  However, the UNHCR 
representative clarified that the protection sector working group 
should remain distinct, as humanitarian protection focuses on the 
protection concerns affecting Darfuri beneficiaries and not on 
security of aid workers. 
 
-------------------------------- 
JOINT RETURNS MECHANISM APPROVED 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Turning to the next agenda item, HLC co-chair MoHA Haroun 
tabled the Joint Verification Mechanism on IDP returns.  The 
mechanism proposes "to help ensure that returns in Darfur are 
sustainable by enabling IDPs to exercise a free, informed, and 
voluntary choice to return to their areas of origin in safety and 
dignity, where and when appropriate."  (Note: This objective 
statement is consistent with international humanitarian principles 
on internal displacement. End note.)  The terms of reference 
document established the composition of a Joint Verification 
Sub-Committee, including the HAC Commissioner and the UN RC/HC as 
co-chairs, as well as representatives of the GOS National 
Intelligence and Security Service (NISS), UNAMID, UNHCR, WFP, 
UNICEF, and IOM, international NGO members, one national NGO 
representative, and one IDP representative, and other HLC members on 
an ad hoc basis.  HLC participants observed that the Joint 
Verification Mechanism only establishes the criteria for the 
appropriateness and voluntary nature of returns and does not 
elaborate on assistance options when returns are verified as such. 
DSRSG Haq stated that, upon HLC approval, the first task of the new 
HLC Joint Verification Sub-Committee would be to investigate next 
steps following returns verification.  The HLC approved the 
mechanism without objection. 
 
KHARTOUM 00001222  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) The monthly HLC meeting provided a timely and constructive 
venue to raise donor concerns over GOS commitments to humanitarian 
staff security.  Donor representatives, including the USG, stressed 
the importance of concrete action against perpetrators and the need 
for improvements on the ground. The outcomes of the new security 
sub-committee will serve as a first test on this issue.