09KIGALI896
TRENDS IN RWANDA PERTAINING TO SEXUAL ORIENTATION
Thu Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXRO8925
PP RUEHGI RUEHRN
DE RUEHLGB #0896/01 3651236
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 311236Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6553
INFO RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KIGALI 000896 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM RW
SUBJECT: TRENDS IN RWANDA PERTAINING TO SEXUAL ORIENTATION 
AND GENDER IDENTITY 
 
REF: STATE 130765 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: There is no Rwandan law against 
homosexuality. The constitution provides for equality of all 
citizens but does not specifically prohibit discrimination 
based on sexual orientation. In December 2009, following 
lobbying and statements by key government figures, the lower 
chamber of Rwanda's parliament removed an article 
criminalizing homosexuality from draft legislation of a 
revised penal code.  Rwandan society is conservative on the 
issue of homosexuality, with many Rwandans believing it 
immoral and alien to their culture. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) There are no laws that criminalize sodomy or 
homosexuality. Although the constitution provides that all 
citizens are equal before the law, without discrimination on 
the basis ethnic origin, tribe, clan, color, sex, region, 
social origin, religion or faith opinion, economic status, 
culture, language, social status, or physical or mental 
disability, there is no provision prohibiting discrimination 
on the basis of sexual orientation. The current penal code is 
silent on homosexuality, but punishes indecent acts with 
imprisonment of eight days to three years and/or a fine of 
1,000-10,000 Rwandan francs (approximately $2-$20). Some 
human rights activists are concerned that without a 
definition of indecent acts, authorities could use the law to 
punish homosexuals. The new penal code includes a similar 
article, defining indecency as any act that goes against the 
code of conduct or degrades Rwandan culture. During the 
adoption of the new penal code in December, several members 
of parliament voiced concern ove 
r the vagueness of the term. (Note:  Legislation passed by 
the lower house goes to the senate, and from there to the 
president, who has the option of returning it to parliament 
for further revision.  End Note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) In 2007, some members of parliament called for 
legislation criminalizing homosexuality. In January 2007 the 
Ministry of Justice finished a new draft of the penal code, 
which had remained largely unchanged since 1978, and sent it 
to parliament. Through consultations with major partners such 
as international and local NGOs, parliament edited the draft 
several times. According to a civil society report, 
parliament added and removed articles criminalizing 
homosexual behavior on multiple occasions. The next-to-final 
draft included an article that stated, "any person who 
practices, encourages or sensitizes people of the same sex to 
sexual relations or sexual practice, shall be liable for a 
term of imprisonment ranging from five to ten years and a 
fine ranging from 200,000 Rwandan francs (approximately $400) 
to 1,000,000 Rwandan francs (approximately $2,000)." A 
coalition of Rwandan civil society representatives wrote a 
position paper, held a press conference, and petitioned 
legislators to remove the articl 
e from the penal code. Key government figures lobbied behind 
the scenes to have the article removed, and in December the 
Minister of Justice expressed public opposition to the 
article.  The lower house subsequently dropped it from the 
penal code. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Rwanda is a socially conservative country and 
anti-homosexual rhetoric is common. Many Rwandans believe 
homosexuality is immoral and alien to Rwandan culture. 
Religion plays a significant role in society and religious 
leaders are very influential. In 2007, according to local 
newspaper New Times, the archbishop of the Rwanda's Anglican 
church said acts of homosexuality were a form of moral 
genocide. 
 
¶5. (SBU) There have been reports of abuse and discrimination 
of members of the LGBT community. According to findings from 
Qof members of the LGBT community. According to findings from 
a small-scale behavioral study of men who have sex with men 
(MSM) in Kigali carried out in 2008-2009 by MEASURE 
Evaluation, some MSM reported physical or verbal abuse in 
workplaces, bars, prisons, and/or in public. In 2008, 
security forces detained two women for several days upon 
their return from a conference on lesbians in Africa; 
security forces also reportedly searched their email. In 
2007, there were reports that police officers assaulted and 
arrested homosexuals. There were also reports of landlords 
evicting tenants based on sexual orientation. There is one 
local NGO, Horizon Community Association (HOCA), .&~