09MOSCOW323
ICRC Maintains No Humanitarian Crisis in South Ossetia
Wed Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO8153
PP RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #0323 0420749
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110749Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1853
INFO RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MOSCOW 000323 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/ECA 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PGOV PHUM PINR ICRC RS GG
SUBJECT: ICRC Maintains No Humanitarian Crisis in South Ossetia 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In Moscow February 5, International Committee of 
the Red Cross (ICRC) Russian Delegation officials stated that there 
is no humanitarian emergency in South Ossetia, despite reports of 
potential food shortages. Although there are some needs that 
continue to demand attention, such as conditions in collective 
centers and freedom of movement for the population residing near the 
Georgian border, these experts maintain that the crisis in South 
Ossetia is over. End Summary. 
¶2. (U) In January Refcoord obtained two separate studies conducted 
by United Nations local implementing partners operating out of the 
Russian North Caucasus that examined the status of food security, 
education, and health care in South Ossetia. The issue of food 
security raised concerns of a potential humanitarian crisis in South 
Ossetia. A study funded by the World Food Program (WFP) indicated 
that due to the destruction of agricultural land, the rising cost of 
food, and low levels of employment in the disputed territory, there 
was a high likelihood of a food crisis during the winter and early 
spring of 2009. 
¶3. (U) ICRC Russia Country Delegate Francois Bellon addressed these 
concerns in a meeting with us February 5. (Note: ICRC operates on 
the ground in South Ossetia, and has succeeded in accessing the area 
since the immediate aftermath of the August conflict. ICRC 
representatives have traveled throughout the region since last 
August, with Bellon's deputy Francois Blancy's most recent visit 
taking place the week of January 23.  End Note.)  Bellon reported 
that, although humanitarian problems persist, the region has moved 
on from crisis mode, and life-saving measures are no longer needed. 
Particularly in regard to food, the ICRC found that the prices and 
selection were similar to markets in Russia's North Caucasus. 
Indeed, South Ossetia's agricultural sector was not greatly 
disturbed by the August events. 
¶4. (SBU) ICRC is not planning to embark on development projects in 
South Ossetia. Blancy described the disputed territory as "stones 
among mountains," in reference to its historic underprivileged and 
undeveloped status. Bellon referred to the works of Dutch artist 
Pieter Brueghel, who specialized in landscapes populated by 
peasants, in describing rural South Ossetia. The poor are still 
poor; the quality of life has not been greatly affected by the 
conflict. Planning for the region must take into consideration the 
population's lifestyle. Highly technical assistance may be a greater 
hindrance than help in the post-conflict recovery process. 
Furthermore, resources that cannot be absorbed by the economy 
encourage corrupt dealings and harmful misappropriation. 
¶5. (SBU) On his January trip, Blancy visited Tskhinvali and 
Khetagorovo, a small (population approximately 800), predominantly 
ethnic-Ossetian village. He had previously visited the region in the 
fall. He found that conditions were more difficult in the region due 
to the winter and limited access to gas. However, he noted that the 
supply of electricity to the town is stable.  Water supply is now 
relatively reliable in the capital, Tskhinvali. Schools and social 
institutions are also functioning. The outlook at the eight 
collective centers in the region is bleaker. There are approximately 
600 IDPs in these shelters, though ICRC is working to improve 
quality of life there by distributing clothes, performing 
maintenance, and upgrading lavatories and kitchen facilities. 
¶6. (SBU) Blancy and Bellon identified several remaining challenges: 
care of people in the IDP centers; support for people residing in 
villages destroyed in the August conflict; and assistance to people 
living near the border with freedom of movement issues. The ICRC is 
considering establishing an office in the Leningori region or else 
sending a mobile team there regularly in order to assist residents 
cut off from their normal personal and business contacts in 
undisputed Georgian territory. 
¶7. (SBU) ICRC has $5.8 million for its mission in South Ossetia, 
which is its highest budget per capita in the world, and Bellon is 
not fully confident that his team will be able to spend all of the 
earmarked money. When approached in December by WFP Regional 
Director Daly Belgasmi, who wanted to discuss the possibility of 
shipping flour from Egypt to South Ossetia for relief, Bellon had 
responded by directing the visiting official to return to Cairo 
rather than provide aid not needed. Although Bellon said he would 
welcome the presence of other international organizations in South 
Ossetia -- particularly UNHCR to deal with protection issues, he 
averred that the ICRC is able to fill existing gaps on its own. 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Getting aid to South Ossetia via UN agencies and NGO 
partners would present serious logistical and political challenges. 
Were ICRC to identify emergent humanitarian needs, the international 
community would face a dilemma that would test its commitment to 
donorship. Fortunately the ICRC states with certainty that we are 
not in that position. 
 
BERYLE