09NAIROBI1032
SOMALIA - OPPORTUNITIES FOR PD ENGAGEMENT WITH DADAAB
Thu May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO9974
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #1032/01 1411246
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211246Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9610
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 001032 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E, A/S CARSON AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER PREF KPAO SO KE
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - OPPORTUNITIES FOR PD ENGAGEMENT WITH DADAAB 
 
REFUGEES 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The residents of Kenya's Dadaab refugee camp, home to more 
than 270,000 mostly Somali refugees, demonstrated a wide range of 
activities aimed at promoting peace and reconciliation among Somalis 
in Dadaab and in Somalia at large.  These worthy projects certainly 
merit support, and offer great prospect for public diplomacy 
engagement with a large population of Somalis, many of whom are 
disaffected but apparently receptive to U.S. engagement.  This 
message offers examples of activities we could support with varying 
degrees of funds.  The refugees' views on Somalia's future and 
United States policy on Somalia will be reported via septels.  End 
summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
270,000 Disaffected Somalis 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) A Somalia Unit officer, accompanied by a visiting AF/PDPA 
officer, traveled to Dadaab refugee camp from May 11-13 to survey 
the views of the refugees regarding U.S. policy toward Somalia, the 
current and future political prospects for Somalia, and 
opportunities for public diplomacy engagement with the refugees. 
The Dadaab refugee camp is in fact three separate camps - Ifo, 
Dagahaley, and Hagadera - and is located approximately 80 kilometers 
from the border with Somalia in Kenya's Northeast Province.  The 
camp was created in 1991 with capacity for 90,000 refugees.  The 
camp currently houses over 270,000 registered refugees, with more 
arriving daily in spite of the official closure of the Kenya-Somalia 
border. 
 
------------------------------ 
Public Diplomacy Opportunities 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Following is a list of opportunities for public diplomacy 
engagement with the Dadaab refugee population.  This list is not 
comprehensive, but offers examples of activities we might back with 
varying degrees of budgetary support.  The groups involved uniformly 
stated that the human resources, including the determination and 
intellect required, were readily available, and that relatively 
small bits of financial support would boost these efforts. 
 
- Radio programming ($400,000, or a portion thereof):  The Office of 
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has 
finally secured permission from the Government of Kenya to establish 
and broadcast radio programming from Dadaab.  The project was 
previously funded but the money was re-allocated due to GOK delays 
in approving the project.  UNHCR's project envisions a studio in 
Dadaab at which the refugees would develop radio programs to be 
broadcast over StarFM, a station with which post has an excellent 
relationship, during StarFM's idle hours.  If post had funds to 
support this initiative, we could dictate the themes of programs 
developed and targeted at this audience of 270,000 Somalis. 
 
- Hagadera soccer league ($4,000 or more): A group of youth, in 
partnership with the NGO CARE, operates a soccer league of 80 teams 
of 23 members each.  The teams run their soccer league under the 
rubric of youth leadership and conflict mediation.  For example, we 
met the coach of one team who described how the youth are trained to 
resolve conflict in the context of their soccer matches.  The league 
could use any amount of equipment.  We envision starting with 
jerseys for each of the 1,840 members.  If budget allowed, we could 
provide soccer balls, cleats, or field upkeep, all emblazoned with 
messages of peace and reconciliation. 
 
- Dagahaley Drama Group ($200 or more): This group presented us with 
approximately thirty minutes of their drama, song, and poetry.  The 
group operates with the most rudimentary of costumes and could use 
anything from simple costumes to a microphone setup to a facility 
for drama practice and rehearsal.  The group could also benefit from 
the ability to move among the camps to present their work.  The 
group presents messages of peace and reconciliation, and would 
likely be receptive to input on their performances in conjunction 
with any support we could offer. 
 
- Youth Action for Peace Group: This initiative, which spans all 
three camps, is focused on youth empowerment, self-reliance, and 
 
NAIROBI 00001032  002 OF 002 
 
 
independence.  The projects, a select few of which will be funded by 
a CARE-associated volunteer, are supported by matching funds to 
complement the funds raised by the applicant. 
 
- Community Peace and Security Team (CPST) Leaders (multiples of 
approximately $100): The CSM leaders at Ifo camp were beneficiaries 
of bicycles, boots, and reflective vests from the Bureau of 
Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM).  However, the group notes 
that their community policing efforts could benefit from even more 
equipment, especially bicycles.  Providing bikes and other equipment 
(possibly with USG branding) would advance our public diplomacy 
efforts while helping improve security in the camps. 
 
- Community Self Management (CSM) Leaders: These groups perform 
conflict resolution activities for disputes and petty crimes.  The 
CSM group in Hagadera noted that they have 30 CSM officers for over 
100,000 refugees in that section of the camp.  As such, a CSM 
officer might require two hours to travel on foot to assist at the 
scene of a dispute.  Contributions to these groups would go toward 
transportation, such as bicycles. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Post believes that public diplomacy support for some or all 
of these worthy initiatives would give us a valuable entre into an 
audience of 270,000 Somalis, many of whom are otherwise disaffected 
and unhappy.  While we intend to use our existing and limited 
programming budget to reach into Somalia, any additional funding 
offered would likely be considered for direction to the Dadaaab 
refugee camps.  This population has both the ability to reach back 
into Somalia with news of our good works and the potential to return 
to Somalia en masse if and when the situation in their country 
allows.  Any public diplomacy programming we undertake in Dadaab is 
likely to have positive effects. 
 
RANNEBERGER