09NAIROBI1772
SOMALIA - Peaceful Protests Across Somaliland
Thu Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO7313
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #1772/01 2321503
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201503Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0733
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 001772 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - Peaceful Protests Across Somaliland 
 
REF: Nairobi 1729 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) As Somaliland's political crisis continues, on August 20 
the two opposition parties protested peacefully in all six regions 
of the self-declared republic.  Although police tried to block 
demonstrations in public areas, thousands of protestors took to the 
streets.  Opposition party leaders condemned recent events and 
called for freedom of speech during the election period.  There were 
few arrests, and although shots were reportedly fired into the air 
in an attempt to disburse the protestors, there were no casualties. 
Days before the protest, opposition leaders turned down President 
Riyale's invitation to meet, pending the NEC withdrawal of its 
decision to hold elections without the voter list.  On August 19, 
the Guurti resolved to remain neutral in the political disputes and 
to help solve the election crisis.  Also on August 19, an Ethiopian 
delegation arrived in Hargeisa raising hopes that international 
mediation might be able to help break the impasse.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Peaceful Protests by Thousands 
in All Six Provinces 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On August 20 thousands of opposition supporters protested 
in all six of Somaliland's provinces.  Opposition parties Kulmiye 
and UCID organized the demonstrations to protest the decision by the 
National Electoral Commission (NEC) and the government to hold 
elections on September 27 without a voter registration list, despite 
a parliamentary ruling to the contrary.  In Hargeisa, by 
approximately 8:00 a.m. local time in on August 20, protestors began 
to assemble in the town's Freedom Garden park, according to our 
contacts.  Police blocked major intersections and access points to 
this area, but protestors still converged in front of Kulmiye 
headquarters.  In their speeches to the Hargeisa gathering, 
opposition leaders "Silanyo" and Warabe condemned the recent actions 
of the government and called for freedom of speech during the 
election period.  At least one media report suggests that security 
forces fired numerous shots into the air in an attempt to disperse 
the demonstrators.  There were no reports of casualties. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) There were similar peaceful demonstrations in all of 
Somaliland's major cities.  In Burao and Erigavo, police blocked 
protestors from converging in major public areas, but demonstrations 
took place in the streets.  Reports indicate that one police officer 
was injured and three opposition party supporters were arrested 
after fights broke out in the town of Las Anod.  Leaders of both 
parties were buoyant as the turnout was much greater than they had 
hoped or expected. 
 
--------------------------- 
Opposition Places Condition 
on Riyale Meeting 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In an apparent effort to forestall the protests, President 
Riyale invited opposition presidential candidates Faisal Ali (UCID) 
and Ahmed Mohamed "Silanyo" (Kulmiye) to discuss on August 19 an end 
to the political crisis.  Our contacts interpret the invitation as a 
sign Riyale is becoming sensitive to internal and international 
pressure to resume talks with the opposition.  In their joint 
response, Ali and "Silanyo" agreed to meet, with the precondition 
that the National Electoral Committee (NEC) should obey Parliament's 
ruling to rescind its July 27 decision that the elections should 
proceed on September 27 without a previously agreed to voter 
registration list. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Faisal Waarabe, Chairman of the UCID, told us that UCID 
and Kulmiye representatives will meet with the NEC August 20 to ask 
that it withdraw its "unilateral" and "illegal" determination, and 
that it endorse stakeholder consensus as a way forward.  Faisal 
insisted that they did not put any direct preconditions for Riyale 
to meet.  Prior to the meetings, the opposition parties also plan to 
formally ask for international mediation of the talks with Riyale to 
ensure that all parties honor their word.  They thought that perhaps 
Ethiopia could play that role. 
 
------------------------- 
House of Elders Votes to 
Maintain Neutrality in 
 
NAIROBI 00001772  002 OF 002 
 
 
Political Disputes 
------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On August 19, Somaliland's Guurti (House of Elders) passed 
a resolution designed to end its internal differences.  The 
resolution was passed by a vote of 63 for, one against, with the 
Speaker abstaining. The articles of the resolution state that the 
members of the Guurti should be united and remain neutral in the 
political disputes in the country.  Another article of the 
resolution held that it is the Guurti's role to help find a 
sustainable solution to Somaliland's political crisis. 
 
-------------------- 
Ethiopian Delegation 
Engages Stakeholders 
-------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) On August 19, an Ethiopian delegation led by Minister of 
State for Foreign Affairs Tekeda Alemu, arrived in Hargeisa.  At 
their meeting, Kulmiye and UCID presented Alemu with a position 
paper which included the following points: 
 
-- The President must state publicly that he is willing to walk back 
his irrational decision to be the jury, the judge and the 
executioner on the conduct of the elections. Unless the rules of 
conduct are respected by all, including the President, a solution to 
the problem will not be found. 
 
-- All the necessary tools required to conduct this election in a 
timely fashion are ready and should be used. The current voter list 
should be accepted. 
 
-- Interpeace must be allowed to resume its role. 
 
-- The NEC has lost credibility and must be replaced. 
 
-- A new body (comprising the three parties) must be created to 
administer the country until a date for a new election can be set. 
The six presidential and vice presidential candidates will not be 
permitted to participate in this body. 
 
---------------------------- 
US Media Engagement Receives 
Positive Response 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) On August 18, AF PDAS Phil Carter was interviewed by Horn 
Cable TV.  Excerpts were broadcast the same evening.  The interview 
was translated into Somali and re-broadcast on August 19.  We have 
received extremely positive feedback on the interview.  A government 
representative told us, "Ambassador Carter expressed the same 
sentiments as the majority of Somalilanders."  He encouraged us to 
keep up the pressure as the wider public appreciates the continued 
engagement by the United States.  We understand that the Foreign 
Minister has requested an interview with Horn Cable to respond to 
PDAS Carter's points. 
 
RANNEBERGER