09NAIROBI345
SOMALIA - The Case for Expanded Assistance
Mon Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO9903
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0345/01 0541419
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231419Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8572
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NAIROBI 000345 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND ACTING A/S CARTER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EAID PINR PHUM SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - The Case for Expanded Assistance 
 
REF: Nairobi 246 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Now is the time for the United States to provide 
an expanded package of security, development and humanitarian 
assistance to consolidate the formation of a new Unity Transitional 
Federal Government (UTFG) in Somalia, while ensuring that additional 
funds are made available to both Puntland and Somaliland.  Reftel 
outlined the Mission's views on the way forward in Somalia.  The 
cable urged that the United States demonstrate its strong commitment 
to Somalia's stabilization by providing $50-$100 million in 
immediate assistance this year (up from $40 million), not only to 
support the new window of opportunity under the Djibouti Peace 
Process but to help both Puntland and Somaliland strengthen security 
and consolidate the democratic processes underway in those 
semi-autonomous regions.   Septel will suggest ways to build the 
democratic, counter-terror and counter-piracy capacities of 
Somaliland and Puntland. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) While we are requesting early release of the FY 09 budget 
levels for Somalia ($40.330 million), the overall requirements to 
support the latest developments in Somalia are substantial and we 
urge the Department and USAID to quickly match our strong political 
engagement with an equally strong financial one.  The most urgent 
additional need is for assistance to the joint security forces, help 
establishing the Unity Transitional Federal Government (UTFG) in 
Mogadishu, support for reintegrating IDPs to Mogadishu, and basic 
provision of social services throughout Somalia.  Below we make the 
case for greater flexibility on programming of the existing FY 09 
budget and suggest specific recommendations for an expanded program 
of assistance. 
 
--------------------------- 
Present FY 09 Budget Levels 
--------------------------- 
 
3.(SBU) The new Unity Transitional Federal Government (UTFG) is 
established and will return imminently to Mogadishu, where peace is 
tenuous.  The new government will face an al-Shabaab insurgency bent 
on assassinating and bombing UTG officials and their AMISOM 
backers, and will be under pressure to quickly satisfy the Somali 
people's high expectations for speedy security, social and economic 
improvement.  Despite the insecurity, and humanitarian and 
development challenges, Somalis are generally optimistic about their 
new President and prospects for progress.  Post's FY 09 Somalia 
budget includes $40.330 million encompassing $20.250 million for 
Economic Support Funds (ESF),which includes $1.25 M earmarked for 
basic education; $11.6 million for Peace Keeping Operations (PKO), 
and $8.48 million for Child Survival and Health (CSH). We should do 
more.  An immediate release of flexible, significantly augmented 
FY09 assistance would allow us to capitalize on existing momentum 
toward peace, and quickly provide programs to tangibly improve 
security and economic prospects first in Mogadishu and, possibly 
later this year, in areas outside the capitol as UTFG influence and 
security permits. 
 
--------------------------- 
Top Transitional Priorities 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) With the formation of the new unity government, the 
Transitional Federal Charter has been extended by two years, through 
August 2011.  The top transitional priorities are: 
 
- stabilization and security 
- continued reconciliation 
- basic functional capacity of the UTFG 
- constitutional development and electoral processes 
- provision of basic social services 
- provision of humanitarian assistance and reintegration of IDPs. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Somalia Needs Security Funding... 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Immediate release of the FY 09 planned level of $18.1 
million in Peace and Security funds is critical in the next month to 
six weeks.  With $11.6 million PKO funds we will support the timely 
formation of the unity government's joint security force, and fund 
crucial AMISOM and regional training and mentoring of the joint 
force.  However, the additional costs for standing up the joint 
security force are substantial.  They include an additional $10-$15 
 
NAIROBI 00000345  002 OF 003 
 
 
million in PKO funds to help provide non-lethal equipment, food and 
possibly stipends to the projected 5,000 joint security forces as 
well as further AMISOM training, technical assistance and capacity 
building support for the Joint Security Committee (JSC).  Funds are 
also needed for support to the JSC-administered cease-fire 
monitoring arrangements.  The Joint Security Force is already being 
deployed in Mogadishu.  It is the only body standing between 
al-Shabaab's hit-and-run attacks on UTFG compounds and AMISOM. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In addition, we request immediate release of the planned $4 
million in ESF funds to help expand civilian police training. (A 
total of 10,000 joint police forces are included as part of the over 
joint security forces complement described in the Djibouti 
Agreement.) The money would support community policing and carry out 
critical justice reform initiatives. An additional $5-$10 million in 
INCLE funds is recommended in order to expand civilian police 
training, mentoring, infrastructure rehabilitation and deployment of 
part of the 10,000 joint civilian police forces, as well as to 
support community policing and key justice sector reform 
initiatives. 
 
¶7. (SBU) We would use the balance of planned $2.5 million in ESF to 
expand conflict mitigation and reconciliation initiatives to 
complement our direct security assistance.  With an additional 
$10-$15 million ESF we could better support the reintegration of 
IDPs in Mogadishu through quick impact economic and youth employment 
programs.  So that Somalis can see progress on the ground, we need 
to provide training and employment opportunities for disadvantaged 
youth, particularly in Mogadishu. The recently launched Somalia 
Youth Livelihood Program can be quickly ramped up to address such 
needs. 
 
---------------------------------- 
...Coupled with Good Governance... 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Of the planned $12.5 million ESF to foster just and 
democratic governance, we intend to program at least $4.5 million to 
help the UTFG stand up key ministries that will deliver important 
social services, and that are responsible for advancing transitional 
tasks needed to bring about elections planned in 2011. We will 
provide support toward a basic "start-up package" to supply or 
improve the government's office equipment, supplies and furnishings, 
as well as to improve UTFG ministries' and officials' effectiveness 
and influence on the ground.  An additional $10 million would enable 
us to improve basic functional capacity building in the Offices of 
the President and Prime Minister, and will assist in moving the 
Parliament from Baidoa to Mogadishu. This would include a 
"Ministries in a Box" program which has been successful in 
Afghanistan and Sudan.  Additionally, immediate support is required 
to ensure the UTFG moves forward with dialogue to address power 
sharing and ensure the government remains broad based.  Getting the 
Benadir Administration (the 16 districts of Mogadishu) up and 
running will be critical.  Thus, support will need to be provided to 
the enhancement of the capacity of the regional, local and district 
councils of the Benadir region. 
 
¶9. (SBU) We intend to utilize the planned $6 million ESF for 
Political Competition and Consensus Building initiatives to 
reinforce the peace agreement and expand the ceasefire to other 
groups ready to join the political process.  These funds will 
support the peace agreement through inclusive consensus-building 
initiatives, the drafting of a new constitution, sponsorship of 
national dialogues, and referenda on issues important to the Somali 
people.  With this funding we can assist the unity government to 
broaden its appeal through dialogue, not force.  These funds will 
also be utilized to build the capacity of the expanded parliament to 
carry out legislative functions and train public sector executives 
in the transparent and accountable management of government 
ministries. 
 
¶10. (SBU) If we had an additional $5-$10 million in ESF we could 
provide better technical assistance and support to political 
processes required under the Transitional Federal Charter, such as 
constitutional reform, carrying out a national census and 
establishment of electoral institutions in preparation for national 
elections scheduled for 2011. Further, mutually accepted structures 
and processes for conflict management are required to build more 
peaceful, transparent and credible power sharing among the different 
members. Substantial support will be needed to carry out a 
transparent and inclusive constitutional process which will be 
 
NAIROBI 00000345  003 OF 003 
 
 
critical for setting the road map for Somalia's future. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Civil society needs to continue to play an important role 
in promoting peace, social and economic development and democratic 
governance.  With the rapid disbursement of the planned $2 million 
ESF for civil society strengthening we could: help deliver social 
and economic development services through quick impact projects; 
amplify civil society organizations' advocacy for peace and good 
governance; support media sector development; and engage the Somali 
Diaspora. 
 
¶12. (SBU) An additional $2 million for civil society will be 
required to ensure that influential civil society actors, including 
business, women's organizations, academic and religious leaders are 
engaged in the post-Djibouti negotiation and implementation process. 
 At the moment civil society actors are unfortunately being 
under-utilized.  In order for the peace process to have sustained 
traction, there needs to be a supported effort to ensure that these 
actors are able to provide advice to government officials as well as 
amplify concerns of grassroots communities. 
 
---------------------------- 
...and Basic Social Services 
---------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Under the FY 09 planned levels, we have $8.48 million in 
CHS funds and $1.25 million ESF earmarked to support basic 
education.  However, we believe it is more appropriate to support an 
integrated program to provide better access to basic health 
services, clean water and basic education.  Therefore, we request 
that F swap up to $3.48 million in CSH funds for basic education 
funds.  This would enable us to then program $5 million CSH to 
support MCH interventions at both urban health facilities and at 
rural community levels.  If this swap is possible, we would program 
$4.73 million to support basic education programs which included a 
water component.  These funds would also be programmed to expand the 
successful Somalia Interactive Radio Instruction Program and in 
particular aim to reach the large number of IDPs and persons 
returning to Mogadishu, a goal Somali President Sharif highlighted 
to the Ambassador in a recent phone conversation (septel). 
 
¶14. (SBU) We believe an additional $10 million to $20 million in 
non-food assistance will be required to expand and further integrate 
ongoing education, health and water service delivery programs 
nationwide, with a focus on Mogadishu.  With additional funding for 
education, health and water, we will be well positioned to expand 
on-going integrated social service programs to an increasing number 
of Somalis nationwide.  Emphasis will be placed on visible and 
quick-impact, community-based projects that can provide immediate 
tangible benefits to some of the most vulnerable members of society 
while laying the foundations for longer-term benefits.  These 
additional funds would also enable us to provide basic social 
services to large number of IDPs expected to return and reintegrate 
into Mogadishu over the next twelve months. 
 
¶15. (SBU) The new, unity government headed by President Sharif is 
determined to leverage the support it has among Somalis tired of 
years of conflict.  Its return to Mogadishu finds opponents, like 
al-Shabaab, off-balance following the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops 
but still, as the February 22 suicide attack on AMISOM indicates, 
able to inflict damage on forces for peace and reconciliation in 
Somalia.  The aid programs outlined in the preceding paragraphs must 
be implemented quickly if the window of opportunity provided by the 
formation of a new government is to be used.  Embassy urges 
immediate, positive consideration of these proposals. 
 
Was this report useful?  Send comments and questions to 
SomaliaWatchers@state.sgov.gov. 
 
RANNEBERGER