09NAIROBI679
SOMALIA - TFG PARLIAMENT MEETING IN MOGADISHU
Mon Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO0519
PP RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0679/01 0961329
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061329Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9074
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 000679 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL PTER SOCI SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - TFG PARLIAMENT MEETING IN MOGADISHU 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Transitional Parliament Speaker Aden 
Mohammed Nur "Madobe," who was en route from Mogadishu via 
Nairobi to Prague for the April 6 - 9 meeting of the ACP - EU 
Joint Parliamentary Assembly, in an April 4 meeting described 
security in Mogadishu as steadily improving, although recent 
assassinations were cause for concern. Madobe calculated the 
number of MPs attending sessions in Mogadishu at 307, barely 
a quorum. The remaining 213 MPs were either traveling or 
still weighing the wisdom of moving to the Somali capital, he 
said.  The Parliament had held two sessions to date: the 
first devoted to organizational matters; the second session 
to increasing the number of committees from fourteen to 
twenty-seven and amending rules of procedure to accommodate 
the recently-installed Alliance for the Re-liberation of 
Somalia (ARS) deputies.  Madobe described al-Shabaab 
Spokesman Muktar Robow, a clan kinsman, as embroiled in a 
conflict with other members of the al-Shabaab leadership, but 
unlikely to bolt to a TFG government he "does not trust." 
Madobe confirmed that the TFG very shortly would present its 
conception of Sharia for Somalia to the Parliament.  The 
TFG's framework would be considered by the Parliament's 
Justice and Religious Affairs Committee, he said.  End 
summary. 
 
Somalia to Feature at ACP-EU 
Parliamentary Assembly 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On April 4, Transitional Federal Parliament Speaker 
Aden Mohammed Nur "Madobe," who was en route from Mogadishu 
to Prague for the April 6 - 9 annual meeting of the African, 
Caribbean, Pacific - European Union (ACP - EU) Joint 
Parliamentary Assembly met briefly in Nairobi to describe the 
work of the Parliament, conditions in Mogadishu, and the 
government's plans to implement Sharia. Madobe noted that 
Somalia would be discussed on the second day of the ACP - EU 
meeting. 
 
Mogadishu Improves, but 
Worrying Signs 
----------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Madobe described a "noticeable" improvement in 
security in Mogadishu since the TFG's February arrival, but 
he cautioned that there were worrying recent developments. 
Among them were the recent assassinations or attempts on 
prominent Somali politicians, especially from the 
Parliament's point of view, the April 1 wounding of MP Amir 
Shaketi.  The attacks were designed to intimidate the 
government, Madobe said, and if they continued, they might 
succeed. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Al-Shabaab remained an enemy of the TFG, and there 
was "no hope" for reconciliation, as it was run by 
"foreigners."  Madobe's clan cousin Muktar Robow (they are 
both members of the Liban sub-clan) was embroiled in a 
conflict with other members of the al-Shabaab leadership, but 
it was unlikely, Madobe thought, that Robow would make 
overtures to the TFG, as he did not trust its leadership. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Madobe disagreed with those who alleged that 
al-Shabaab's funding was drying up.  There has been a recent 
influx of foreigners, he said, and the organization seemed as 
robust as ever.  He implied that the World Food Program's 
humanitarian programs were benefiting al-Shabaab in areas it 
controlled, and urged that thought be given to channeling 
more aid to TFG-controlled areas. 
 
Parliament in Session 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The improvement in security had allowed 307 MPs to 
relocate to Mogadishu. The remaining 213, Madobe said, were 
traveling, in training, or fearful of moving to the Somali 
capital.  In its two plenary sessions to date, the Parliament 
had dispensed with all initial logistical problems, and 
agreed to increase the number of committees from fourteen to 
twenty-seven. 
 
Sharia Discussion 
----------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Madobe confirmed that the TFG was expected to 
present a framework for the discussion of the adoption of 
Sharia law very soon. (Prime Minister Sharmarke separately 
told Ambassador Yates that he would present the TFG's 
framework as early as April 4 or 5.)  If the conception was 
 
NAIROBI 00000679  002 OF 002 
 
 
acceptable to the Parliament, a committee to draft 
legislation on Sharia based the framework would be 
constituted.  Like the Prime Minister and President Sharif, 
Madobe expected that the version of Sharia to be presented by 
the TFG would be "in harmony with Somali traditions," and 
would not cause concern among members of the international 
community. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment: The initial decision to move the Parliament 
from Baidoa to Mogadishu met resistance from MPs --Madobe 
among them-- and clearly many parliamentarians have not 
agreed to attend plenaries in Somalia's sometimes violent 
capital.  It is unlikely, however, that the percentage of MPs 
present in Baidoa at any time exceeded that currently present 
in Mogadishu. Madobe joined virtually all of Somalia Unit's 
contacts in believing that the decision to introduce Sharia 
was driven largely by the need to neutralize the TFG's 
opposition, which had tabled Sharia as a litmus test for the 
new government.  More important to Madobe was the TFG's 
fragile hold on Mogadishu and the rising number of attacks 
targeted at prominent Somali personalities.  End Comment. 
 
Was this report useful?  Please send comments and questions 
to SomaliaWatchers@state.sgov.gov. 
RANNEBERGER