09NAIROBI2530
SOMALIA - NOMINATION FOR SECRETARY'S AWARD FOR INTERNATONAL
Fri Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXYZ0042
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNR #2530/01 3451434
ZNR UUUUU ZZH(CCY ADXEB5709 TOQ4391 532A)
O R 111433Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0079
INFO SOMALIA COLLECTIVEUNCLAS NAIROBI 002530 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y - PARAGRAPH FORMATTING AND REFERENCE 
NUMBER 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/PD, AND AF/E 
DEPT FOR S/GWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPAO PTER SO KWMN
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - NOMINATION FOR SECRETARY'S AWARD FOR INTERNATONAL 
 
REF: 07 STATE 116686 
 
¶1. (U) The Embassy Nairobi's Somalia Unit respectfully nominates 
the late Somalia Minister Dr. Qamar Aden Ali for the 2010 Secretary 
of State's Award for International Women of Courage.  Until her 
death on December 3, 2009, at the hands of a suicide bomber in 
Mogadishu, Dr. Ali was the Minister of Health for the Transitional 
Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia.  The selection of Dr. Ali 
would be a tribute to her undeniable courage, and would demonstrate 
the USG's resolve to support the beleaguered TFG in Somalia. 
 
¶2. (U) Dr. Qamar Aden Ali was murdered on December 3, 2009, along 
with two other ministers, both males, as well as several medical 
professionals and students, journalists, and bystanders when a 
suicide bomber detonated himself at a graduation ceremony for 
Somali medical students at Banadir University in Mogadishu.  The 
ceremony was honoring students who, in spite of the daily violence 
of Mogadishu, had persevered and were being awarded undergraduate 
degrees in medicine.  Many of the students had earned scholarships 
to continue their studies outside of Somalia, after which they 
planned to return to Somalia to practice medicine. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Qamar Aden Ali, of the Dir/Surre subclan, was born in 
Beledweyne, Somalia, in 1955.  A lawyer and a Political Scientist 
by training, she graduated from Gaheyr Law College (Somali National 
University) in Mogadishu in 1982, then earned graduate degrees in 
East Germany.  Upon the collapse of the Siad Barre regime in 1991, 
she settled in the United Kingdom, where she was involved with 
local Somali community associations and civil society groups.  Dr. 
Ali returned to Somalia in the late 1990s and entered the Somali 
political scene.  She actively participated in the 2002-2004 
Kenya-sponsored Somalia Reconciliation Conference, and secured a 
seat in the Transitional Federal Parliament.  From 2005 - 2007, she 
was TFG Minister of Health.  She re-joined the cabinet after the 
2008 Djibouti peace conference, again as Minister of Health.  Ms. 
Ali is survived by two children. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Multiple organizations have praised Dr. Ali for her 
unwavering dedication to the Somali people as Minister of Health, 
citing her as one of the most active ministers in the TFG.  She 
voluntarily left a comfortable life in the United Kingdom to return 
to her homeland in order to work for better conditions for all 
Somalis.  A high-level UN official has speculated that Dr. Ali was 
in fact the target of the bomb as a result of her activism and 
effectiveness, which the official said was seen by the extremists 
as a threat to their efforts to perpetuate instability in Somalia, 
and also cripple the TFG. 
 
¶5. (U) Dr. Ali also worked hard to forge bonds among Somalia's 
feuding regions.  She worked tirelessly to coordinate her 
activities with the Health Ministers of Somaliland and Puntland. 
Her far-sighted, pan-Somali approach was in sharp contrast to the 
work of many others, both in the TFG and in the regions. 
 
¶6. (U) A prominent civil society figure said Dr. Ali was "not only 
visionary in where her ministry should be in a given time but she 
was also making real time impact on people's lives."  He cited her 
initiative to establish a blood bank and her focus on child and 
maternal health - even in a country engulfed in war - as examples 
of her dedication to her work.  The civil society figure said that, 
"Whenever there was political wrangling, she did not want to be 
part of it. You could in fact see the disappointment in her face. 
She spent most of her time at hospitals and with doctors but 
whenever at a meeting, you could count on her to present ideas," 
and to make a difference.  He concluded, "She was inspirational. 
Somalia lost a capable and a courageous leader." 
 
 
¶7. (U) Dr. Marthe Everard, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
Representative for Somalia, described how Dr. Ali introduced 
herself by saying: "I am a doctor too, but not a medical doctor but 
a doctor in law."  Everard said Ali was bright, courageous, and 
active in advocating "health as a bridge to peace."  She said 
during a meeting in Mogadishu on September 16, 2009: "I strongly 
believe that good health and equity in access to health services 
can be an entry point for lasting peace in Somalia."  In her 
address during the tragic December 3 graduation ceremony, Dr. Ali 
proudly hoped that "this class of medical graduates will be the 
basis for re-establishment of the health system in Somalia; they 
will be absorbed by the Ministry of Health" and will treat the sick 
in Somalia. 
 
 
believe that good health and equity in access to health services 
can be an entry point for lasting peace in Somalia."  In her 
address during the tragic December 3 graduation ceremony, Dr. Ali 
proudly hoped that "this class of medical graduates will be the 
basis for re-establishment of the health system in Somalia; they 
will be absorbed by the Ministry of Health" and will treat the sick 
in Somalia. 
 
 
 
¶8. (U) A WHO statement after the bombing said that, "Dr. Ali was a 
tireless, energetic and influential advocate for health in Somalia 
who was determined to improve health standards and care for her 
fellow Somalis.  Dr. Ali worked very closely with the World Health 
Organization and was a strong supporter of WHO's activities to 
strengthen the country's health system."  The statement pointed out 
that the attack targeted a ceremony for medical students graduating 
from Banadir University, a teaching institution that is training 
Somalis to be able to provide healthcare for the millions of 
Somalis suffering from decades of humanitarian crisis. 
 
 
 
¶9. (U) We understand that there is no precedent for the 
posthumously conferring of an International Women of Courage award. 
Making an exception in Ms. Ali's case would pay tribute to her 
courage.  Her courage was recognized by the TFG, which named a new 
school after Dr. Ali after her death.  A posthumous award would 
also highlight the extremely dangerous conditions in which the 
struggling TFG must work, as well as the destructive role that the 
terrorist group al-Shabaab is playing in Somalia.  We strongly urge 
that the Department acknowledge Dr. Ali's undeniable courage by 
conferring this posthumous award. 
 
 
 
¶10. (U) Point of contact for this nomination is Public Affairs 
Officer for Somalia Mark Zimmer,  ZimmerMV@state.gov, TEL: 
254-20-363-6181. 
RANNEBERGER