09PARIS1745
FRANCE: US PHARMACEUTICAL FIRMS AGENDA
Wed Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO3899
RR RUEHIK
DE RUEHFR #1745/01 3571046
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231046Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7968
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 001745 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR FCS, MAS, MAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD KIPR FR
SUBJECT:  FRANCE: US PHARMACEUTICAL FIRMS AGENDA 
 
PARIS 00001745  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U): Ambassador Rivkin met with the board of AGIPHARM, the 
association of American pharmaceutical subsidiaries in France to 
review the results of President Sarkozy's pharmaceutical strategy 
conference (CSIS) held on October 26.  AGIPHARM considers that the 
CSIS yielded important breakthroughs but that key issues remain. 
The 10th Annual France-U.S.A. conference on "Access to 
Pharmaceutical Innovation," which will take place in Boston, MA on 
June 11, 2010, offers an excellent venue for discussing these 
issues, provided it can attract the right participants.  AGIPHARM 
asked Ambassador and EEB A/S Jose Fernandez to support high level 
participation by USG and senior American pharmaceutical executives. 
 
¶2. (SBU) President Sarkozy's advisor for health, Raphael Radanne met 
subsequently with FCS to explore themes of mutual interest for the 
conference.  These include addressing a perception that rigid French 
labor laws detract from an otherwise excellent investment climate 
for research and development in France, presenting the American 
model for public private partnerships in the pharmaceutical industry 
and considering best practices from the French healthcare system. 
Radanne agreed to promote the conference at the ministerial level of 
the GOF.  We understand that French Ambassador Pierre Vimont and 
former Prime Minister Jean Pierre Raffarin have already committed to 
attend the conference.  AGIPHARM will meet with Radanne in January 
to develop a detailed agenda for the conference.  End Summary 
 
Background:  AGIPHARM and USCS France 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) For more than 15 years, USCS France has worked closely with 
AGIPHARM (Association des Groupes Internationaux pour la Pharmacie 
de Recherche) composed of the subsidiaries of American research 
laboratories operating in France.  AGIPHARM is recognized by public, 
industrial and medical authorities as an involved and responsible 
key player in French public health issues.  AGIPHARM members are: 
Abbott, Amgen, Baxter, Biogen IDEC, Bristol-Myers Squibb BMS, 
Cephalon, Gilead, Janssen-Cilag, Lilly, Merck Sharp and Dohme MSD, 
Mundipharma, Pfizer, Procter and Gamble, Schering-Plough.  AGIPHARM 
member companies have created approximately 18,000 direct jobs in 
France.  This represents 18 percent of the total workforce in 
France's pharmaceutical industry.  They operate manufacturing 
facilities and distribution centers as well as R and D sites. 
AGIPHARM advocates for a legal, regulatory and economic climate that 
advances global health care by assuring access to the benefits of 
innovative pharmaceuticals. To achieve this, AGIPHARM promotes: 
 
-- Speedier product approval by industry regulators; 
 
-- Faster agreement by French health insurance to cover new products 
and higher prices for these products; 
 
-- Loosening strictures on direct communication including 
advertizing to key audiences including legislators, regulators, 
medical societies and patient organizations. 
 
Sarkozy Makes Pharma R and D a Strategic Sector 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. (U) On October 26, President Sarkozy announced plans to make 
France the priority destination for foreign investment in medical 
research, with the healthcare industry becoming "a centerpiece of 
French competitiveness" on par with its aerospace and luxury goods 
sectors.  To launch his new plan, President Sarkozy invited 15 CEOs 
of major foreign pharmaceutical and medical device companies - 
including three U.S. firms - to take part in a meeting of the 
Strategic Council for Health Industries (CSIS), a council created by 
then President Chirac in 2004 but which had not met for three years. 
Five ministers (Economy Minister Christine Lagarde, Budget Minister 
Woerth, Health Minister Bachelot, Industry Minister Estrosi, and 
Research Minister Pecresse) took part in small roundtables, along 
with President Sarkozy himself. 
 
¶5.  (U) AGIPHARM considers that Sarkozy broke important new ground 
through his personal participation, his designation of pharma as a 
strategic sector and through practical measures; e.g., companies can 
now charge two prices for drugs: one fixed price for pharmaceutical 
products reimbursed by French Social Security and an unregulated 
price for export. This pricing strategy will prevent parallel 
imports that undercut companies' marketing strategy and sales in 
export markets, a key issue for all U.S. firms. 
 
¶6.  (U) A second very positive point: to prevent subcontractors from 
manufacturing generic drugs in low-cost countries like China, India 
and Brazil, which could siphon off 5,000 French jobs, the 
President's plan allows companies to produce generics in France a 
few weeks before patents expire so that products can be ready for 
 
PARIS 00001745  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
sale as soon as the patent ends. In France, the generics market 
represents 20 percent of the drug market, compared to 4 percent in 
¶2004. France has been promoting generic drugs as part of overall 
healthcare reforms. 
 
Dialog with Ambassador Rivkin 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) On December 8, CEOs of 14 U.S. subsidiaries briefed the 
Ambassador on key issues concerning operations and sales in France. 
For most U.S. firms, France represents the largest market outside of 
the United States.  All CEOs noted that French tax credits on 
Research and Development, plus the highly qualified French 
scientific and technical personnel, make France an excellent 
location for R and D.  Unfortunately, the rigid labor laws and the 
extremely complex consultations with unions required for almost any 
change have given France a poor image in U.S. corporate 
headquarters.  Despite the success of the CSIS meeting, there remain 
other issues to pursue with the GOF.  Public Private Partnerships 
(PPPs), for example, fascinate the GOF, but the GOF tends to view 
this as a way to gain private sector financing for government 
projects.  AGIPHARM, by contrast, wants to see PPPs lead to greater 
cooperation on epidemiological data bases, which could serve as a 
measure of effectiveness of innovative products. The 10th annual 
France-U.S.A. conference on "Access to Pharmaceutical Innovation," 
which will take place in Boston, MA on June 11, 2010, offers an 
excellent venue for discussing these issues, provided it can attract 
the right participants.  Ambassador Rivkin and visiting EEB A/S 
Fernandez, offered to promote this conference to senior U.S. and 
French policy makers and top U.S. pharmaceutical executives. 
 
Meeting with Presidential Advisor on Health 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) On December 14, FCS SCO and Commercial Specialist met with 
Raphael Radanne, Technical Advisor to President Sarkozy, to 
emphasize Embassy support for the dialog between the GOF and the 
American pharma subsidiaries in France.  SCO offered three themes 
that could be of mutual interest. 
 
-- Sector Image.  While France has a lot to offer as a place for 
research and development, there continues to be an image problem in 
U.S. HQs regarding the rigidity of the labor market.  Radanne 
acknowledged this image problem in the U.S. business community.  SCO 
emphasized the opportunity to address this image problem at the 
conference, especially after President Sarkozy's strong commitments 
for the pharmaceutical sector.  This would involve the Ministry of 
Finance and the Ministry of Industry to describe the reforms 
President Sarkozy is undertaking to provide greater flexibility. 
 
-- Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs).  SCO proposed that PPPs 
should be an important theme of the 10th conference, especially to 
showcase examples of successful PPPs in the U.S. as they relate to 
pharmaceutical R and D.  Radanne responded enthusiastically on this 
theme, noting that President Sarkozy has made PPPs a priority. 
 
-- Healthcare Reform.  SCO noted that the healthcare reform would 
probably pass the Congress, but that the debate over implementation 
would continue.  Hearing some best practices from France would be 
useful.  Radanne agreed and added that the current healthcare reform 
in the U.S. is of great interest for France's decision makers in 
that field.  He stated that, should pharmaceutical products 
experience price cuts on the U.S. market, it is very likely that 
laboratories will then try to raise prices in foreign markets. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Significantly, Radanne offered to reach out to Ministers 
Bachelot (Health), Estrosi (Industry) and even Lagarde (Finance) in 
order to promote participation of those Ministers in the 10th 
conference, once we have a final agenda. We agreed that both sides 
would have to work in tandem to raise the level of participants if 
the conference were to have real impact.  AGIPHARM will meet with 
Radanne in January to discuss the agenda in detail. 
 
10th France - U.S. AGIPHARM Conference, 6/2010 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Since the meeting with Radanne, we understand that French 
Ambassador to the U.S. Pierre Vimont, Jean Pierre Raffarin - former 
French Prime Minister who created the "Competitive Clusters" - and 
Louis Giscard d'Estaing - who chairs the France - USA Friendship 
Group at the French National Assembly - have tentatively agreed to 
participate in the conference.  If these speakers are confirmed, it 
should help to attract high ranking executives from the U.S. pharma 
industry and from the GOF and USG.  The conference is scheduled for 
June 10 and 11, 2010, in Boston. 
 
RIVKIN