09PRETORIA1914
South Africa: Minerals and Energy Newsletter "THE ASSAY" -
Thu Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO8075
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHSA #1914/01 2601445
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171445Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9640
INFO RUCPDC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1025
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 0880
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1787
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 1030
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 0627
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0839
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1632
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 0001
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 PRETORIA 001914 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID 
STATE PLEASE PASS USGS 
DEPT FOR AF/S, EEB/ESC AND CBA 
DOE FOR SPERL AND PERSON 
DOC FOR ITA/DIEMOND 
 
E.O.   12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ENRG EMIN EINV EIND ETRD ELAB KHIV SF
SUBJECT: South Africa: Minerals and Energy Newsletter "THE ASSAY" - 
Issue 8, August 2009 
 
This cable is not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Introduction:  The purpose of this newsletter, initiated in 
January 2004, is to highlight minerals and energy developments in 
South Africa.  This includes trade and investment as well as supply. 
 South Africa hosts world-class deposits of gold, diamonds, platinum 
group metals, chromium, zinc, titanium, vanadium, iron, manganese, 
antimony, vermiculite, zircon, alumino-silicates, fluorspar and 
phosphate rock, and is a major exporter of steam coal.  South Africa 
is also a leading producer and exporter of ferroalloys of chromium, 
vanadium, and manganese.  The information contained in the 
newsletters is based on public sources and does not reflect the 
views of the United States Government.  End introduction. 
 
¶2. (SBU) CONTENTS: 
 
HOT NEWS 
SA Gold Production Down by 12.2% 
 
ENERGY 
Licenses for U.S. Forest Gas Project 
Expertise for Angola Oil 
Eskom's Plants on Track but Delayed 
Carbon Capture a Transitional Measure 
Promotion Renewable Energy Projects 
Eskom Sole Purchaser of Electricity 
Sasol Sponsors Solar Energy Research 
 
MINING 
Malawi's Mining Starting to Blossom 
Using Acid Mine Drainage as Water Resource 
Phosphoric Acid Plant to Close 
Are Fatalities in SA Deep Mines Avoidable? 
State Mining Company - No Final Decision 
Redundant Diamond Equipment Scrapped 
 
-------- 
HOT NEWS 
-------- 
 
-------------------------------- 
SA Gold Production Down by 12.2% 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) South African gold and non-gold production was lower by 
12.2% and 7.3%, respectively, in June 2009 compared to June 2008, 
according to Statistics South Africa.  Total mining production for 
the second quarter of 2009 decreased by 10.7% compared with the 
second quarter of 2008, but total mining production for the second 
quarter of 2009 increased by 4.5% compared with the previous 
quarter.  Platinum group metal (PGM) production was up by 4% and was 
the main contributor to this increase.  According to the latest 
mining production and sales data, total mineral sales decreased by 
33.1% to $2.25 billion in May 2009 when compared with the same month 
in 2008. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Gold sales at $500 million were up 3.5% year-on-year in 
May, while non-gold sales fell 39% to $1.75 billion in the same 
month.  The total adjusted value of mineral sales at current prices 
for the three months ended May 2009 reflected a decrease of 0.8% 
compared with the previous three months.  This was a result of a 
decrease of 2.5% in the sale of non-gold minerals.  The estimated 
total value of mineral sales at current prices for the three months 
ended May 2009 decreased by 24.1% compared with the three months to 
end May 2008.  Statistics South Africa said major contributors to 
this decrease were PGMs, manganese ore, coal, and other non-metallic 
minerals.  Iron ore and gold were the only major minerals that made 
positive contributions to sales. 
 
------ 
ENERGY 
QENERGY 
------ 
 
PRETORIA 00001914  002 OF 008 
 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
Licenses for U.S. Forest Gas Project 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Forest Oil Commercial Director John Langhus announced at 
the end of August that the Department of Mineral Resources (DMR) had 
granted Forest and its partners a 30-year Production Right for Block 
2A of the Ibhubesi Gas Project.  The Ibhubesi partners are U.S. firm 
Forest Exploration International (52.8%), state oil company PetroSA 
(24%), and U.S. firm Anschutz Overseas (22.2%).  The license covers 
the development of a natural gas field off the west coast of South 
Africa.  The area comprising 5,000 square kilometers is situated 350 
kilometers northwest of Cape Town and 100 kilometers offshore from 
the coast.  Exploration will be in four phases and will involve the 
sinking of 99 wells over a period of 20 years.  The expectation is 
that there will be sufficient gas to power a 700 megawatt station, 
which would provide about 35% of the energy needs of the Western 
Cape.  The western region of South Africa has no energy resources or 
power generation facilities, with the exception of the 1,800 
megawatt Koeberg nuclear plant, and must import the balance of its 
needs from coal-fired plants in the rest of the country. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Ibhubesi was initially discovered by Soekor, the previous 
government-owned oil exploration company, which has been merged into 
PetroSA.  The Ibhubesi partners began exploring the field 1998 and 
have invested over $100 million to date.  An estimated further 
capital spend of $3-4 billion will be required over the period of 
the Production Right.  The marketing plan is to deliver gas to 
industries along the west coast down to Cape Town in the south. 
Direct employment is estimated to be 115 permanent jobs and about 
twice that number during construction.  Indirectly, it will provide 
energy to fuel thousands of new jobs along the west coast.  At a 
signing ceremony held in Cape Town, speakers included: Petroleum 
Agency of South Africa (PASA) CEO Mthozami Xiphu representing the 
National Government; the Minister for Economic Development, Trade 
and Tourism Alan Winde representing the Provincial Government; and 
Wesgro Head of Investment Promotion, Rameez Johaar.  Forest's John 
Langhus and COO JC Ridens represented Ibhubesi Partners and Dr. 
Alberta Mayberry, American Consul General in Cape Town, represented 
the U.S. government.  Dr. Mayberry said:  "the agreement is an 
example of what President Barack Obama would like to see, namely 
economic development partnerships with South Africa and the whole of 
Africa." 
 
--------------------------- 
SA Expertise for Angola Oil 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) South African President Jacob Zuma visited Angola in 
mid-August on his first official state visit, together with the 
largest business-related delegation to Angola since South Africa's 
1994 democratic elections.  Frost and Sullivan's African program 
manager for energy and power supplies said South Africa, an 
Qmanager for energy and power supplies said South Africa, an 
oil-dependent country, imports much of its oil from Iran.  Friendly 
ties with Angola would be of mutual benefit to both countries and 
possibly ensure a secure supply of oil for South Africa.  South 
Africa has engineering skills and expertise in project management 
and financial systems, which are needed in Angola and could be 
applied in exchange for oil.  This represents an opportunity for 
South African companies and a major deal with Angola would boost the 
South African economy.  An agreement between the countries would 
open up new markets for South African companies and provide access 
to some of Angola's minerals and oil. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Angola is also China's biggest supplier of oil in exchange 
for which it has given Angola financial aid and expertise.  China's 
Sinohydro Corporation's spokesperson says the company has invested 
$2.4 billion in Angola since the end of the civil war in 2002 to 
rebuild infrastructure.  It is currently building new hospitals, 
irrigation canals, and other infrastructure aimed at improving the 
lives of ordinary Angolans.  Frost views China as a competitor to 
 
PRETORIA 00001914  003 OF 008 
 
 
South Africa, but says the rebuilding of Angola needs more help than 
China can deliver on its own.  However, corruption is a major 
stumbling block for future development.  Angola's total oil exports 
in October are set to hit their highest level this year at around 
1.90 million barrels per day (bpd) of crude, up 50,000 bpd from 
September and well above its implied OPEC target.  Angola's 
production is higher than its exports as it has a refinery able to 
process 60,000 bpd.  Its crude oil exports approached 2.0 million 
bpd in the fourth quarter of 2008, but fell to 1.60 million bpd in 
February 2009, according to Reuters data. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Eskom's Plants on Track but Delayed 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Power utility Eskom's new Kusile coal-fired power station 
will be commissioned in June 2013, despite some teething problems, 
according to civil engineering contractor Stefanutti Stocks.  The 
company is leading a consortium of construction companies, which 
were awarded the civil works contract for the new 4,800 megawatt 
power station in Mpumalanga Province.  The contract is worth about 
$360 million.  The project manager claims that some 20% of the early 
civil structures are complete and, given no further delays, the 
plant should be completed within four years, with the first unit 
operational in two-and-a-half years and the others commissioned at 
six-monthly intervals thereafter.  The power station will house six 
800 megawatt units and a closed cooling system.  Eskom is also 
currently building the 4,800 megawatt Medupi power plant in Limpopo 
Province, which will be its first new power station in more than two 
decades.  Medupi's first 800 megawatt unit was expected to be 
operational by September 2011, but is four to six months behind 
schedule.  Similarly, commissioning of the first unit of its Ingula 
pumped-storage plant, on the border between the Free State and 
KwaZulu-Natal provinces, has been delayed by between three and four 
months from its initial 2012 commissioning date. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Industry analysts worry that Eskom's failure to resolve 
its $20 billion funding shortfall may cause it to delay any one of 
its three major projects, namely coal-fired Medupi and Kusile, or 
pump-storage Ingula -- costing a total of about $30 billion.  This 
would have negative implications for the country's energy-intensive 
industries, employment, and possibly slow its emergence from the 
economic recession.   Eskom and the state are likely to do all they 
can to avoid this happening.  First power from Medupi is set for 
April 2012, Kusile by June 2013, and Ingula's commissioning by 
October 2013.  Eskom says these key projects are unaffected by its 
cash problems.  However, construction industry sources say Eskom 
appears to be taking longer to issue the smaller project tenders. 
Analysts believe there are three ways that Eskom could fund its 
expansions during the next five years to March 2013: 
Qexpansions during the next five years to March 2013: 
-- getting the National Energy Regulator to grant substantial tariff 
increases; 
-- raising debt on local and international markets; 
-- raising soft loans from the government. 
All these are problematic, given the current financing environment 
and political sensitivities.  However, Eskom's funding demands could 
be ameliorated by making investment in power generation attractive 
to private and foreign independent power producers (IPPs).  This 
would require a realistic tariff structure and an investor-friendly 
fiscal, legal, and regulatory framework.  The government's stated 
aim is to have IPPs produce 30% of new power, but under existing 
circumstances their contribution is unlikely to increase, despite 
the latest tariff increases. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Carbon Capture a Transitional Measure 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Carbon capture and storage (CCS) will be a transitional 
measure to bridge the gap between South Africa's reliance on fossil 
fuels and its greater reliance on nuclear and renewable energy 
forms, said South African National Energy Research Institute 
 
PRETORIA 00001914  004 OF 008 
 
 
(Saneri) senior manager Tony Surridge at an Energy Efficiency 
conference in mid-August.  He noted that it was unlikely that CCS 
could be implemented in South Africa without carbon trading to 
offset the high cost of CCS.  The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) 
does not accept CCS for trading, but the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is dealing with this issue. 
South Africa is currently compiling a carbon dioxide (CO2) storage 
atlas using existing geological information to identify potential 
sites for the storage of CO2 from industrial sources that primarily 
use coal and is on schedule for completion by the middle of 2009. 
The country is also planning to implement a CO2 injection pilot 
project by 2016 and a demonstration plant by 2020.  The atlas is 
being sponsored by petrochemical company Sasol, power utility Eskom, 
state oil company PetroSA, multi-national mining company Anglo 
American, and Saneri for an amount of $250,000. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The captured CO2 will be compressed into liquid form and 
injected into storage sites in deep geological formations, such as 
saline reservoirs, coal seams, and depleted oil and gas fields. 
International capture technology can be acquired, but storage 
potential is specific to local circumstances that must be identified 
and measured.  Storage reservoirs are commonly associated with the 
sedimentary basins in which oil and gas occur.  South Africa lacks 
these, but the onshore central basin of the Karoo Supergroup, with 
its substantial sedimentary formations, may offer storage 
opportunities.  Offshore sedimentary rocks along the coastline also 
hold some potential for storage.  The Council for Geoscience (CGS) 
and PetroSA intend to publish the initial assessment of storage 
potential in a user friendly atlas by April 2010.  The atlas will 
illustrate the distribution and ranking of potential geological CO2 
storage reservoirs, including: 
-- estimated CO2 storage capacities; 
-- main CO2 emission sources; 
-- location of industrial hubs; 
-- location of pipelines; and 
-- other factors that may have a bearing on storage feasibility. 
This information will provide guidance for further exploration 
should CCS technologies be used in South Africa. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Promoting Renewable Energy Projects 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) The South African Department of Energy's (DOE) Clean 
Energy Division Chief Director David Mahuma said it was developing 
financial instruments to promote renewable energy in South Africa. 
Mahuma said the government recognized and accepted that there were 
economic barriers to the uptake of renewable energy.  He mentioned a 
number of initiatives established by DOE to develop financial 
instruments, such as the recently published renewable energy 
feed-in-tariff (REFIT); the renewable energy finance and subsidy 
office (REFSO); the renewable energy market transformation (REMT) 
project; and the potential use of tradable renewable energy 
Qproject; and the potential use of tradable renewable energy 
certificates. 
 
 
¶14. (SBU) DOE's New and Renewable Energy Director Nomawethu Qase 
explained that a renewable energy policy framework was established 
in 2003 and was currently under review.  This framework set a 
renewable energy contribution target of 4% of total power generation 
capacity, equal to about 10,000 gigawatt-hours (GWh) by 2013.  Qase 
encouraged independent power producer (IPP) participation in meeting 
these targets and said there was also a role for power utility Eskom 
to play and that Eskom should contribute some 6,000 GWh towards the 
target.  The criteria for selecting IPPs still needs to be clarified 
and will remain unclear until an integrated resource plan is 
completed.  This would deal with plant location preferences to allow 
for grid stabilization and mitigate transmission losses. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Eskom Sole Purchaser of Electricity 
----------------------------------- 
 
PRETORIA 00001914  005 OF 008 
 
 
 
¶15. (SBU) State power utility Eskom has been designated the 
renewable energy purchasing authority (REPA), and the sole buyer of 
electricity.  It is responsible for entering into agreements with 
renewable energy (RE) power generators and for payment of power 
purchased from them.  Eskom said it is committed to shortening the 
time taken to conclude power purchase agreements and would also be 
responsible for the cost of transporting power from the place of 
generation to the Eskom transmission grid.  Eskom Market Development 
Manager Yousuf Haffajee said that the challenge of connecting 
generators to the grid should not be underestimated.  He also said a 
successful renewable energy program required supportive government 
policies and a feed-in-tariff (REFIT) that gives a fair return to 
both project developers and purchasers.  Eskom would need to ensure 
that it had sufficient funds to pay for the more expensive RE. 
Haffajee noted that an estimated $375 million per year would be 
needed to meet the 700 megawatt target for RE set for 2013 and that 
a large electricity price increase would be required to meet the 
target and costs.  He noted that tariffs were already under pressure 
for Eskom's build programs and decisions would have to be made for 
additional funding schemes, beyond tariffs, and to ensure that cost 
recovery mechanisms where in place. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Sasol Sponsors Solar Energy Research 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶16. (SBU) Petrochemicals giant Sasol has announced a sponsorship of 
$375,000 over the next five years to support solar thermal energy 
research by the University of Stellenbosch's Department of 
Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering.  The money will be used to 
appoint a senior researcher to lead the research effort and to 
purchase new equipment for the University's Solar Roof Laboratory. 
The funding is in addition to an investment of $500,000 by the 
university to expand solar research facilities and to appoint 
additional staff.  Senior Director of Research and Innovation Dr 
Therina Theron said Stellenbosch sees environmental sustainability 
and renewable energy as a key focus area for research and was 
looking forward to developing more industry partnerships in this 
area.  The department has focused on bulk renewable solar power 
generation over the last 11 years.  Solar thermal energy research 
also supports Sasol's initiative to investigate opportunities in the 
field of renewable energies and low-carbon electricity.  Sasol has 
been identified as the world's single biggest point source of green 
house gas. 
 
¶17. (SBU) During 2008, Sasol formed a New Energy division with the 
prime aim of developing business opportunities to reduce the 
company's green house gas footprint.  Southern Africa is blessed 
with some of the best solar radiation in the world, which is why 
Sasol supports the development of solar energy technologies as a 
viable renewable energy source for Southern Africa within a carbon 
Qviable renewable energy source for Southern Africa within a carbon 
constrained future.  Sasol reiterated its commitment to renewable 
energy research saying: "In bridging the gap towards a carbon 
constrained energy future, renewable energy and specifically solar 
energy, will play an ever increasing strategic role.  We need to 
understand this technology environment and be ready with the 
technology alternatives."  Stellenbosch University has established 
research and teaching expertise spanning a wide spectrum in 
renewable energy, and in particular in solar thermal energy. 
 
------ 
MINING 
------ 
 
----------------------------------- 
Malawi's Mining Starting to Blossom 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) Malawi is not generally recognized as a mining country. 
Nevertheless, Australia's Paladin Uranium recently started 
production at its $200 million Kayelekera uranium mine.  The country 
 
PRETORIA 00001914  006 OF 008 
 
 
also has known resources of the aluminum-bearing mineral bauxite, 
and there is the prospect of it becoming a producer of niobium. 
Niobium is a rare ductile transition metal used in the production of 
steel, super alloys, and super-conductors.  The South African 
engineering firm Thuthuka has agreed to invest $10.6 million in a 
joint venture to develop the Kanyika niobium project, owned by 
Australian-listed Globe Metals & Mining.  A bankable feasibility 
study is due to be completed by December 2010.  Kanyika's planned 
production is 3,000 tons per year of niobium metal, which is 
expected to start in 2012.  This will establish the company as the 
world's fourth-largest producer of ferro-niobium. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Acid Mine Drainage as Water Resource 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶19. (SBU) Watermark Global, a UK-listed company that focuses on the 
treatment of acid mine drainage (AMD) in South Africa, has completed 
verification of the mine water resource in the Witwatersrand gold 
basin.  The resource verification, carried out by Golder Associates, 
has confirmed that the daily recharge into the western, central and 
eastern basins is 155 million liters. Watermark's subsidiary, 
Western Utilities Corporation, plans to produce between 50 and 70 
million liters of industrial quality water per day for re-use by 
mines, with excess AMD being converted to potable water for sale to 
bulk distributors, including the state water utility Rand Water. The 
results of the bankable feasibility study are expected at the end of 
September, and the company plans to start construction by the first 
quarter of 2010. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Sasol to Close Phosphoric Acid Plant 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶20. (SBU) Petrochemical company Sasol has announced the possible 
closure of its Sasol Nitro phosphoric acid operations in Phalaborwa. 
 The plant manufactures phosphoric acid from phosphate rock and 
sulfur and its profitability is determined by a combination of the 
prices of the feed products and sale volumes and prices of 
phosphoric acid on the international market.  Sasol Nitro buys its 
phosphate rock from the neighboring state-owned Foskor mine, which 
increased the price to such an extent that Sasol considered shutting 
down its plant in 2004.  According to Sasol, despite having explored 
a number of options, current feedstock prices and a declining 
phosphoric acid market have rendered the plant's ongoing operation 
unsustainable and the plant is projecting significant losses for 
¶2009.  Plant closure would affect 245 employees at the plant, and 
another 250 service provider employees.  Sasol says it will endeavor 
to redeploy employees to other Sasol operations where possible.  The 
plant was designed to produce 325,000 tons of phosphoric acid of 
which 100,000 tons have already been mothballed.  Most of this 
product is used by the fertilizer industry and to produce animal 
Qproduct is used by the fertilizer industry and to produce animal 
feed products. 
 
¶21. (SBU) Conversely, state-owned mining and fertilizer 
manufacturing company Foskor more than doubled its annual profit in 
2008 from the production of phosphoric acid and phosphate 
fertilizer.  It has said it would like to buy Sasol's phosphoric 
acid plant as it would form part of the group's core business. 
Foskor's spokesperson said that at least one earlier attempt to buy 
the plant had been blocked by the antitrust authorities.  The Foskor 
plant produces phosphoric acid from phosphate rock mined at the 
company's adjacent mine.  Foskor is spending $150 million to expand 
production by 14% to 2.85 million tons of phosphate rock within the 
next two years as part of its growth strategy and is conducting 
feasibility studies to broaden its product range away from 
conventional fertilizer.  Foskor's chief executive said a 
combination of record harvests and food shortages for both humans 
and animals fuelled the need for better crop yields, thus boosting 
fertilizer demand, and phosphoric acid prices almost doubled from 
the start of the financial year and peaked at about $2,200 a ton in 
August 2009.  The cost of raw materials such as sulfur and ammonia 
 
PRETORIA 00001914  007 OF 008 
 
 
has increased exponentially, but the company has been able to 
counter some of these increases as it is one of the few vertically 
integrated companies in the world. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Are Fatalities in SA Deep Mines Avoidable? 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶22. (SBU) Recent mining-related deaths have once again raised the 
question of whether fatalities in South Africa's deep gold and 
platinum mines are avoidable.  Some 167 deaths were recorded in 2008 
and so far this year more than 100 miners have died, mainly on gold 
and platinum mines.  While mine management now universally recognize 
a single death is unacceptable, the number of deaths and the 
fatality rate per thousand workers has steadily declined from 774 
and 1.12 in 1984 to 167 and less than 0.40 in 2008, respectively. 
Mining journalist Brendan Ryan opines that the only way to mine at 
great depths without fatalities is by mechanization. Otherwise he 
says fatalities are inevitable.  He says mine management has 
dedicated itself to attaining a zero fatality rate over time, but 
the realities of deep level mining with its generally unpredictable 
seismic events, pressure bursts, and falls of rock mean fatalities 
and accidents will occur, irrespective of management's best efforts. 
 Ryan says Australian resource giant BHP Billiton has not ventured 
into platinum mining in South Africa because it concluded fatalities 
are inevitable. 
 
¶23. (SBU) The answer probably lies in the combination of better mine 
planning and layout, safety awareness and training, changes in 
attitude of both miners and management focusing on safety and safe 
working conditions, more stringent safety regulations, and other 
measures, short of stopping mining altogether.  The latter step 
would have a devastating impact on the country's economy, 
employment, and social stability and is therefore not an acceptable 
alternative, despite Gold Fields CEO's statement that if they cannot 
mine without fatalities they would not mine at all.  Similarly, 
labor would not accept the loss of jobs and would probably push for 
nationalization of the mines, with little improvement in safety. 
The ultimate answer is to reduce the number of people underground 
and place machines in high-risk areas.  The challenge is nobody has 
yet developed a viable mechanized mining system for the narrow ore 
bodies found in South African mines.  Unions generally oppose 
mechanization because it would take away jobs -- recent attempts by 
Impala Platinum to bring in a safer and more productive drilling 
system at the mining face were opposed by workers concerned about 
job losses.  However, Secretary General of the National Union of 
Mineworkers says that as long as the purpose of mechanization isn't 
to reduce jobs the union is not opposed to it and they accept 
AngloGold Ashanti's study that to mine five kilometers below surface 
would require mechanization. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Q---------------------------------------- 
State Mining Company - No Final Decision 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶24. (SBU) The South African cabinet has agreed to suspend the 
disposal of mining assets held by state entities, a move that may 
lead to the creation of a state mining company, government spokesman 
Themba Maseko said in early August.  Maseko said at a post-cabinet 
briefing that the moratorium was intended to provide the minister of 
mineral resources adequate time to conduct and finalize an audit of 
mining interests held directly or indirectly by the state.  The 
audit will enable the state to decide whether to consolidate, 
retain, or dispose of such interests.  Maseko said it was too early 
to suggest the moratorium would lead to the establishment of a 
national mining company, an idea mulled by the ruling ANC but 
criticized by mining analysts as unworkable.  He said there was no 
decision to set up a state mining company, although the review may 
lead government to set one up.  He said state mineral assets were 
owned without being registered on a central data base and there was 
a need to decide what to do with these assets -- dispose or develop 
them. 
 
PRETORIA 00001914  008 OF 008 
 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
Redundant Diamond Equipment Scrapped 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶25. (SBU) Major diamond finds along Namibia's Coast at the turn of 
the 20th century led to a thriving diamond mining industry that 
stretched from the Orange River in the south to Luderitz and beyond 
in the north, a distance of more than 200 kilometers.  Mining 
currently takes place along the beaches, in the surf zone, and in 
the sea.  The largest player until 1994 was Consolidated Diamond 
Mines (CDM), which was wholly owned by the diamond giant De Beers. 
In 1994, a new agreement was concluded with the government of 
Namibia, resulting in the formation of the Namdeb Diamond Corp, 
which is jointly owned by the Namibian government and De Beers. 
Given the high intrinsic value of Namibian diamonds, all operations 
are governed by strict security protocols for mining, processing, 
handling, and transporting of diamonds.  One security measure is 
that all equipment going into any diamond mining area, albeit a 
dozer, pick-up truck, or excavator, never comes out again.  At the 
end of its useful life it is dumped on a local scrap heap.  Over 
more than 60 years of mining, these scrap heaps have accumulated 
tens of thousands of tons of valuable scrap metal. 
 
¶26. (SBU) Namdeb has taken the decision to clear these scrap heaps 
for environmental and practical reasons, and has given Cape Town 
based SA Metal company the contract to recycle and process the 
materials on site prior to their release from secured areas. 
Barloworld Equipment Namibia and Caterpillar have supplied the 
shearing equipment to cut up the scrap and training for SA Metal 
operators in the use of this equipment.  According to SA Metal, the 
contract commenced in July 2008, is open-ended, is expected last for 
about three years, and will yield some 250,000 tons of saleable 
metal.  Because of the corrosive nature of the west coast, any 
pre-1960 metal will have rusted away.  Namdeb's scrap metal 
stockpile represents one of the world's largest and the scale of the 
operation is so big that the site is clearly visible from space. 
Everything was mixed together during dumping operations, so the 
metal and non-metal materials must be separated and the metals 
sorted into elements such as copper, steel, lead, and zinc.  The 
material is sourced from a main and an estimated 15 satellite mines 
spread over a distance of some 110 kilometers up and down the coast. 
 
GIPS