09SARAJEVO1065
INVITATION FOR THE SECRETARY TO ATTEND CLOSING
Fri Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sarajevo
VZCZCXYZ0007
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHVJ #1065/01 2470952
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 040952Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY SARAJEVO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0737UNCLAS SARAJEVO 001065 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SCE (HIGHLAND,FOOKS). 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL BA
SUBJECT: INVITATION FOR THE SECRETARY TO ATTEND CLOSING 
CEREMONY OF THE BRCKO SUPERVISOR'S OFFICE 
 
¶1. (U) The Embassy received a diplomatic note (paragraph 2) 
with a copy of an official letter (paragraph 3) from 
Presidency Chairman Komsic, inviting the Secretary to attend 
the official closing ceremony in mid-November for the office 
of the Supervisor of Brcko District. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin Text of Diplomatic Note: 
 
The Office of the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and 
herzegovina presents its compliments to the Embassy of the 
United States in Sarajevo and has the honour to forward the 
copy of the invitation letter from the Chairman of the 
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina H.E. Mr. Zeljko Komsic, 
sent to the US State Secretary, Hon. Hillary R. Clinton for 
the occasion of closing ceremony of the Office of the 
Supervisor of Brcko District. 
 
The invitation was sent through the diplomatic channels and 
we have the honour to send you the copy of the invitation. 
 
The Office of the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the 
Embassy of the United States of America in Sarajevo the 
assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
Sarajevo, August 24th 2009. End text. 
 
 
¶3. (3) Begin Text of Invitation Letter: 
 
Dear Secretary Clinton, 
 
The United States of America has played a vital role in 
bringing peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), helping it to 
recover from the war, and making it possible for it to pursue 
its manifest destiny as members of both NATO and the European 
Union. 
 
Nowhere in BiH has the US peacekeeping effort been more 
present, visible or successful than in Brcko District, the 
strategically important area in northeastern BiH. 
 
In the November 1995 negotiations to end the war in BiH, the 
parties could not agree how to resolve the Entities' 
competing claims regarding the boundary line between 
Republika Srpska and the federation in the Brcko area.  The 
disagreement was serious, but rather than return to war, the 
Entities agreed to subject their dispute to a building 
arbitration. 
 
In March, 1999, the Arbitral Tribunal for the dispute over 
the Brcko area issued its Final Award, which directed the 
establishment of a single, unitary, multiethnic unit of local 
self-governance directly under the sovereignty of BiH. 
Although the Final Award made the territory of Brcko a 
condominium of both entities, both were deemed to have 
permanently delegated all their powers of governance to the 
new local iQitutions of Brcko District. 
Thanks primarily to US leadership, capability, and resources, 
the people of Brcko have succeeded in establishing a truly 
multiethnic Distric that serves as an example for police, 
schools, and public administration. 
The American role in Brcko has been a key to its success. 
The District was formally inaugurated in March 2000 by then 
US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.  All Brchko 
Supervisors have been Americans, while American jurist Amb. 
Roberts Owen has continued as the President of the Arbitral 
Tribunal.  Americans made up the vast majority of the 
peacekeeping troops, police, and government specialist who 
helped bring peace, insured freedom of movement, and 
established the District,s many institutions.  Brcko became 
a sister city of St. Louis, Missouri in May 2008. 
We expect Supervision to come to a formal end in mid-November 
of this year given the successful implementation of the Final 
Award.  Brcko District and the Supervisor,s Brcko Final 
Award Office intended to mark the occasion with a suitably 
festive but nonetheless solemn ceremony.  Given your personal 
interest in BiH, as well as your predecessor,s role in 
inaugurating the District, we think it would be most fitting 
if you could be present to help mark the closing of this very 
successful chapter of US peacekeeping efforts.  As such, it 
is our great pleasure and distinct privilege to invite you to 
participate in the closing ceremony.  While we expect 
Supervision to formally end on 19 November, the day of the 
closing ceremony can be suitably adjusted to accommodate any 
commitments you may already have. 
 
Respectfully, 
Zeljko Komsik 
Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 
Dr. Raffi Gregorian 
Supervisor of Brcko District 
 
Dr. Dragan Pajic 
Mayor of Brcko District 
 
Mr. Mirsad Djapo 
President of the Brcko District Assembly 
 
End Text 
MOORE