09SKOPJE587
MACEDONIA PLEDGES SUPPORT FOR AFGHANISTAN
Fri Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Skopje
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSQ #0587/01 3381730
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041730Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY SKOPJE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8729
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3774UNCLAS SKOPJE 000587 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/FO, EUR/SCE, EUR/RPM 
STATE PLEASE PASS NSC HOVENIER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS NATO AF MK
SUBJECT: MACEDONIA PLEDGES SUPPORT FOR AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. This is an action request - please see para. 4. 
 
¶2. In response to President Obama's speech on the way forward in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan, President Ivanov wrote a letter addressed 
to the President (shared with the media here) in which he commended 
President Obama for his leadership in this important effort.  The 
letter also documented Macedonia's continual support for the ISAF 
Mission from 2002, highlighting that over 1100 soldiers have served 
there, including the current deployment of 163.  President Ivanov 
added that 79 more soldiers will join the current contingent at the 
beginning of 2010 in a joint mission with the Vermont National 
Guard.  Full text in para. 6. 
 
¶3. Macedonia's soldiers have served with distinction in ISAF (and 
with no caveats), and have received numerous medals from NATO 
allies.  They also were one of our allies in Iraq until the new 
U.S.-Iraq Status of Forces Agreement ended their deployment at the 
end of 2008.  Their distinguished service there resulted in 163 
medals including eight Bronze Stars. 
 
¶4. Action request: Post requests a letter from President Obama 
thanking Macedonia for its continued support for ISAF and for 
agreeing to send more troops in 2010.  We believe their 
distinguished service and further commitment merit this attention. 
Additionally, Macedonia not only continues to be blocked from 
joining the Alliance pending a solution to the "name issue" with 
Greece, but we anticipate that the same issue will prevent the Dec 
10-11 European Council from giving Macedonia a date to commence EU 
accession talks.  A letter from the President would help boost 
Macedonian morale among both the government and the people, as well 
as reinforce the importance of our joint efforts to succeed in 
Afghanistan. 
 
¶5. Suggested Text: Thank you for your letter expressing Macedonia's 
continuing support for our joint effort to stabilize Afghanistan. 
On behalf of the American people, I want to express my gratitude for 
your efforts thus far and for your increased commitment in this 
critical period. 
 
Since the tragic events of September 11, 2001, we have been able to 
count on the people of Macedonia to stand by us and defend the cause 
of freedom.  I salute the willingness of your people to stand with 
us, our Allies, and the Afghan people. 
 
End text. 
 
 
¶6. Text of letter from President Ivanov to President Obama (courtesy 
translation provided by the GOM): 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
 
Skopje, 2 December 2009 
 
Honorable Mr. President, 
 
Allow me to greet you cordially and to extend my assurances of 
highest appreciation to you and your great nation. 
 
Mr. President, with reference to the announcement of the new 
Strategy on Afghanistan, I feel obliged to address you in order to 
reaffirm my strong support and the support of the Republic of 
Macedonia within this context. 
 
I would like to assure you that the Republic of Macedonia and I 
personally highly appreciate your role on the global level, as well 
as your paramount contribution in making the world safer and more 
democratic. From the outset the Republic of Macedonia demonstrated 
its solidarity and contribution towards the 
joint mission in Afghanistan, and I hereby assure you of my 
country's commitment to remain with you, shoulder to shoulder, until 
the final goal is achieved. 
 
Honorable Mr. President, we are fully aware that sustainable peace 
and stability can only be attained through providing not only for 
the national, but also through contributing to regional and to 
global security. The contribution of the Republic of Macedonia to 
the ISAF mission began symbolic?lly back in 2002. 
Gradually, the contribution evolved into a rotation of a total of 
1109 Macedonian peacekeepers. Today, our national contribution 
represents one of the largest (per capita) national contributions to 
the mission in Afghanistan. Currently, the 
Republic of Macedonia contributes with a total of 163 soldiers 
deployed in the ISAF mission. 
 
Honorable Mr. President, 
 
I am proud to confirm that the Republic of Macedonia will 
additionally increase its contribution to Afghanistan as of February 
2010, with additional 80 soldiers. The Macedonian soldiers, embedded 
with the US National Guard of Vermont, will take part in the 
training and mentorship mission of the Afghan 
security forces. This significant increase of contribution of almost 
50% will amount to a total of 260 deployed troops, which represents 
4% of the land forces of the Army of the Republic of Macedonia, 
making my country one of the leading nations contributing to ISAF. 
Furthermore, allow me to inform you that the Republic of Macedonia 
is to gradually further increase its contribution to international 
operations up to 8% of its land forces by 2018. 
 
I welcome the new approach of the United States in consolidating the 
situation in Afghanistan, announced at your address yesterday at the 
West Point Military Academy, and I assure you that my country shall 
provide an active contribution in this direction. 
 
Honorable Mr. President, with regard to the foregoing, the Republic 
of Macedonia reaffirms its devotion to the Euro-Atlantic values and 
goals, it reaffirms its compatibility with the NATO standards and 
already acts as a full-fledged member. I am convinced that the day 
when the Republic of Macedonia will formally occupy its place within 
the big Euro-Atlantic family is not far away, a place it genuinely 
deserves. 
 
With such fervor, please, accept warm and sincere regards from the 
Republic of Macedonia. 
 
Dr. Gjorge Ivanov 
 
END TEXT 
 
NAVRATIL