09STATE109948
EUR: INSTRUCTIONS FOR 2009 TIP INTERIM ASSESSMENT
Fri Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO8739
PP RUEHPOD
DE RUEHC #9948/01 2962046
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 232025Z OCT 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHKB/AMEMBASSY BAKU PRIORITY 9370
RUEHCH/AMEMBASSY CHISINAU PRIORITY 1038
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV PRIORITY 2110
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 4769
RUEHPOD/AMEMBASSY PODGORICA PRIORITY 2383
RUEHRA/AMEMBASSY RIGA PRIORITY 1938UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 109948 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KTIP KWMN PGOV PHUM SMIG AJ MD UA RS MW LG
SUBJECT: EUR: INSTRUCTIONS FOR 2009 TIP INTERIM ASSESSMENT 
 
REF: NONE 
 
1.(U) This is an action cable; action request in paras 5 and 
¶6. 
 
2.(SBU) The Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as amended in 
2003, requires the Secretary of State to submit a "Special 
Watch List" of countries on the TIP Report that either 1) had 
moved up a tier on the TIP Report over the last year or 2) 
were ranked on Tier 2 but a) had not shown evidence of 
increasing efforts to address severe forms of TIP from the 
previous year, b) were placed on Tier 2 because of 
commitments to carry out additional future actions over the 
coming year, or c) had a significant or significantly 
increasing number of victims of severe forms of TIP. 
 
3.(SBU) The "Special Watch List" has been submitted to 
Congress, as required, along with the President's 
determinations for sanctions of Tier 3 countries.  The TVPA, 
as amended, now requires the Secretary to submit to Congress 
an Interim Assessment on the Special Watch List countries no 
later than February 1, 2010. 
 
4.(SBU) The Interim Assessment, which the Department plans to 
release on January 5, 2010, will serve as a narrowly-focused 
progress report, assessing only a country's key deficiency(s) 
highlighted in the June 2009 TIP Report.  Measuring progress 
or lack of progress in addressing these deficiencies (the 
basis for which the country was placed on the Watch List 
initially) is the main purpose of the Interim Assessment. 
This will not/not serve as a large-scale analysis of 
anti-trafficking efforts in the relevant country.  Similarly, 
it will not describe the trafficking problem in that country 
(readers can refer to the 2009 TIP Report for that). 
Finally, it will not mention Tiers or allude to progress in 
achieving a higher tier or, conversely, forecast a fall to a 
lower tier. 
 
5.(U) Action Request for Action Addressees:  Please answer 
the questions addressed to your Post in para 6 in concise 
analytical terms, citing examples of the progress (or lack 
thereof) sparingly.  Post's submission should not exceed four 
or five paragraphs.  The final Interim Assessment will 
include a narrative of no more than half a page on each 
country's progress.  Please provide these responses to the 
Department via front-channel cable -- slugged for EUR/PGI and 
G/TIP -- no later than November 16. 
 
¶6. (U) Interim Assessment Requirements: 
 
¶A.  FOR EMBASSY BAKU: Please summarize the progress, or lack 
thereof, the Government of Azerbaijan has made in: (a) 
implementing the national victim referral mechanism adopted 
in August 2009 and ensure that identified male, female, and 
child victims of both sex and labor trafficking are referred 
for assistance; (b) allocating sufficient funding to fully 
implement the national trafficking action plan adopted in 
February 2009; (c) increasing inter-agency coordination of 
anti-trafficking efforts and identify points of contact 
within responsible offices as designated in the national 
action plan; (d) improving victim assistance and protection 
for child victims of trafficking through proactive 
identification of trafficking victims among vulnerable 
populations -- such as street children -- and increase the 
amount of time children are permitted to stay at child 
homeless shelters and other facilities; and (e) increasing 
efforts to investigate, prosecute, and convict government 
officials complicit in trafficking and ensure, as 
appropriate, that  those convicted serve time in prison. 
Please report on any other significant developments. 
 
¶B. FOR EMBASSY CHISINAU:  Please summarize the progress the 
Government of Moldova has made in: (a) continuing to 
investigate and prosecute officials, complicity in 
trafficking, and seeking punishment for such officials; 
(b)improving data collection on investigations, prosecutions, 
convictions, and sentences for trafficking offenders; 
(c)increasing anti-trafficking law enforcement efforts; (d) 
continuing to disburse resources for victim assistance and 
protection; (e) boosting proactive efforts to identify and 
protect trafficking victims, including child victims and 
victims trafficked within Moldova; and (f) considering 
prevention activities specifically targeted at reducing the 
 
STATE 00109948  002 OF 002 
 
 
demand for human trafficking in Moldova. Please report on any 
other significant developments. 
 
¶C. FOR EMBASSY KYIV:  Please summarize the progress, or lack 
thereof, the Government of Ukraine has made in: (a) seeking 
sentences for convicted traffickers that require them to 
serve appropriate jail time; (b) taking steps to curb 
trafficking complicity by government officials; (c) 
continuing trafficking-specific training for prosecutors and 
judges; (d) increasing funding for victim protection and 
assistance; (e) developing formal systems to guide law 
enforcement in proactive identification of trafficking 
victims and referral of victims to available services; (f) 
taking steps to provide specialized protection and assistance 
to child trafficking victims; and (g) considering awareness 
initiatives targeted at potential clients of the sex trade 
and labor trafficking beneficiaries to reduce the demand for 
human trafficking.  Please report on any other significant 
developments. 
 
¶D. FOR EMBASSY MOSCOW:  Please summarize the progress, or 
lack thereof, the Government of Russia has made in: (a) 
developing a comprehensive national strategy that addresses 
all forms of trafficking and provides comprehensive victim 
assistance throughout Russia and providing funding from 
federal, regional and or municipal budgets to implement this 
national strategy; (b) allocating funding to anti-trafficking 
NGOs that provide victim assistance and rehabilitative care; 
(c)increasing the number of victims identified and assisted; 
(e) designating trafficking-specific responsibilities to 
relevant government ministries on the national and regional 
levels and establishing an official federal coordinating body 
with the authority to implement a national strategy; (f) 
increasing the number of investigations, prosecutions and 
convictions for all types of trafficking offences, including 
government officials complicit in trafficking; (g) ensuring 
convicted traffickers and convicted complicit officials are 
sentenced to some time in prison; (h) creating a central 
repository for comprehensive trafficking data; (i) continuing 
efforts to raise public awareness of both sex and labor 
trafficking; and (j) continuing to take steps to prevent the 
use of forced labor in construction projects of the 2014 
Winter Olympics.  Please report on any other significant 
developments. 
 
¶E. FOR EMBASSY PODGORICA:  Please summarize the progress, or 
lack thereof, the Government of Montenegro has made in: (a) 
vigorously investigating and prosecuting trafficking 
offenses, and convicting and sentencing trafficking 
offenders, including public officials complicit in 
trafficking;(b)ensuring that convicted traffickers receive 
adequate punishment; (c) improving tracking of human 
trafficking law enforcement data; (d) increasing efforts to 
identify victims among vulnerable groups, such as women 
arrested for prostitution violations, undocumented migrants, 
and child beggars, and refer them to the government shelter 
or trafficking NGOs; (e) provide protections for potential 
child victims of trafficking; (f) continuing the recently 
launched anti-trafficking awareness campaign; and (g) 
continuing vigorous efforts to coordinate all 
anti-trafficking entities within Montenegro.  Please report 
on any other significant developments. 
 
¶F. FOR EMBASSY RIGA:  Please summarize the progress, or lack 
thereof, the Government of Latvia has made in: (a) providing 
government-funded assistance to a greater number of 
trafficking victims; (b) increasing efforts to identify 
victims of trafficking among vulnerable populations, such as 
women and girls in prostitution, and refer these victims for 
assistance; (c) ensuring law enforcement, border guards and 
labor inspectors receive labor trafficking training; (d) 
ensuring that a majority of convicted traffickers serve some 
time in prison; (e) taking steps to expand available victim 
services to areas outside of Riga; (f) working with NGOs to 
improve services available to victims of trafficking; and (g) 
increasing efforts to raise awareness about both sex and 
labor trafficking.  Please report on any other significant 
developments. 
CLINTON