09STATE7040
JAN 27 US STATEMENT AT UNSC BRIEFING ON GAZA
Tue Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7040 0270318
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 270309Z JAN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 007040 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM IS KPAL
SUBJECT: JAN 27 US STATEMENT AT UNSC BRIEFING ON GAZA 
 
 ¶1. (U)This is an action message. USUN is authorized to draw 
from points in para 2 below following the UNSC Briefing by 
USG/ECR John Holmes on the Humanitarian Situation in Gaza. 
 
¶2. (U) I thank Under-Secretary General Holmes and 
Commissioner-General AbuZayd for their recent trip and for 
their insightful briefing on the current humanitarian 
situation in Gaza. 
 
The United States welcomes the cease-fire in Gaza and deeply 
appreciates the efforts of international and regional 
partners, in particular the important role of the Government 
of Egypt. 
The United States looks forward to Egypt?s continued efforts 
towards a broader peace through a commitment to end smuggling 
from within its borders. 
 
The United States wishes to express its profound appreciation 
to the UN agencies, including the UN Relief and Works Agency 
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and other 
international and non-governmental organizations for their 
tireless dedication in providing critical humanitarian 
assistance under extremely difficult circumstances.  Your 
efforts to rescue the wounded, to provide shelter for the 
displaced, and to distribute food to the hungry mitigated the 
human toll of this conflict.  The United States recognizes 
those efforts came at the high cost of the lives of nine UN 
staff and contractors and I want to express our deepest 
condolences. 
 
First and foremost, the United States remains extremely 
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Gaza.  The 
relief, recovery, and reconstruction needs remain great 
and will require the attention and action of all in the 
international community to provide the needed assistance 
to the people of Gaza. The regular and controlled flow of 
assistance and humanitarian staff into Gaza will be an 
important part of addressing the enormous humanitarian 
needs of Gazans. 
 
In addition to the almost $600 million the United States 
provided in assistance to Palestinians in 2008, including 
$185 million for UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine 
Refugees in the Near East operations, we provided $85 
million to UNRWA in late December to support UNRWA?s 2009 
General Fund, West Bank and Gaza Emergency Appeals, and 
the Gaza Flash Appeal.  These funds helped provide food 
and shelter to those affected by the violence. 
 
Through the U.S. Agency for International Development and 
its implementing partners on the ground in Gaza, the 
United States has also provided nearly $4 million for the 
procurement and delivery of food, medicine and other 
essential items for Gazans. 
 
We urge all parties to work together, in coordination with 
President Abbas and the Palestinian Authority, to support 
international and non-governmental organizations undertaking 
the large and important task of providing humanitarian 
assistance and financial support in the wake of this conflict. 
The United State plans to fully support the planned 
international donor?s conference to seek short-term 
humanitarian assistance and long-term reconstruction for the 
Palestinian economy.  This 
assistance will be provided to and guided by the Palestinian 
Authority.  We urge the international community to support 
this effort. 
 
We urge all parties to ensure the secure and continuous 
provision of humanitarian supplies to civilians in Gaza, 
including allowing an increased volume of humanitarian 
goods through all border crossings. 
 
We are deeply concerned by the loss of life over the past 
month and the pressing humanitarian needs in Gaza.  We 
must extend a hand of opportunity to those who seek 
peace.  As part of a lasting cease-fire, Gaza?s border 
crossings should be open to allow the flow of aid and 
commerce, with an appropriate monitoring regime, with the 
international community and Palestinian Authority 
participating. 
 
Securing lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians 
is a critical priority for the United States. It is for 
this reason that, President Obama and Secretary Clinton 
last week appointed Senator George Mitchell as special 
envoy for Middle East peace. Senator Mitchell is recognized by 
the country and international community for his commitment and 
ability to find peaceful solutions to conflict as demonstrated 
by his efforts to bring peace in Northern Ireland. Senator 
Mitchell understands the full scope of challenges we face on 
this arduous road towards a peaceful reconciliation. 
 
As President Obama said last week, this administration is 
committed to actively and aggressively seeking a lasting 
peace between Israel and the Palestinians, as well as 
Israel and its Arab neighbors.  A long-term resolution of 
the situation in Gaza will require the restoration of 
legitimate Palestinian Authority control and ultimately a 
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  In this 
regard, we call for renewed efforts to realize the two-state 
solution and establish an independent and viable Palestinian 
state in 
the West Bank and Gaza, consistent with UN Security 
Council Resolution 1850.  Lasting peace can only be based 
on an enduring commitment to mutual recognition, freedom 
from violence, incitement, and terror. 
CLINTON