09STATE60609
RWANDA -- 2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND
Fri Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0609 1630043
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 120018Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY KIGALI IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 060609 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP ELAB KCRM KPAO KWMN PGOV PHUM PREL SMIG RW
SUBJECT: RWANDA -- 2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND 
DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 59732 
     ¶B. (B) STATE 005577 
 
¶1. This is an action cable; see paras 5 through 7 and 10. 
 
¶2. On June 16, 2009, at 10:00 a.m. EDT, the Secretary will 
release the 2009 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report at a 
press conference in the Department's press briefing room. 
This release will receive substantial coverage in domestic 
and foreign news outlets.  Until the time of the Secretary's 
June 16 press conference, any public release of the Report or 
country narratives contained therein is prohibited. 
 
¶3. The Department is hereby providing Post with advance press 
guidance to be used on June 16 or thereafter.  Also provided 
is demarche language to be used in informing the Government 
of Rwanda of its tier ranking and the TIP Report's imminent 
release.  The text of the TIP Report country narrative is 
provided, both for use in informing the Government of Rwanda 
and in any local media release by Post's public affairs 
section on June 16 or thereafter.  Drawing on information 
provided below in paras 8 and 9, Post may provide the host 
government with the text of the TIP Report narrative no 
earlier than 1200 noon local time Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, 
EUR, and NEA countries and OOB local time Tuesday June 16 for 
SCA and EAP posts.  Please note, however, that any public 
release of the Report's information should not/not precede 
the Secretary's release at 10:00 am EDT on June 16. 
 
¶4. The entire TIP Report will be available on-line at 
www.state.gov/g/tip shortly after the Secretary's June 16 
release.  Hard copies of the Report will be pouched to posts 
in all countries appearing on the Report.  The Secretary's 
statement at the June 16 press event, and the statement of 
and fielding of media questions by G/TIP,s Director and 
Senior Advisor to the Secretary, Ambassador-at-Large Luis 
CdeBaca, will be available on the Department's website 
shortly after the June 16 event.  Ambassador de Baca will 
also hold a general briefing for officials of foreign 
embassies in Washington DC on June 17 at 3:30 EDT. 
 
¶5. Action Request: No earlier than 12 noon local time on 
Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, EUR, and NEA posts and OOB local 
time on Tuesday June 16 for SCA and EAP posts, please inform 
the appropriate official in the Government of Rwanda of the 
June 16 release of the 2009 TIP Report, drawing on the points 
in para 9 (at Post's discretion) and including the text of 
the country narrative provided in para 8.  For countries 
where the State Department has lowered the tier ranking, it 
is particularly important to advise governments prior to the 
Report being released in Washington on June 16. 
 
¶6. Action Request continued:  Please note that, for those 
countries which will not receive an "action plan" with 
specific recommendations for improvement, posts should draw 
host governments' attention to the areas for improvement 
identified in the 2009 Report, especially highlighted in the 
"Recommendations" section of the second paragraph of the 
narrative text.  This engagement is important to establishing 
the framework in which the government's performance will be 
judged for the 2010 Report.  If posts have questions about 
which governments will receive an action plan, or how they 
may follow up on the recommendations in the 2009 Report, 
please contact G/TIP and the appropriate regional bureau. 
 
¶7. Action Request continued: On June 16, please be prepared 
to answer media inquiries on the Report's release using the 
press guidance provided in para 11.  If Post wishes, a local 
press statement may be released on or after 10:30 am EDT June 
16, drawing on the press guidance and the text of the TIP 
Report's country narrative provided in para 8. 
 
¶8. Begin Final Text of Rwanda,s country narrative in the 
2009 TIP Report: 
 
--------------- 
RWANDA (TIER 2) 
--------------- 
 
Rwanda is a source country for some women and children 
trafficked for the purposes of forced labor and sexual 
exploitation.  Rwandan girls are trafficked within the 
country for domestic servitude, as well as for commercial 
sexual exploitation; in a limited number of cases, this 
trafficking is facilitated by loosely organized prostitution 
networks.  There were isolated reports of such sex 
trafficking networks operating in secondary schools and 
universities.  In addition, older females reportedly offer 
vulnerable younger girls room and board, eventually pushing 
them into prostitution to pay for their keep.  Rwandan 
children are also trafficked to Uganda, Tanzania, and Kenya 
for agricultural labor or use in commercial sexual 
exploitation.  Recruiters for the National Congress for the 
Defense of the People (CNDP), fraudulently promising high 
paying employment, defrauded Congolese men and boys from 
Rwanda-based refugee camps, as well as Rwandan adults and 
children from towns in western Rwanda, into forced labor and 
soldiering in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).  In 
December 2008, the UN Group of Experts on the DRC released a 
report accusing Rwandan authorities of complicity in the 
fraudulent recruitment of soldiers, including children, by 
the CNDP and their movement across the border.  Rwandan 
police or administrative officers reportedly were sometimes 
present during such recruitment. 
 
The Government of Rwanda does not fully comply with the 
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking; 
however, it is making significant efforts to do so.  During 
the reporting period, the government concluded its first 
known anti-trafficking prosecution. 
 
Recommendations for Rwanda:  Enact and enforce the 
anti-trafficking provisions of the draft Penal Code through 
increased investigations and prosecutions of traffickers; 
take additional steps to assist children trafficked into 
prostitution and domestic servitude and to provide for their 
care; and launch a nationwide anti-trafficking public 
awareness campaign. 
 
Prosecution 
----------- 
The government,s anti-trafficking law enforcement efforts 
increased modestly during the reporting period.  Rwandan law 
does not prohibit all forms of trafficking in persons, though 
existing penal and labor code statutes prohibit slavery, 
forced labor, forced prostitution, and child prostitution, 
under which traffickers are prosecuted.  Prescribed penalties 
under these statutes range from small fines to six years, 
imprisonment, which are sufficiently stringent but not 
commensurate with penalties prescribed for other grave 
crimes.  Penal code revisions that encompass draft 
anti-trafficking legislation remained under consideration by 
the plenary of the Chamber of Deputies in 2008.  Amendments 
to the Child Protection Law, which include draft provisions 
criminalizing the actions of hotels and cinema halls that 
provide venues for child prostitution, were not passed during 
the reporting period.  In 2008, the Cabinet approved 
revisions to the labor code and transferred them to 
Parliament for review.  On the local level, more than 10 
districts have instituted bylaws against child labor that 
prescribe fines for employers and parents; NGOs reported that 
these bylaws, provision of fines, accompanied by 
sensitization campaigns, has had a deterrent effect on child 
labor in local jurisdictions. 
 
The government did not provide statistics on the punishment 
of trafficking offenders during the year.  However, in May 
2008, the Gasabo district court sentenced a man to 30 years, 
imprisonment for operating an underage prostitution ring. 
Due to her status as a minor, his 17-year old accomplice 
received a suspended sentence of five years, imprisonment. 
This is the country,s first known conviction of a 
trafficking offender.  In December 2008, the government 
arrested, but has yet to charge, three Rwandans suspected of 
illegally recruiting children and adults on behalf of the 
CNDP.  Labor inspectors issued warnings and levied fines 
during the reporting period against those illegally employing 
children; no cases of forced labor were brought to court.  At 
border crossings and security checkpoints throughout the 
country, the National Police questioned men traveling with 
children but without an adult female and inspected suspected 
irregularities, including any possible indications of 
trafficking; such inspections yielded no reported cases of 
trafficking. 
 
Protection 
---------- 
With the exception of its care for former child combatants, 
some of whom are trafficking victims, the government provided 
few protective services to victims.  The Rwandan 
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission (RDRC) continued 
operation of a center for child ex-combatants in Muhazi, 
which provided three months of care and education to children 
returned from the DRC by the United Nations Mission to the 
Congo; 28 children arrived at the center during the reporting 
period, joining 13 children who remained at the center from 
the previous reporting period.  The RDRC worked with local 
authorities and an NGO to locate the children,s families, 
and social workers sensitized the families before their 
child,s return; in 2008, 12 children were reunited with 
their families.  RDRC,s social workers and district 
integration officers track each child,s progress for two 
years and provide assistance with school fees and expenses, 
as well as offering income-generating support to their 
families. 
 
In January 2009, Rwandan authorities cooperated with Ugandan 
law enforcement to repatriate a trafficked Rwandan boy to the 
country.  During the reporting period, some local authorities 
identified children in prostitution and brought them to the 
attention of local organizations for assistance.  The police 
headquarters in Kigali operated a hotline and an examination 
room for victims of gender-based violence; both were staffed 
by trained counselors and could be used by female victims of 
trafficking.  Fully equipped examination rooms were also 
operational in Gasabo and Rwamagana.  In June 2008, the 
Supreme Court distributed three checklists developed for 
police officers, prosecutors, and judges, respectively, on 
proper investigative, protective, and judicial procedures for 
addressing the needs of sexual and domestic violence victims; 
these measures are also applicable to the provision of 
protective services to trafficking victims.  Resource and 
capacity constraints hindered full implementation of these 
procedures nationwide.  In &catch-up8 education programs 
spread over 80 centers, the Ministry of Education provided 
education for approximately 9,000 children who had missed all 
or part of their primary education due to involvement in 
child labor.  The government encouraged victims to 
participate in investigation and prosecution of trafficking 
crimes and did not penalize victims for unlawful acts 
committed as a direct result of their being trafficked during 
the reporting period.  Beyond a temporary stay of up to one 
month, existing legal statutes do not provide foreign 
trafficking victims with legal alternatives to their removal 
to a country where they may face hardship or retribution. 
 
 
Prevention 
---------- 
The government,s anti-trafficking prevention efforts 
significantly increased during the reporting period.  There 
is, however, a general lack of understanding among government 
officials and the general population of what constitutes 
human trafficking.  In January 2009, the Acting Commissioner 
General of Police spoke publicly about a case of child 
trafficking to Uganda and the importance of addressing 
trafficking crimes as a regional concern.  In 2008, the 
Ministry of Public Serve and Labor (MIFOTRA) and an NGO 
produced a documentary on child labor that was broadcast on 
national television eight times.  The national university,s 
radio station, in collaboration with labor inspectors, 
conducted awareness programs for parents, children, and 
teachers on exploitative child labor.  District child labor 
task forces, comprised of the mayor, the vice mayor for 
social affairs, police, army child protection officers, 
education officers, teachers, and local leaders, met 
bi-monthly and conducted sensitization activities on the 
dangers and illegality of exploiting child labor, including 
during monthly community service days.  In mid-2008, cell 
leaders, under the supervision of the Nyaruguru district 
child labor task force, conducted a survey assessing the 
extent of exploitative child labor and released the results 
in February 2009.  In an effort to reduce the demand for 
commercial sex acts, men arrested for procuring females in 
prostitution received informal sensitization on women,s 
rights, including a brochure on gender-based violence. 
Rwandan troops deployed to the UN peacekeeping mission in 
Darfur received training on gender sensitivity and sexual 
exploitation. 
 
 
¶9. Post may wish to deliver the following points, which offer 
technical and legal background on the TIP Report process, to 
the host government as a non-paper with the above TIP Report 
country narrative: 
 
(begin non-paper) 
 
-- The U.S. Congress, through its passage of the 2000 
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as amended (TVPA), 
requires the Secretary of State to submit an annual Report to 
Congress.  The goal of this Report is to stimulate action and 
create partnerships around the world in the fight against 
modern-day slavery.  The USG approach to combating human 
trafficking follows the TVPA and the standards set forth in 
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the 
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime (commonly known as the "Palermo Protocol").  The TVPA 
and the Palermo Protocol recognize that this is a crime in 
which the victims, labor or services (including in the "sex 
industry") are obtained or maintained through force, fraud, 
or coercion, whether overt or through psychological 
manipulation.  While much attention has focused on 
international flows, both the TVPA and the Palermo Protocol 
focus on the exploitation of the victim, and do not require a 
showing that the victim was moved. 
 
-- Recent amendments to the TVPA removed the requirement that 
only countries with a "significant number" of trafficking 
victims be included in the Report. Beginning with the 2009 
TIP Report, countries determined to be a country of origin, 
transit, or destination for victims of severe forms of 
trafficking are included in the Report and assigned to one of 
three tiers.  Countries assessed as meeting the "minimum 
standards for the elimination of severe forms of trafficking" 
set forth in the TVPA are classified as Tier 1.  Countries 
assessed as not fully complying with the minimum standards, 
but making significant efforts to meet those minimum 
standards are classified as Tier 2.  Countries assessed as 
neither complying with the minimum standards nor making 
significant efforts to do so are classified as Tier 3. 
 
-- The TVPA also requires the Secretary of State to provide a 
"Special Watch List" to Congress later in the year. 
Anti-trafficking efforts of the countries on this list are to 
be evaluated again in an Interim Assessment that the 
Secretary of State must provide to Congress by February 1 of 
each year.  Countries are included on the "Special Watch 
List" if they move up in "tier" rankings in the annual TIP 
Report -- from 3 to 2 or from 2 to 1 ) or if they have been 
placed on the Tier 2 Watch List. 
 
-- Tier 2 Watch List consists of Tier 2 countries determined: 
(1) not to have made "increasing efforts" to combat human 
trafficking over the past year; (2) to be making significant 
efforts based on commitments of anti-trafficking reforms over 
the next year, or (3) to have a very significant number of 
trafficking victims or a significantly increasing victim 
population.  As indicated in reftel B, the TVPRA of 2008 
contains a provision requiring that a country that has been 
included on Tier 2 Watch List for two consecutive years after 
the date of enactment of the TVPRA of 2008 be ranked as Tier 
¶3.  Thus, any automatic downgrade to Tier 3 pursuant to this 
provision would take place, at the earliest, in the 2011 TIP 
Report (i.e., a country would have to be ranked Tier 2 Watch 
List in the 2009 and 2010 Reports before being subject to 
Tier 3 in the 2011 Report).  The new law allows for a waiver 
of this provision for up to two additional years upon a 
determination by the President that the country has developed 
and devoted sufficient resources to a written plan to make 
significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with the 
minimum standards. 
 
-- Countries classified as Tier 3 may be subject to statutory 
restrictions for the subsequent fiscal year on 
non-humanitarian and non-trade-related foreign assistance 
and, in some circumstances, withholding of funding for 
participation by government officials or employees in 
educational and cultural exchange programs.   In addition, 
the President could instruct the U.S. executive directors to 
international financial institutions to oppose loans or other 
utilization of funds (other than for humanitarian, 
trade-related or certain types of development assistance) 
with respect to countries on Tier 3.  Countries classified as 
Tier 3 that take strong action within 90 days of the Report's 
release to show significant efforts against trafficking in 
persons, and thereby warrant a reassessment of their Tier 
classification, would avoid such sanctions.  Guidelines for 
such actions are in the DOS-crafted action plans to be shared 
by Posts with host governments. 
 
-- The 2009 TIP Report, issuing as it does in the midst of 
the global financial crisis, highlights high levels of 
trafficking for forced labor in many parts of the world and 
systemic contributing factors to this phenomenon:  fraudulent 
recruitment practices and excessive recruiting fees in 
workers, home countries; the lack of adequate labor 
protections in both sending and receiving countries; and the 
flawed design of some destination countries, "sponsorship 
systems" that do not give foreign workers adequate legal 
recourse when faced with conditions of forced labor.  As the 
May 2009 ILO Global Report on Forced Labor concluded, forced 
labor victims suffer approximately $20 billion in losses, and 
traffickers, profits are estimated at $31 billion.  The 
current global financial crisis threatens to increase the 
number of victims of forced labor and increase the associated 
"cost of coercion." 
 
-- The text of the TVPA and amendments can be found on 
website www.state.gov/g/tip. 
 
-- On June 16, 2009, the Secretary of State will release the 
ninth annual TIP Report in a public event at the State 
Department.  We are providing you an advance copy of your 
country's narrative in that report.  Please keep this 
information embargoed until 10:00 am Washington DC time June 
¶16.  The State Department will also hold a general briefing 
for officials of foreign embassies in Washington DC on June 
17 at 3:30 EDT. 
 
(end non-paper) 
 
¶10. Posts should make sure that the relevant country 
narrative is readily available on or though the Mission's web 
page in English and appropriate local language(s) as soon as 
possible after the TIP Report is released.  Funding for 
translation costs will be handled as it was for the Human 
Rights Report.  Posts needing financial assistance for 
translation costs should contact their regional bureau,s EX 
office. 
 
¶11. The following is press guidance provided for Post to use 
with local media. 
 
Q1:  What progress has Rwanda made in the past year? 
 
A:  The Gasabo district court sentenced a man to 30 years, 
imprisonment for operating an underage prostitution ring. 
This is the Rwanda,s first known conviction of a trafficking 
offender.  The Rwandan Demobilization and Reintegration 
Commission continued operation of a center for child 
ex-combatants in Muhazi, which provided three months of care 
and education to 28 children returned from the DRC by the 
United Nations Mission to the Congo.  The Ministry of Labor 
and an NGO produced a documentary on child labor that was 
broadcast on national television eight times.  The national 
university,s radio station, in collaboration with labor 
inspectors, conducted awareness programs for parents, 
children, and teachers on exploitative child labor.  District 
child labor task forces conducted sensitization activities on 
the dangers and illegality of exploiting child labor, 
including during monthly community service days. 
 
Q2:  How can Rwanda further the fight against trafficking in 
persons? 
 
A: To advance its anti-trafficking efforts, the Government of 
Rwanda could:  enact and enforce the anti-trafficking 
provisions of the draft Penal Code through increased 
investigations and prosecutions of traffickers; take 
additional steps to remove children from prostitution and 
domestic servitude and to provide for their care; and launch 
a nationwide anti-trafficking public awareness campaign. 
 
 
¶12. The Department appreciates posts, assistance with the 
preceding action requests. 
CLINTON