09STATE84997
TALKING POINTS FOR AUGUST 20 CONSULTATIONS ON SYG
Fri Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0008
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4997 2261803
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141745Z AUG 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 084997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM SU XA XW
SUBJECT: TALKING POINTS FOR AUGUST 20 CONSULTATIONS ON SYG 
REPORT ON ELECTIONS IN SUDAN 
 
¶1.  USUN may draw from the talking points in paragraph 2 for 
the August 20 consultations on the SYG Report on Elections in 
Sudan. 
 
¶2.  Begin talking points: 
 
-- We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his 
comprehensive and incisive report detailing the preparations 
for national elections in Sudan, and for identifying tasks 
needing completion to prepare for the elections.  We also 
express our sincere appreciation for the work of UNMIS and 
other UN entities in planning and assisting in the efforts to 
help ensure that free and fair elections take place in Sudan. 
 Today, I would like to make several points. 
 
-- I would like to begin by acknowledging the progress that 
has been made towards holding national elections in Sudan. 
In anticipation of the elections, 71 political parties have 
been registered by the Political Parties Affairs Council. 
Sudan has created a National Elections Commission (NEC), 
appointed a Southern Sudan elections commission and 25 state 
commissions, and passed a National Elections Act; however, 
much work remains. 
 
-- As discussed in the Secretary-General,s report, political 
freedom, including freedom of press, speech, and assembly 
must be respected.  They form the cornerstone of a free and 
fair electoral environment.  We strongly urge the Government 
of National Unity, the National Assembly, and the Government 
of Southern Sudan to take steps to ensure they are provided 
for both by law and in practice. 
 
-- We remain concerned that there is no final resolution of 
concerns related to census results which would permit the 
final delimitation of constituencies to be completed without 
challenge.  The resolution of these concerns is an essential 
part of the electoral process.  Although we urge all parties 
to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) to conclude a 
final and durable agreement, constituency delimitation is 
already underway.  Agreement between the parties on 
transparent procedures for delimitation of remaining 
constituencies, primarily in the South, is needed without 
further delay.  We are also concerned that the complaint 
period for constituency delimitation has begun prior to the 
completion of delimitation and without the public release of 
delimitation information or clarification of the procedures 
for filing a complaint.  We urge UNMIS and other concerned UN 
partners to continue to press the NEC to develop transparent 
and inclusive procedures regarding the administration of all 
electoral processes. 
 
-- In addition, the lack of policies addressing requirements 
for voter identification documentation and the registration 
of internally displaced persons and refugees creates 
conditions that could disenfranchise significant portions of 
the Sudanese voting population.  We acknowledge UNMIS, 
attempt to bring these issues to the attention of the NEC, 
and support their efforts to work with the NEC to develop 
transparent policies to enable the greatest number of persons 
to exercise their right to vote.  UNMIS must continue to 
press the NEC to develop policies and procedures aimed at 
ensuring that legitimate Sudanese citizens have an 
opportunity to cast votes. 
 
-- Also, given the current literacy rate in Sudan and the 
population,s lack of recent experience with elections, 
substantive voter education programs are critical to enabling 
Sudanese citizens to understand electoral processes and 
procedures.  Voter education programs should also inform the 
population of the options and choices that will be before 
them when they vote.  UNMIS and the other collaborating UN 
entities must continue to work with the NEC to formulate and 
deliver an effective voter education program that addresses 
the needs of every region. We urge the Government of Sudan to 
encourage the NEC to work closely with groups such as UNMIS, 
UNDP, and IFES to coordinate efforts to transparently address 
technical electoral issues and develop and implement voter 
education throughout the country.  It is also important for 
domestic and international election monitors to be able to 
observe the entire electoral process.  We urge UNMIS and 
UNAMID, within their mandate, to help facilitate election 
observation. 
-- The lack of an operational plan and budget for the 
administration and organization of elections is another cause 
for concern.  This in turn affects the readiness of the high 
committees responsible for supervising elections at the 
Southern Sudan and state levels.  Unless an operational plan 
is approved soon, not only will electoral administration be 
impacted, the international community will not be able to 
secure the funding and materials necessary to support the 
electoral process. Furthermore, holding multiparty, national 
elections in Sudan will require the assistance not only of 
UNMIS but UNAMID.  Elections conducted in Darfur include 
additional difficulties such as voter identification and 
registrations, logistics, and security.  UNMIS and UNAMID 
must continue developing and implementing a strategy whereby 
UNAMID can provide all required election support and 
assistance within its existing resources and capabilities. 
Moreover, we hope UNMIS will be proactive in its efforts to 
provide maximum assistance under its mandate and available 
resources. 
 
-- Finally, during the election period it is essential that 
there be sufficient security and safety to permit the voting 
population to cast their ballots in an environment free of 
insecurity or retribution.  We commend UNMIS and UNAMID for 
their efforts to date in preparing police training materials, 
and look forward to receiving the report on threat assessment 
and plans for elections security.  In the meantime, we hope 
that UNAMID and UNMIS police will continue to work with the 
national and local authorities in Northern and Southern Sudan 
to prepare local police to carry out elections-related 
security functions.  We hope UNMIS will also explore 
additional means of supporting electoral readiness, such as 
assisting with transportation resources. 
 
-- The elections, while important, are not an end in and of 
themselves.  They are a step in a process to bring stability 
and security to Sudan.  In order for the elections to be 
successful, the issues relating to political freedom, 
transparent constituency delimitation and registration, 
administration, security, and voter education must be 
addressed.  The United States fully supports the work of the 
UN in this regard, and calls on the Government of Sudan to 
address the outstanding legal, administrative, and security 
concerns so that transparent and credible elections can be 
held. 
 
End points. 
CLINTON