09STATE106424
Guidance: Middle East Consultations, October 14
Wed Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6424 2870549
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 140529Z OCT 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0000UNCLAS STATE 106424 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IS KPAL
SUBJECT: Guidance: Middle East Consultations, October 14 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  USUN may draw from 
para two elements when making its intervention during 
the Middle East debate in the Security Council on 
October 14.  The Department may send follow-on 
instructions revising these elements in order to capture 
the nuance of the evolving situation; Mission should be 
alert for these possible revisions. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin elements: 
 
I thank Under Secretary-General Pascoe for his report. 
 
As we have noted in prior monthly Middle East 
consultations, advancing the cause of peace in the 
Middle East is among the most important objectives 
President Obama has identified for our renewed 
international engagement.  As the President affirmed to 
the General Assembly on September 23, "the time has come 
to re-launch negotiations without preconditions that 
address the permanent status issues: security for 
Israelis and Palestinians, borders, refugees, and 
Jerusalem.  The goal is clear: Two states living side by 
side in peace and security -- a Jewish state of Israel, 
with true security for all Israelis; and a viable, 
independent Palestinian state with contiguous territory 
that ends the occupation that began in 1967, and 
realizes the potential of the Palestinian people." 
 
Special Envoy Mitchell has just returned from another 
trip to the region, working to create the context for a 
prompt resumption and early, successful conclusion of 
negotiations between the parties. 
 
I wish to place in clear contrast two dramatically 
different visions for the road ahead: the road of 
statehood and the road of conflict. 
 
The Palestinian Authority and President Abbas are 
constructing the basis for a viable and responsible 
Palestinian state.  They have been making steady and 
significant progress towards that goal.  We have 
welcomed the PM Prime Minister Salaam Fayyad's 
development of a detailed, two-year plan to develop 
institutional capacity.  We supported the deployment of 
over 2000 Palestinian security personnel to the West 
Bank, after completing their training in Jordan, with 
another 500 on the way. 
 
We have also welcomed the recent increases in economic 
activity and quality of life in the West Bank.  Israel 
has taken constructive steps to facilitate this 
progress.  It has removed key checkpoints and eased 
conditions at others, and withdrawn troops to the 
outskirts of four cities.  These initial steps taken 
 
show that Israelis and Palestinians can make practical 
progress by working together towards the same goals. 
 
Much more needs to be done.  Israel should stop 
settlement activity and dismantle outposts; the United 
States does not accept the legitimacy of continued 
Israeli settlements.  Israel should further ease access 
and movement, and facilitate economic growth in the West 
Bank.  Palestinians should continue efforts on security, 
reform of governance institutions, and ending 
incitement.  And all parties, including Arab states, 
need to move forward to re-launch negotiations as soon 
as possible. 
 
Then there is the road of conflict.  Hamas' behavior 
continues to fall short of the principles long outlined 
by the Quartet: renunciation of violence, recognition of 
Israel, and acceptance of previous agreements between 
the parties.  In the month of September alone, thirteen 
rockets and mortars were fired from Hamas-controlled 
Gaza indiscriminately at civilian communities in Israel, 
and there were dozens of other attacks along the 
boundary. Terrorist attacks of this nature are not a 
form of "resistance."  They do represent a threat to 
international peace and security, and they were the 
cause of the conflict between Israel and Hamas last 
winter.  This path will never lead to the fulfillment of 
Palestinian aspirations for an independent state. 
 
A further danger to international peace and security, 
which we note with very grave concern, is the continuing 
presence of armed groups including Hizballah in Lebanon. 
Armed elements, their assets, and their weapons in South 
Lebanon pose a similar threat to those who work 
diligently for peace and security in Lebanon. The 
explosion in Tayr Filsi, taken alongside the earlier 
explosion in Khirbet Salim, signals yet another weapons- 
related violation of UNSCR 1701.  It should be a source 
of deep concern to all of us. We look forward to DPKO's 
report for detailed information on this latest, serious 
incident. 
 
We continue to strongly support the full implementation 
of UN Security Council Resolutions 1701 and 1559, 
including their calls for all arms in Lebanon to be 
brought under state control and the delineation of 
Lebanon's borders.  The people of Lebanon deserve to 
reap the benefits of a government whose services and 
authority extends throughout the land. 
 
Lest we sow the seeds of another conflict, all UN 
members must also fulfill their responsibility to 
prevent the illicit arms smuggling into Gaza.  We also 
continue to call for the immediate release of Gilad 
Shalit.  At the same time, just as we defend Israel's 
right to self defense, we cannot accept the continuing 
humanitarian crisis in Gaza.  The people of Gaza must 
have hope for a better future and know that the 
international community hears their concerns.  We call 
for a reopening of the crossings, with an appropriate 
monitoring regime, to allow for the entry of legitimate 
goods into Gaza. 
 
The Report of the UN Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza 
Conflict was requested by the Human Rights Council in 
Geneva, and the allegations of human rights and 
humanitarian law violations contained therein it are not 
a matter for Security Council action.  We continue to 
have serious concerns about the Report, its unbalanced 
focus on Israel, the overly broad scope of its 
recommendations, and its sweeping conclusions of law. 
Nevertheless, we take the allegations in the report 
seriously.  Israel has the institutions and ability to 
carry out serious investigations of these allegations 
and we encourage it to do so.  Hamas is a terrorist 
organization, and has neither the ability nor 
willingness to examine its violations of human rights. 
 
Finally, we urge all Arab states to take steps in the 
spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative towards building 
relations with Israel, including ceasing harsh rhetoric 
in international organizations and other fora.  Arab 
governments can also promote progress by supporting the 
Palestinian Authority under President Abbas, both 
politically and financially, thus helping to improve 
conditions for all Palestinians throughout the West Bank 
and Gaza. 
 
With patience and determination, we can assist all 
people in the region to construct a new and better 
future, and realize the peace and stability they 
deserve. 
 
End elements. 
CLINTON