09STPETERSBURG31
REBELLIOUS GOVERNOR OF MURMANSK OBLAST REPLACED
Mon Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate St Petersburg
R 231502Z MAR 09
FM AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2732
INFO AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 
AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 
AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 
AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURGUNCLAS ST PETERSBURG 000031 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV RS
SUBJECT: REBELLIOUS GOVERNOR OF MURMANSK OBLAST REPLACED 
 
REF: ST. PETERSBURG 28 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  President Medvedev has relieved Murmansk 
Oblast Governor Yuriy Yevdokimov of his position and replaced 
him with Deputy Head of the State Fishing Committee Dmitriy 
Dmitriyenko.  Medvedev's decision followed United Russia's 
recent election defeat in the city of Murmansk where the 
incumbent lost to the candidate supported by Yevdokimov.  Unlike 
Yevdokimov, Dmitriyenko does not have deep roots in Murmansk 
Oblast, and will likely govern in more complete compliance with 
the Kremlin's regional plans.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU).  On March 21, President Dmitriy Medvedev accepted 
Murmansk Oblast Governor Yuriy Yevdokimov's resignation letter. 
Rumors of Yevdokimov's likely resignation first emerged at the 
end of February during the mayoral election campaign in the city 
of Murmansk, where Yevdokimov's ally Sergey Subbotin was running 
against incumbent Mikhail Savchenko (reftel).  Yevdokimov, 
though a United Russia party member himself, accused United 
Russia of illegal and unfair campaigning, while his opponents 
retaliated by charging the governor with political intrigue 
against the incumbent mayor.  The conflict between the governor 
and the incumbent mayor made the Murmansk mayoral elections 
highly competitive, and the first round on March 1 was 
inconclusive and necessitated a runoff.  Subbotin defeated 
Savchenko in the March 15 runoff election by a decisive margin. 
Subbotin, who has always insisted that he was an active 
supporter of United Russia and Vladimir Putin's personal 
follower, has promised to formally enter the party.  United 
Russia is reportedly weighing whether it should live with 
Subbotin's victory and accept him into its ranks, or whether it 
should initiate legal proceedings to cancel the election 
results.  However, regardless of United Russia's decision on 
Subbotin, observers expected that the party would punish 
Yevdokimov to send a message to other governors that they should 
not work against United Russia's official election candidates. 
 
¶3. (SBU).  While Yevdokimov's resignation formally was 
voluntary, most observers are sure the Kremlin was behind it, 
and believe the election conflict with United Russia was just 
the straw that broke the camel's back with respect to 
Yevdokimov's relationship with United Russia.  It was not the 
only charge against Yevdokimov.  President Medvedev earlier had 
publicly criticized the governor for his failure to implement an 
anti-crisis regional employment program.  Regardless, Yevdokimov 
himself now says that it is time to replace elder regional 
leaders with younger officials, and that he would help 
Dmitriyenko become acquainted with the oblast.  Unlike 
Yevdokimov, who was first elected governor in 1996, Dmitriyenko 
is little known in the region.  He has played up his prior 
service in the Northern Fleet,as well as his recent duties with 
the State Fishing Committee as being experiences which help him 
to understand the oblast and its economy. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment.  Replacement of Murmansk Governor Yevdokimov 
with a relative unknown is fully in line with the Kremlin's 
gubernatorial appointment strategy.  Dmitriyenko was probably 
selected because he is an experienced and disciplined official 
who has certain knowledge and competence which will be useful 
for his new gubernatorial duties.  However, he also does not 
have any deep roots in the region nor any personal business ties 
with the local political elite - making him completely dependent 
on Moscow.  End Comment. 
 
GWALTNEY