09STATE11823
DEMARCHE ON MAURITANIA
Mon Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
P R 092041Z FEB 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY DAKAR PRIORITY 
INFO AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 
USMISSION USAU ADDIS ABABAUNCLAS STATE 011823 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SG MR
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON MAURITANIA 
 
¶1. (U) This is an urgent action request.  Please see 
paragraph 3. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On January 28, President Abdoulaye Wade sent a 
special envoy from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mankeur 
Ndiaye to deliver a message to Mauritanian Mohamed Ould Abdel 
Aziz. According to media reports, the message emphasized the 
friendship and brotherhood between the two countries. The 
week prior, President Wade met with General Aziz in Qatar and 
began what reports have called "dialogue" between Mauritania 
and Senegal. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Post is instructed to meet with Foreign Minister 
Gadio and special envoy Mankeur Ndiaye as soon as possible to 
request clarification regarding recent meetings between 
Senegalese officials and Mauritania junta leaders. Post 
should also make clear USG position on Mauritania. 
 
Please refer to the following talking points. 
(BEGIN POINTS) 
 
-- We remain firm in our condemnation of the undemocratic and 
unconstitutional measures taken by Mauritania's security and 
military leaders in launching the August 6 coup d'etat 
against the legitimate and democratically elected president 
of Mauritania. 
 
-- We do not accept the coup for reasons both of principle 
and practicality:  Not only do coups violate the democratic 
principles we all share, but also experience shows that coups 
simply beget further coups--and inspire them elsewhere.  We 
are also convinced that this coup will not bring greater 
security and stability to Mauritania but rather risks 
sparking divisive conflict and courting economic ruin. 
 
--The U.S. strongly supports the firm and principled position 
of the AU and the international community in rejecting the 
coup in Mauritania. 
 
--In defiance of the international community, the junta is 
embarked on a course that will lead the country even farther 
down an unconstitutional path by taking steps to conduct 
illegitimate elections that can only further complicate a 
return to legitimacy and constitutional order. 
 
--We must reject this cynical attempt by the junta to give 
itself a democratic veneer.  We, therefore, urge Senegal to 
fully support the AU position including any measures adopted 
to dissuade the junta from its unwise and illegitimate 
actions. 
 
--Senegal's reputation as a leading democracy gives its 
actions towards undemocratic events increased importance and 
scrutiny among its neighbors and within the international 
community.  We hope that Senegal will use its influence to 
help Mauritania return to constitutional order beginning with 
the re-instatement of President Abdallahi to his presidential 
powers. 
 
 
CLINTON