09STATE61216
UKRAINE--2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND
Fri Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1216 1640009
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 122345Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY KYIV PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 061216 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB KCRM KWMN PGOV PHUM PREL SMIG KPAO KTIP UP
SUBJECT: UKRAINE--2009 TIP REPORT: PRESS GUIDANCE AND 
DEMARCHE 
 
REF: A. 2009 STATE 59732 
     ¶B. 2009 STATE 5577 
 
¶1. This is an action cable; see paras 5 through 7 and 10. 
 
¶2. On June 16, 2009, at 10:00 a.m. EDT, the Secretary will 
release the 2009 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report at a 
press conference in the Department's press briefing room. 
This release will receive substantial coverage in domestic 
and foreign news outlets.  Until the time of the Secretary's 
June 16 press conference, any public release of the Report or 
country narratives contained therein is prohibited. 
 
¶3. The Department is hereby providing Post with advance press 
guidance to be used on June 16 or thereafter.  Also provided 
is demarche language to be used in informing the Government 
of Ukraine of its tier ranking and the TIP Report's imminent 
release.  The text of the TIP Report country narrative is 
provided, both for use in informing the Government of Ukraine 
and in any local media release by Post's public affairs 
section on June 16 or thereafter.  Drawing on information 
provided below in paras 8 and 9, Post may provide the host 
government with the text of the TIP Report narrative no 
earlier than 1200 noon local time Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, 
EUR, and NEA countries and OOB local time Tuesday June 16 for 
SCA and EAP posts.  Please note, however, that any public 
release of the Report's information should not/not precede 
the Secretary's release at 10:00 am EDT on June 16. 
 
¶4. The entire TIP Report will be available on-line at 
www.state.gov/g/tip shortly after the Secretary's June 16 
release.  Hard copies of the Report will be pouched to posts 
in all countries appearing on the Report.  The Secretary's 
statement at the June 16 press event, and the statement of 
and fielding of media questions by G/TIP's Director and 
Senior Advisor to the Secretary, Ambassador-at-Large Luis 
CdeBaca, will be available on the Department's website 
shortly after the June 16 event.  Ambassador de Baca will 
also hold a general briefing for officials of foreign 
embassies in Washington DC on June 17 at 3:30 pm EDT. 
 
¶5. Action Request: No earlier than 12 noon local time on 
Monday June 15 for WHA, AF, EUR, and NEA posts and OOB local 
time on Tuesday June 16 for SCA and EAP posts, please inform 
the appropriate official in the Government of Ukraine of the 
June 16 release of the 2009 TIP Report, drawing on the points 
in para 9 (at Post's discretion) and including the text of 
the country narrative provided in para 8.  For countries 
where the State Department has lowered the tier ranking, it 
is particularly important to advise governments prior to the 
Report being released in Washington on June 16. 
 
¶6. Action Request continued:  Please note that, for those 
countries which will not receive an "action plan" with 
specific recommendations for improvement, posts should draw 
host governments' attention to the areas for improvement 
identified in the 2009 Report, especially highlighted in the 
"Recommendations" section of the second paragraph of the 
narrative text.  This engagement is important to establishing 
the framework in which the government's performance will be 
judged for the 2010 Report.  If posts have questions about 
which governments will receive an action plan, or how they 
may follow up on the recommendations in the 2009 Report, 
please contact G/TIP and the appropriate regional bureau. 
 
¶7. Action Request continued: On June 16, please be prepared 
to answer media inquiries on the Report's release using the 
press guidance provided in para 11.  If Post wishes, a local 
press statement may be released on or after 10:30 am EDT June 
16, drawing on the press guidance and the text of the TIP 
Report's country narrative provided in para 8. 
 
¶8. Begin Final Text of Ukraine's country narrative in the 
2009 TIP Report: 
 
-------------------------------- 
Ukraine (TIER 2 Watch List) 
-------------------------------- 
 
Ukraine is a source, transit and, to a lesser extent, 
destination country for men, women, and children trafficked 
for the purposes of commercial sexual exploitation and forced 
labor.  Forty-eight percent of the trafficking victims 
assisted by IOM and its local NGO partners in Ukraine in 2008 
suffered sexual exploitation; three percent had been forced 
to beg; and 49 percent suffered other forms of forced labor. 
Ukrainian victims are trafficked to Russia, Poland, Turkey, 
Italy, Austria, Spain, Germany, Portugal, the Czech Republic, 
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, Israel, Greece, 
Lebanon, Benin, Tunisia, Cyprus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
Hungary, Slovakia, Syria, Switzerland, the United States, 
Canada and Belarus.   Women were forced into the sex 
industry, or forced to work as housekeepers, in service 
industries, or in textile or light manufacturing.  The 
majority of Ukrainian male labor trafficking victims were 
exploited in Russia but also in other countries, primarily as 
construction laborers, factory and agriculture workers, or 
sailors.  There were three instances in which males were 
forced to take part in criminal activities, such as 
dismantling stolen cars for parts to be sold on the black 
market.  Children were most often trafficked for sexual 
exploitation or forced begging.  Ukraine continues to be a 
country of transit for trafficking victims from Central Asia 
and Russia.  Victims were trafficked within Ukraine for the 
purpose of labor exploitation in the agriculture and service 
sectors, sexual exploitation, and begging.  In 2008, IOM 
reported one male from Belarus was trafficked to Ukraine for 
the purpose of labor exploitation. Homeless children or 
children in orphanages are particularly vulnerable to 
trafficking in Ukraine. 
The Government of Ukraine does not fully comply with the 
minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking; 
however, it is making significant efforts to do so.  Despite 
these overall efforts, the government did not show evidence 
of progress in punishing trafficking offenders, addressing 
the significant complicity of government officials, and 
providing sufficient protection for trafficking victims; 
therefore, Ukraine is placed on Tier 2 Watch List. 
Recommendations for Ukraine:  Seek sentences for convicted 
trafficking offenders that require them to serve appropriate 
jail time; take steps to curb trafficking complicity by 
government officials; continue trafficking-specific training 
for prosecutors and judges; increase funding for victim 
protection and assistance; develop formal systems to guide 
law enforcement in proactive identification of trafficking 
victims and referral of victims to available services; take 
steps to provide specialized protection and assistance to 
child trafficking victims; and consider awareness initiatives 
targeted at potential clients of the sex trade and labor 
trafficking beneficiaries to reduce the demand for human 
trafficking. 
 
Prosecution 
---------------- 
The Government of Ukraine made progress in prosecuting labor 
trafficking cases during the reporting period, though these 
efforts were overshadowed by inadequate punishments imposed 
on both sex and labor trafficking offenders and a lack of 
effort to address official complicity in human trafficking. 
The government prohibits all forms of trafficking through 
Article 149 of its Criminal Code.  Penalties prescribed range 
from three to 15 years, imprisonment, which are sufficiently 
stringent and commensurate with those prescribed for other 
grave crimes.  This year, the government prosecuted 80 
trafficking cases, compared with 95 cases in 2007.  The 
number of labor trafficking prosecutions increased from 23 in 
2007 to 53 in 2008.  The government reported 99 convictions 
in 2008 compared with 128 in 2007.  The average prison term 
imposed on convicted trafficking offenders was six years; 
however, only 39 percent of convicted traffickers actually 
served time in jail.  Two offenders who were convicted of the 
most serious category of trafficking crimes were sentenced 
only to pay fines.  In 2008, the General Prosecutor,s Office 
issued a report assessing human trafficking trial procedures 
and calling for prosecutors to give more serious attention to 
human trafficking cases.  The Academy of Judges incorporated 
a human trafficking lecture into professional training for 
judges and the Ministry of Interior conducted ongoing 
training throughout Ukraine on trafficking awareness for 
police officers.  Widespread trafficking-related corruption 
of law enforcement officials remained a serious impediment to 
more effective anti-trafficking efforts in Ukraine.  NGOs 
reported that corruption was particularly a problem at times 
involving prosecutors or judges, though the government 
reported no investigations, prosecutions, or convictions of 
government officials complicit in trafficking. 
 
 
Protection 
---------------- 
Ukraine,s protection efforts remained heavily reliant on 
international donor funding during the reporting period. 
While one of the goals of the government,s 2007-2010 
national anti-trafficking plan was to provide assistance to 
trafficking victims, the government has not developed a 
mechanism for referral or sufficient funding for assistance. 
Through donor-sponsored programs and some government 
services, foreign and domestic victims of trafficking in 
Ukraine received shelter, medical, psychological, legal, and 
job placement assistance.  The government placed child 
trafficking victims in temporary homeless shelters for 
children that do not offer specialized services for 
trafficking victims.  Local governments offered sporadic 
in-kind contributions toward protection of victims.  The 
government does not have a formal system established to 
proactively identify trafficking victims.  While the 
government has expressed a policy of encouraging victims to 
participate in investigations or prosecutions through a 
witness protection program, in practice the government rarely 
employed this program due to lack of funding or a lack of 
prosecutors, understanding of the program. In 2008 IOM, 
working with its local partners, registered 820 victims, 
including 32 victims of internal trafficking. IOM reported 
that 295 of these 820 victims participated in criminal 
proceedings.  There were no reports of victims being punished 
for unlawful acts committed as a direct result of being 
trafficked, but there were reports that victims, rights were 
not fully respected during court trials.  The government did 
not provide legal alternatives to the removal of foreign 
victims to countries where they may face hardship or 
retribution. 
 
 
Prevention 
---------------- 
The government made modest progress in preventing trafficking 
in persons during the reporting period.  In 2008, the 
government spent approximately $34,431 for printing and 
distribution of anti-trafficking awareness materials 
targeting potential victims.  The government also cooperated 
with local television channels to broadcast public service 
announcements and informational programs aimed at raising 
awareness of human trafficking.  There were no specific 
campaigns targeted at potential clients of the sex trade or 
beneficiaries of forced labor.  Inadequate funding, lack of 
performance indicators and other obstacles impeded 
implementation of the government,s national anti-trafficking 
plan in 2008.  The Kherson regional government provided some 
financial support to a local awareness campaign.  Ministry of 
Interior police conducted two operations in 2008 aimed at 
identifying and preventing Ukrainians and foreigners 
participating in sex-tourism.  Ukraine,s National Academy of 
Defense cooperated with IOM to conduct five pre-departure 
counter trafficking training for Ukrainian troops being 
deployed for international peacekeeping duties in 2008. 
 
¶9. Post may wish to deliver the following points, which offer 
technical and legal background on the TIP Report process, to 
the host government as a non-paper with the above TIP Report 
country narrative: 
 
(begin non-paper) 
 
-- The U.S. Congress, through its passage of the 2000 
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as amended (TVPA), 
requires the Secretary of State to submit an annual Report to 
Congress.  The goal of this Report is to stimulate action and 
create partnerships around the world in the fight against 
modern-day slavery.  The USG approach to combating human 
trafficking follows the TVPA and the standards set forth in 
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the 
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime (commonly known as the "Palermo Protocol").  The TVPA 
and the Palermo Protocol recognize that this is a crime in 
which the victims' labor or services (including in the "sex 
industry") are obtained or maintained through force, fraud, 
or coercion, whether overt or through psychological 
manipulation.  While much attention has focused on 
international flows, both the TVPA and the Palermo Protocol 
focus on the exploitation of the victim, and do not require a 
showing that the victim was moved. 
 
-- Recent amendments to the TVPA removed the requirement that 
only countries with a "significant number" of trafficking 
victims be included in the Report. Beginning with the 2009 
TIP Report, countries determined to be a country of origin, 
transit, or destination for victims of severe forms of 
trafficking are included in the Report and assigned to one of 
three tiers.  Countries assessed as meeting the "minimum 
standards for the elimination of severe forms of trafficking" 
set forth in the TVPA are classified as Tier 1.  Countries 
assessed as not fully complying with the minimum standards, 
but making significant efforts to meet those minimum 
standards are classified as Tier 2.  Countries assessed as 
neither complying with the minimum standards nor making 
significant efforts to do so are classified as Tier 3. 
 
-- The TVPA also requires the Secretary of State to provide a 
"Special Watch List" to Congress later in the year. 
Anti-trafficking efforts of the countries on this list are to 
be evaluated again in an Interim Assessment that the 
Secretary of State must provide to Congress by February 1 of 
each year.  Countries are included on the "Special Watch 
List" if they move up in "tier" rankings in the annual TIP 
Report -- from 3 to 2 or from 2 to 1 -- or if they have been 
placed on the Tier 2 Watch List. 
 
-- Tier 2 Watch List consists of Tier 2 countries determined: 
(1) not to have made "increasing efforts" to combat human 
trafficking over the past year; (2) to be making significant 
efforts based on commitments of anti-trafficking reforms over 
the next year, or (3) to have a very significant number of 
trafficking victims or a significantly increasing victim 
population.  As indicated in reftel B, the TVPRA of 2008 
contains a provision requiring that a country that has been 
included on Tier 2 Watch List for two consecutive years after 
the date of enactment of the TVPRA of 2008 be ranked as Tier 
¶3.  Thus, any automatic downgrade to Tier 3 pursuant to this 
provision would take place, at the earliest, in the 2011 TIP 
Report (i.e., a country would have to be ranked Tier 2 Watch 
List in the 2009 and 2010 Reports before being subject to 
Tier 3 in the 2011 Report).  The new law allows for a waiver 
of this provision for up to two additional years upon a 
determination by the President that the country has developed 
and devoted sufficient resources to a written plan to make 
significant efforts to bring itself into compliance with the 
minimum standards. 
 
-- Countries classified as Tier 3 may be subject to statutory 
restrictions for the subsequent fiscal year on 
non-humanitarian and non-trade-related foreign assistance 
and, in some circumstances, withholding of funding for 
participation by government officials or employees in 
educational and cultural exchange programs.   In addition, 
the President could instruct the U.S. executive directors to 
international financial institutions to oppose loans or other 
utilization of funds (other than for humanitarian, 
trade-related or certain types of development assistance) 
with respect to countries on Tier 3.  Countries classified as 
Tier 3 that take strong action within 90 days of the Report's 
release to show significant efforts against trafficking in 
persons, and thereby warrant a reassessment of their Tier 
classification, would avoid such sanctions.  Guidelines for 
such actions are in the DOS-crafted action plans to be shared 
by Posts with host governments. 
 
-- The 2009 TIP Report, issuing as it does in the midst of 
the global financial crisis, highlights high levels of 
trafficking for forced labor in many parts of the world and 
systemic contributing factors to this phenomenon:  fraudulent 
recruitment practices and excessive recruiting fees in 
workers' home countries; the lack of adequate labor 
protections in both sending and receiving countries; and the 
flawed design of some destination countries' "sponsorship 
systems" that do not give foreign workers adequate legal 
recourse when faced with conditions of forced labor.  As the 
May 2009 ILO Global Report on Forced Labor concluded, forced 
labor victims suffer approximately $20 billion in losses, and 
traffickers' profits are estimated at $31 billion.  The 
current global financial crisis threatens to increase the 
number of victims of forced labor and increase the associated 
"cost of coercion." 
 
-- The text of the TVPA and amendments can be found on 
website www.state.gov/g/tip. 
 
-- On June 16, 2009, the Secretary of State will release the 
ninth annual TIP Report in a public event at the State 
Department.  We are providing you an advance copy of your 
country's narrative in that report.  Please keep this 
information embargoed until 10:00 am Washington DC time June 
¶16.  The State Department will also hold a general briefing 
for officials of foreign embassies in Washington DC on June 
17 at 3:30 pm EDT. 
 
(end non-paper) 
 
¶10. Posts should make sure that the relevant country 
narrative is readily available on or though the Mission's web 
page in English and appropriate local language(s) as soon as 
possible after the TIP Report is released.  Funding for 
translation costs will be handled as it was for the Human 
Rights Report.  Posts needing financial assistance for 
translation costs should contact their regional bureau's EX 
office. 
 
¶11. The following is press guidance provided for Post to use 
with local media. 
 
Q1: Why was Ukraine given a ranking of Tier 2 Watch List? 
 
A: Ukraine is placed on Tier 2 Watch List because the 
government did not show evidence of sufficient progress in 
punishing trafficking offenders, addressing complicity of 
government officials, and providing sufficient protection for 
trafficking victims 
 
Q2: What progress did Ukraine make in the last year? 
 
¶A. The government made progress in prosecuting labor 
trafficking cases during the reporting period, though these 
efforts were overshadowed by inadequate punishments imposed 
on both sex and labor trafficking offenders and a lack of 
effort to address official complicity in human trafficking. 
 
Q3: What can Ukraine do to improve its fight against 
trafficking in persons? 
 
A: To improve its anti-trafficking performance, the Ukrainian 
government could: seek sentences for convicted trafficking 
offenders that require them to serve appropriate jail time; 
take steps to curb trafficking complicity by government 
officials; continue trafficking-specific training for 
prosecutors and judges; increase funding for victim 
protection and assistance; develop formal systems to guide 
law enforcement in proactive identification of trafficking 
victims and referral of victims to available services; take 
steps to provide specialized protection and assistance to 
child trafficking victims; and consider awareness initiatives 
targeted at potential clients of the sex trade and labor 
trafficking beneficiaries to reduce the demand for human 
trafficking. 
 
¶12. The Department appreciates posts' assistance with the 
preceding action requests. 
CLINTON