09STATE14176
GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST CONSULTATIONS, FEBRUARY
Mon Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0013
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4176 0471736
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161720Z FEB 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 014176 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL IS KPAL
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE: MIDDLE EAST CONSULTATIONS, FEBRUARY 
18 
 
¶1. (SBU) This is an action message.  USUN is authorized 
to 
draw from points in para 2-4 below as a basis for its 
participation in Security Council consultations on the 
Middle East scheduled for February 18, and for its 
public statements on the consultation. 
 
¶2. (U) Talking points. 
 
-- Thank Special Coordinator Serry. 
 
-- The United States has already moved to reinvigorate 
its efforts to achieve a comprehensive resolution to the 
Arab-Israeli conflict based on two states, Israel and 
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. 
 
-- President Obama and Secretary Clinton are firmly 
committed to this objective.  On the second full day of 
the Administration, they named a distinguished special 
envoy, who immediately traveled to the region to hear 
the views of the parties, to help consolidate the 
ceasefire in Gaza, and to ensure that the humanitarian 
needs of the people of Gaza are being met. 
 
-- Special Envoy Mitchell will continue to carry forward 
this commitment with vigorous, determined diplomacy.  He 
will be returning to the region soon.  We seek a 
comprehensive peace between Israel and all its neighbors 
that respects Israel's rightful place in the community 
of nations. 
 
-- With respect to Gaza, our goal remains a durable and 
fully-respected ceasefire.  This entails: 
 
-- a) an end to all violence, hostilities and acts of 
terrorism, including rocket, mortar and other attacks on 
Israel; 
 
-- b) preventing the rearming of Hamas, including an end 
to illicit Hamas smuggling of arms and ammunition into 
Gaza, and intensifying member states' efforts to prevent 
Hamas from replenishing its arsenal; 
 
-- c) reopening the Gaza border crossings on a 
controlled, sustained and continuous basis, with an 
appropriate monitoring regime with international and 
Palestinian Authority participation, consistent with the 
November 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. 
 
-- A durable ceasefire in Gaza would make it far easier 
to resume serious negotiations toward a two-state 
solution, as described in UNSC Resolution 1850 and 
called for in numerous Security Council resolutions.  As 
noted in UNSC Resolutions 1850 and 1860, both Israel and 
the Palestinians have obligations to fulfill. 
 
-- As we strive for a permanent and sustainable 
ceasefire, we remain deeply concerned about the 
humanitarian situation in Gaza. 
 
-- In addition to the $600 million the United States 
provided in assistance to the Palestinians last year, 
including $185 million for UNRWA, we have provided 
approximately $61 million in emergency assistance in 
Fiscal Year 2009 through UNRWA, ICRC, WFP, and NGOs. 
This assistance will help provide food, temporary 
shelter, non-food items, and emergency health care for 
the people of Gaza.  Additionally, we have contributed 
$60 million this year to UNRWA's General Fund for its 
core health and education programs in all five fields of 
operation. 
 
-- The United States strongly supports Egypt's call for 
an international donors' conference in Cairo on March 2 
to facilitate Gaza's recovery and strengthen the 
Palestinian economy in both the West Bank and Gaza.  We 
plan to be represented at a high level and urge others 
to show similar support for Egypt's initiative. 
 
-- The United States sees the March 2 conference as an 
opportunity to address -? along with other donors and 
international organizations -? immediate humanitarian 
needs in Gaza, and to support the Palestinian 
Authority's plan for the reconstruction of Gaza as an 
integral part of a future Palestinian state. 
 
-- We hope that conditions on the ground will allow the 
United States and other members of the international 
community to provide substantial levels of assistance to 
the people of Gaza. 
 
-- We strongly support President Mubarak's efforts, 
including his invitation to leaders of Palestinian 
factions to join in reconciliation talks in Cairo 
starting February 22, and we urge others to back these 
efforts. 
 
-- A better life for the Palestinian people, including 
the people of Gaza, can be assured only in the context 
of a Palestinian Authority with which the international 
community and Israel can work.  Naturally, this would be 
a Palestinian Authority that rejects violence, 
recognizers Israel's right to exist, and abides by past 
agreements.  These are necessary elements for 
Palestinian statehood and for the unity of the West Bank 
and Gaza. 
 
-- We believe that the Quartet remains the most 
effective instrument for furthering the international 
community's engagement, including the engagement of the 
Secretary General, in efforts to bring lasting peace to 
the Middle East. 
 
-- The United States strongly supports the engagement of 
UN Agencies in addressing urgent humanitarian needs in 
Gaza.  We are reviewing the February 2 Consolidated 
Appeal Process (CAP) document and expect to be in a 
position to give it our strong support. 
 
End Talking Points. 
 
¶3. (U) Possible additional talking point, for use only 
if developments warrant: 
 
-- We congratulate President Mubarak and Egyptian 
officials on their success in arranging a longer-term 
truce in Gaza between Israel and Hamas.  This is a 
important step toward a lasting, sustainable peace. 
 
¶4. (U) Possible additional talking points, if time 
permits: 
 
-- While our primary focus remains on Gaza, we should 
not lose sight of developments in Lebanon.  The 
international community's commitment to Lebanon's 
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity, and 
independence must revolve around full implementation of 
UNSC Resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006), including 
an end to weapons smuggling and the disarmament of all 
militias, including Hizballah.  We should also raise our 
voices in support of democratic forces in Lebanon. 
 
-- Last week President Obama and Secretary Clinton 
commemorated the fourth anniversary of the assassination 
of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.  We are 
confident that the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, 
scheduled for its formal launching on March 1, will 
bring to justice those responsible for financing, 
planning and perpetrating this heinous crime. 
 
End Talking Points. 
CLINTON