09STATE64062
ZIMBABWE TIP 2009 TIER 3 SHORT-TERM ACTION PLAN
Fri Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4062 1702238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192216Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY HARARE IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 064062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP ELAB KCRM KWMN PHUM PREL SMIG ZI
SUBJECT: ZIMBABWE TIP 2009 TIER 3 SHORT-TERM ACTION PLAN 
 
¶1. This is an action cable: please see paragraph 4. 
 
¶2. The 2009 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report carries 
policy and programmatic implications for those countries 
listed on Tier 3 (i.e. those countries whose governments do 
not fully comply with the minimum standards for the 
elimination of trafficking and are not making significant 
efforts to do so).  Under the Trafficking Victims Protection 
Act of 2000, as amended, (TVPA) certain sanctions, effective 
October 1, 2009, may be imposed on Tier 3 countries. 
Sanctions may be avoided if, prior to the Presidential 
determination on sanctions, a country makes "significant 
efforts" to comply with the minimum standards and the 
Secretary determines that the country should be reassessed 
off of Tier 3. 
 
¶3. The following statement is for Post's information only. 
If the Government of Zimbabwe completes the steps described 
below within 60 days of the TIP Report's release (by August 
15, 2009) and, assuming that other efforts continue apace and 
there are no significant negative events related to human 
trafficking, G/TIP and AF will recommend to the Secretary 
that she make a determination that Zimbabwe has been found to 
meet the criteria for Tier 2 Watch List.  If the Government 
of Zimbabwe were reassessed to Tier 2 Watch List, it would no 
longer be subject to sanctions.  If the steps below are not 
completed, and Zimbabwe remains on Tier 3, the President has 
the option waive sanctions, either in full or in part, if he 
determines that doing so would promote the purposes of the 
TVPA or is otherwise in the national interest of the United 
States. (Note: the term "sanctions" is used herein to 
describe sanctions defined in the TVPA, including provision 
for directed voting in international financial institutions 
(IFIs)). 
 
¶4. Action Request: Zimbabwe is listed as a Tier 3 Country in 
the 
2009 TIP Report. Post is requested to approach the government 
to urge that it implement the following steps within the next 
60 days.  Department encourages Post to remind the government 
that, while these steps are critical in the next 60 days, 
continued significant efforts throughout the year will be key 
to next year's ranking. 
 
¶5. Begin demarche/action plan: 
 
The Secretary of State has determined that Zimbabwe neither 
fully complies with the minimum standards for the elimination 
of trafficking in persons, as set forth in U.S. law (the 
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as amended), nor is it 
making significant efforts to comply with those standards. 
This places Zimbabwe on Tier 3.  Within 60 days of the 
release of the Trafficking in Persons Report, the President 
must transmit to Congress sanctions determinations for 
countries on Tier 3; sanctions could include certain 
restrictions on USG foreign assistance; and negative USG 
votes on international financial institutions (IFIs). 
 
During the next several months, the USG will work with the 
Government of Zimbabwe and foreign country missions most 
directly affected by trafficking to promote improvements in 
combating trafficking in persons.  Based on actions taken by 
Zimbabwe within 60 days of the Report's release, Zimbabwe 
could be determined to have made significant efforts to bring 
itself into compliance with the minimum standards if it 
undertakes significant actions against trafficking during 
this time frame. 
 
Fulfillment of the following (or other similar) steps would 
constitute significant efforts: 
 
-- Consider the feasibility of and show progress toward the 
development of a specific and comprehensive national law 
against human trafficking that includes both transnational 
and internal trafficking.  The law should define trafficking, 
specify who can be considered a trafficker, and outline a 
punishment scheme for various trafficking acts.  The process 
by which the law is developed should be consultative, and 
include input gained from broad consultations with relevant 
ministries and police agencies, civil society, human rights 
bodies, and international organizations that deal with issues 
relating to human trafficking. 
 
-- Enhance the ability of police, other law enforcement 
entities, and social welfare officials to respond to the 
physical and psychological needs of trafficking victims by 
expanding formalized procedures for interviewing potential 
victims and transferring them to the care, when appropriate, 
of local NGOs or international organizations, and assuring 
eventual reintegration.  To facilitate this sort of 
cooperation, seek out, learn about the work of, and establish 
partnerships with organizations working to protect children 
within the country in addition to current activities already 
taking place at Zimbabwe,s major border crossings at 
Plumtree and Beitbridge.  Ensure that police receive clear 
instructions regarding their specific roles and 
responsibilities to combat trafficking. 
 
-- Expand current trafficking-related media reports into a 
nationwide awareness campaign aimed educating government 
officials and the general public about the nature of human 
trafficking.  Publicize available resources for trafficking 
victims and populations vulnerable to trafficking.  This 
could be carried out in a variety of locally appropriate 
ways.  For example: 
 
a. Air brief informational spots on local radio stations; 
 
b. Support street dramas about TIP using youth groups; 
 
c. Government officials knowledgeable on TIP give press 
interviews or include discussions of trafficking and 
trafficking related issues in public appearances and 
speeches; 
 
d. Place opinion editorials (op eds) on trafficking in 
persons in local newspapers; or 
 
e. Publicize, where appropriate, trafficking-related court 
proceedings in local news media; or 
 
f. Encourage government-sponsored media including radio, 
television, and print to air anti-trafficking messages and 
advertisements free of charge. 
 
End demarche/action plan. 
 
¶6. Post's continued assistance and efforts in the fight to 
eliminate trafficking in persons are greatly appreciated. 
CLINTON