09TELAVIV2479
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #2479/01 3171107
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131107Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4201
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 6240
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 2809
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 6846
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 7057
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 6296
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 4946
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 7152
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3918
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 2134
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0801
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 8322
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 3327
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 7305
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 9382
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 2128
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 3170
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 002479 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
¶3.  Muslim-Americans 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
HaQaretz published the results of a survey conducted over the past 
days among Israelis by Dialog: 
- The majority of the public -- 57% -- supports the view of MK Shaul 
Mofaz of Kadima, who published a plan earlier this week, in which he 
called for dialogue with Hamas under certain conditions.  Inside 
Kadima the idea has tremendous support by some 72 percent of the 
party's voters.  But even 53 percent of Likud supporters back the 
idea. The poll shows that the left is breaking apart and that Likud 
is moving to the center. HaQaretz comments that it seems that Mofaz 
knew that he was marching on solid political ground when he included 
this radical article in his plan. 
- The survey was carried out toward the end of Netanyahu's visit to 
Washington this week.  HaQaretz says that the lessons the PM 
experienced at the hands of the White House left no scars in the 
hearts of the average Israeli.  The vast majority of those asked 
said that the White House's attitude toward Netanyahu was 
"reasonable."  Just a quarter of those asked claimed that the 
attitude of the White House toward Netanyahu was humiliating. 
According to HaQaretz, there are two possible ways of interpreting 
this: either that the emotional way with which the politicians and 
the media received the fact that Netanyahu went to the White House 
late in the evening in a van does not affect the general public or 
that the public believes that Netanyahu deserves what he got. 
HaQaretz remarks that the former is probably correct: The emotional 
discussion over the circumstances of the meeting between Netanyahu 
and U.S. President Barack Obama stayed in the political-media 
world's court and the street did not form its opinions apart from 
that. 
- In general, the results of the survey are favorable to Netanyahu. 
A great majority blames Mahmoud Abbas for the impasse in the peace 
process with the Palestinians. The overall level of satisfaction 
from Netanyahu continues to be positive, as it was five months ago, 
after 100 days in government.  Also with regards to his suitability 
to the post of prime minister, he leads Tzipi Livni, who is second, 
by a significant margin: 43 percent for Netanyahu and 27 percent for 
Livni. 
- FM Avigdor Lieberman continues to be seen negatively; also 
unpopular is Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz.  The average Israeli 
is angry and dissatisfied with Labor and its leader, DM Ehud Barak. 
Not long ago, Barak was the most popular minister in the government 
by a substantial margin. Netanyahu has now surpassed him. Since the 
last survey, held in mid-June, Barak lost 20 points in popular 
support. In June, 29 percent were dissatisfied with Barak's conduct 
and now that number has increased to 44 percent. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Israel has suspended its efforts to have 
Gilad Shalit released until close to the PA elections in January 
¶2010. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the Foreign MinistryQs written goals do not 
even mention the word QPalestinians. 
 
Yediot cited Kadima chair Tzipi LivniQs objection to Shaul MofazQs 
peace plan.  She reportedly disputes MofazQs willingness to speak to 
Hamas, against which Israel enlisted the entire world. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and other leading media reported that French 
President Nicolas Sarkozy is expected to urge Syrian President 
Bashar Assad to open direct talks with Israel when the two men meet 
in Paris today.  Israel Radio reported that in an interview with the 
French daily Le Figaro, Assad called President Obama the weakest 
among the Mideast mediators.   Major media reported that yesterday 
the Prime Minister's Office denied reports that Netanyahu had 
relayed a message to Assad that Israel is willing to cede the Golan. 
 However, HaQaretz quoted diplomatic sources in Jerusalem saying 
yesterday that Netanyahu is also examining the possibility that 
France will replace Turkey as a mediator between Israel and Syria. 
HaQaretz also reported that over recent weeks IDF Chief of Staff Lt. 
Gen. Gabi Ashkenazi has privately expressed his support for the 
resumption of diplomatic talks with Syria. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that settler leaders are conducting a 
PR campaign in the U.S. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday QIsrael and the 
international community signaled new optimismQ after PA officials 
indicated that elections scheduled for January would not go ahead. 
 
Leading media reported on a clash that took place this morning in 
the northern Gaza Strip between IDF troops and suspected terrorists. 
 Israel Radio quoted Palestinian sources as saying that a 
Palestinian man was killed and several others were arrested. 
 
Israel Radio reported on a small protest against President Peres and 
Israel in Sao Paulo, where posters portrayed him as Hitler.  On the 
other hand the radio reported that Brazilian legislators, including 
those of Arab origin, warmly welcomed Peres; Israel Radio reported 
that PeresQ entourage expects larger demonstrations in Argentina. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Judge Richard Goldstone told the daily 
yesterday that President Shimon Peres' remarks criticizing him were 
"specious and ill-befitting the head of the State of Israel." 
Goldstone was responding to PeresQ characterization of him as a 
Qsmall manQ out to hurt Israel.  He was also quoted as saying, "I do 
not believe that any nation should protect another nation blindly. 
I would prefer to see the United States furnish reasons for 
criticizing the report.  The U.S. has supported our call for 
credible investigations by Israel and by the Gaza authorities, 
whether the PA or Hamas.Q  Goldstone was quoted as saying that 
criticism of his report was a classic case of Qattacking the 
messenger.Q  Leading media reported that former PM Ehud Olmert spoke 
out against the Goldstone Commission during a ceremony unveiling a 
9/11 memorial in Jerusalem. 
 
 
The media reported that yesterday the Jerusalem District Court 
indicted QJewish terroristQ Yaakov Teitel.  The indictment included 
14 charges. Teitel said upon arriving at the court: "It was a 
pleasure and honor to serve my God.  God is proud of what I have 
done.  I have no regrets."  According to the indictment, Teitel 
decided while still a resident of the U.S. to target Palestinians to 
avenge terrorist attacks against Israel. 
 
Asked about the alleged e-mail exchange surrounding a possible 
commemoration of Meir Kahane at the Knesset, the spokesman of the 
U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv was quoted as saying in comments to Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe that it is not unusual for American officials to ask 
questions relating to their counterpartsQ plans.  The daily 
conjectured that this is not the first case of the U.S. intervening 
in IsraelQs affairs, as in the case of the Golan referendum. 
Israel Radio quoted the London-based Al-Hayat as saying that during 
his talks with PM Benjamin Netanyahu on Wednesday, Sarkozy advocated 
diplomatic talks with Tehran, while Netanyahu did not rule out 
military action against Iran. 
 
HaQaretz reported that during a three-week coast-to-coast lecture 
tour in the U.S. last month -- following the accepted practice of 
former prime ministers -- Ehud Olmert  was stunned to find an 
America where the dominant discourse was Palestinian, with 
unprecedented hostility to Israel and growing indifference to its 
continued existence as a homeland for the Jewish people.   Olmert 
has spoken at hundreds of universities over the past 20 years. 
HaQaretz ran a feature about Col. (res.) Ben Tzion Gruber from the 
settlement of Efrat in Gush Etzion, a Qone-man self appointed PR 
command unitQ who has crisscrossed the U.S. Q even before Operation 
Cast Lead Q explaining the unique way the IDF conducts itself in its 
war against Hamas terror. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted senior Israeli defense officials as saying 
that Israel is likely to demand that it be allowed to participate in 
the production of the F-35 aircraftQs ordering. 
 
Yediot reported that former U.S. President Bill Clinton and 
California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, as well as five 
Congressmen, three U.S. Senators, three senior advisers in the Obama 
administration, and the Deputy Secretary of State, will be among the 
guests of the Sixth Saban Forum that opens tomorrow in Jerusalem. 
 
Former U.S. security official, Hillary Mann Leverett, who is Jewish 
and once served in the U.S. Embassy inTel Aviv, was quoted as saying 
in an interview with HaQaretz that Washington must build relations 
with Tehran if it wants to succeed in the region. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Oranim, an organization that publicly split 
from Birthright israel-Taglit a few months ago, plans to bring its 
first 120 participants from abroad next month.  Prior to the split, 
Oranim was Birthright's largest subcontractor, having brought some 
50,000 young Diaspora Jews to Israel for visits.  Birthright, which 
has brought approximately 220,000 Jews to Israel for 10-day visits 
since its inception in 2000, is a joint venture between the Israeli 
Government, major American Jewish donors, and the Jewish Agency for 
Israel.  It mainly sets policy and raises funds, which it then 
funnels to various smaller groups that recruit the students and 
organize the trips. HaQaretz quoted Oranim's director, Shlomo (Momo) 
Lifshitz, as saying he split from Birthright over its demand that he 
stop urging trip participants to immigrate to Israel and marry other 
Jews.  He said that both these suggestions irritated the American 
donors, including major Jewish federations. 
 
Yediot correspondent Eldad Beck reported from northern Iraq. 
 
The USSTRATCOM Command Chaplain, Rabbi (Col., USAF) Brett Oxman, was 
quoted as saying in an interview with HaQaretz that one must learn 
to work in a multi-faith, pluralist environment. 
 
Yediot reported that there has been a sharp increase in enlistment 
in combat units by young Israeli men.  Conversely, 27% of youth are 
not drafted at all. 
 
Maariv and other media reported that the Government dropped the 
planned drought tax but that the price of water is soaring. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
 
¶I.  QA Glass of Wine Will Do 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (11/13): QIt is not peace plans that are 
lacking in the Middle East, it is the courage to sign them, the 
political power to pass them and the ability to meet their terms on 
the day after.  Mofaz offers the Palestinians a state within 
provisional borders that will include 60 percent of the West Bank's 
area.  An identical proposal, or more generous, was made by Ehud 
Barak to the Palestinians and the Americans.  The Palestinians 
rejected the proposal out of hand: they said that with Israel, 
temporary is permanent.  After them, the proposal was rejected by 
the Americans.  Mofaz is optimistic: he will persuade the Americans 
and they will persuade the Palestinians.  If Fatah is not convinced, 
we will go to Hamas.  Meanwhile, in the general diplomatic tedium, 
he manages to make headlines.  The only plan that should worry 
Netanyahu's government at present is the plan of Palestinian Prime 
Minister Salam Fayyad.  Fayyad proposes a process: the Palestinian 
state will be established without permanent borders.  It will deal 
in building institutions for two years.  In conjunction with this, 
it will negotiate with Israel.  If the negotiations do not give rise 
to an agreement, the issue will be turned over to the U.N. 
institutions.  The Security Council will reach a resolution on the 
content of the arrangement, including borders.  The U.S. will not 
impose a veto.  The outcome will be a unilateral solution under the 
auspices of the U.N.  The Security Council will not send U.N. troops 
to impose the terms of the agreement upon Israel.  It is enough for 
it to decide.  If Israel does not cooperate, the ostracism process 
will begin.  Within a short period, Israel will be a pariah state. 
It will surrender: it will have no choice.  Fayyad has no real 
influence on the Palestinian street.  Abu Mazen is moving away from 
him.... The Obama administration preferred to adopt the positive 
part of Fayyad's plan.  Building national institutions is good. 
This is something that Israel and the European Union also agree to. 
Fayyad is credible, serious and professional.  He must be helped. 
Only by negotiations, Netanyahu said to Obama this week.  The 
Israeli attempt for an unilateral move, in the disengagement from 
Gaza, ended in failure, and this is how the Palestinian attempt will 
end too.  Israel will respond to every unilateral move with a 
unilateral move of its own.  The ones to gain will be Hamas, and 
indirectly, Iran.  We mustn't give up. 
 
II.  QPalestine Now 
 
Columnist and former Meretz Party Chairman Yossi Sarid wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (11/13): QBoth sides have a right 
to act unilaterally.  Abbas owes it to his people, to himself, and 
to us.  This week, there were reports that Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu finds this possibility very scary, and he expects the 
Americans to nip it in the bud.  But his nightmare is our only 
chance for an end to the occupation in our time.  When he declares 
independence, Abbas should call upon the Jews living in the state of 
Palestine to preserve the peace and to do their part in building up 
the new country as full and equal citizens, enjoying fair 
representation in all of its institutions.  David Ben-Gurion would 
not have been upset by such a pretty act of plagiarism from his 
Declaration of Independence.  And thus, Abbas will become the 
Palestinian Ben-Gurion.... This week, I phoned Abbas, after not 
having spoken to him for at least four years.  I told him everything 
that I am writing now.  I also told him something else: What 
happened to the wall in Berlin 20 years ago, and to apartheid a few 
months later, would also happen to the occupation: it will collapse, 
even if attempts are made to reinforce it with nails. 
 
III.  QAn Israeli Ambassador in Riyadh 
 
Yehezkel Dror, Professor of Political Science at the Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, who served on the Winograd Commission of 
Inquiry into the Second Lebanon War, wrote in Ha'aretz  (11/13): 
QIsrael is in need of a new diplomatic paradigm.  Time is not on our 
side.  QManagingQ the conflict based on the concept of Qmore of the 
sameQ will not do. No interim arrangement featuring Qa kind of 
Palestinian state on a portion of the territory of Judea and Samaria 
[i.e. the West Bank]Q will prevent the constant erosion of Israel's 
situation.  That is also the verdict with respect to the QMofaz 
Plan,Q which continues to focus on the Palestinian issue, with the 
added element of Qopening the road to diplomatic arrangements and 
regional peace,Q instead of thinking first about a regional 
framework.... The Israeli peace plan must be shaped to meet the 
interests of the rulers of the moderate Arab states, as well as 
Asian Islamic states and the superpowers, led by the United States. 
It should be based on the Arab peace initiative but with changes.... 
Israel will be ready to express sorrow over Palestinian suffering, 
without taking responsibility for it, and will contribute 
proportionally and symbolically to a comprehensive regional 
resolution in the Middle East and a comprehensive global solution to 
the refugee problem.  All of this would only come about in return 
for peace agreements with most of the Arab states, agreement which 
would be clearly reflected in reality through the presence, for 
example, of an Israeli embassy in Riyadh, a city which is an Islamic 
religious center, and where the puritanical Wahhabi sect of Islam 
developed.  This would constitute a major ideological-psychological 
and cultural-religious turning point in the conflict.  Such a shift 
is worth far-reaching concessions on Israel's part. 
 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  QAre We with Obama, or What? 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (11/13): QPresident Truman 
recognized Israel two hours after the state was declared, over the 
objections of his secretary of state, Gen. George Marshall. 
President Kennedy approved supplying Israel with Hawk anti-aircraft 
missiles.  President Johnson approved the supply of jet fighters, 
and opened the White House to our leaders.  It is doubtful that 
without America's support Israel would have attained its current 
status.  It is not only because of the presidents, but also because 
of the political influence of America's Jews, their high voting 
rates and their generous financial aid to candidates.  A year after 
the electrifying election of President Obama, his goals have not 
been achieved: not the reduction of unemployment, nor the end of 
military involvement in Afghanistan, nor the neutralization of the 
Iranian threat.  People are still wondering if his deeds are as good 
as his words.  They used to say about Ariel Sharon that he was fun 
to be around, but as far as Obama is concerned, all we know is what 
we can see, and there's no certainty he will show the same intimacy 
some of his predecessors had with Israel's leaders.  A great deal 
depends on whether we help him achieve his goals. 
 
II.  QWhat If Obama Betrays Israel? 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Lord wrote in the nationalist, Orthodox Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe (11/13): QThe relevant image in the relations between 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and U.S. President Barack 
Obama is that of a date with a hologram.  Every meeting between the 
two, like this week, looks like a crisis.  Has Israeli done anything 
that made the man in the White House believe that there is a cause 
for a crisis?  Or is it because the darling from the Muqata [Mahmoud 
Abbas], who spends his weekends in Amman, has decided ... to 
resign.... The problem is that Israel has no one it can trust in the 
White House -- with the possible exception of Dennis Ross. 
 
III.  QTime to Learn Spanish 
 
Dr. Yoav J. Tenenbaum, a lecturer in the diplomacy program at Tel 
Aviv University, wrote in Ha'aretz (11/13): QThe United States is a 
strategic asset to Israel.  And America's Hispanic population is a 
strategic asset within a strategic asset.  It's like a Russian 
nesting doll: inside the largest doll are successively smaller ones, 
similar in appearance and form, which must be accorded special 
attention.... Although it is appropriate for Israel to cooperate 
with Jewish and pro-Israel organizations in the U.S. in devising a 
strategy aimed at the Hispanic population, it must also shape such a 
strategy as part of its own foreign policy.  Israel should lead and 
not be led.  To begin with, Israeli diplomats should initiate a 
serious dialogue with Hispanic opinion shapers including 
politicians, communal and religious leaders, journalists, artists, 
writers and businesspeople. This dialogue must not just have a 
concrete short-term objective: The diplomatic horizon should extend 
well beyond the day-to-day affairs of state.  This dialogue -- 
conceived and conducted in Spanish, by fluent Spanish-speaking 
Israeli diplomats, preferably of Hispanic origin themselves could 
have a different outcome than one conducted in English or broken 
Spanish by diplomats with whom the Hispanic interlocutor has no 
common heritage, no matter how capable and intelligent they might 
be.  American Hispanics have not been known for hostility toward 
Israel; they lack the same critical aloofness that exists among 
parts of the African-American population.  The basis for a 
constructive, indeed friendly, dialogue exists.... The influence of 
Hispanic communities can also transcend the borders of the United 
States.  Devising a separate, coherent, diplomatic strategy 
vis-a-vis a minority population per se may not be a common feature 
of foreign policy.  However, considering the strategic importance of 
the Hispanic minority in the United States, and its ever-increasing 
presence and influence in the socio-political life of the country, 
it is not too soon for Israel to take such a step. 
 
--------------------- 
¶3.  Muslim-Americans: 
--------------------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
Q9/11, Remember? 
 
 
Columnist Shmuel Rosner, who was HaQaretzQs correspondent in 
Washington, wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv (11/13): QAround 
two years ago the Pew Research Center reported that Muslim-Americans 
are Qlargely assimilated, happy with their lives, and moderate with 
respect to many of the issues that have divided Muslims and 
Westerners around the world.Q  But they sometimes create great 
embarrassment, such as the one caused this week when it turned out 
that the Fort Hood murderer was in contact with radical elements, 
advocated the discharge of Muslims from military tasks, made shrill 
statements, and was neither arrested nor discharged.  U.S. 
intelligence failed again. 
 
CUNNINGHAM