09TELAVIV534
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Mar 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0534/01 0641159
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051159Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0834
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5103
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1701
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5595
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5912
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5140
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3637
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5945
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2770
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0982
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9691
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7192
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2151
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6193
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8231
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1021
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1589
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000534 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Iran 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Various media reported that yesterday the IAF assassinated senior 
Islamic Jihad militant Khaled ShaQalan in northern Gaza.  Another 
senior militant and five other Palestinians were wounded in the 
raid.  The media cited the organizationQs threat of retaliation. 
Israel Radio reported that this morning the IAF killed two 
Palestinians in the central Gaza refugee camp of El-Mazari.  The 
radio reported that two rockets landed in Israel this morning. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Israel will increase the range of goods 
permitted into the Gaza Strip as a gesture to Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton, who concluded her visit to the region yesterday. 
In recent weeks, Israel has prevented such products as jam, pasta, 
and paper from reaching the besieged coastal territory.  "We want 
humanitarian aid to get into Gaza in sufficient amounts to alleviate 
the suffering of the people," Clinton was quoted as saying, but 
stopped short of calling for a full opening of the crossings. 
HaQaretz quoted a senior Jerusalem source as saying yesterday: "Even 
though the pasta issue was solved last week, this entire episode has 
made us look ridiculous in the eyes of the world.  It's too bad we 
have to wait for pressure from Europe and the U.S., and we couldn't 
rescind the measure on our own."  The media reported that, before 
her departure, Clinton visited PA President Mahmoud Abbas and 
Palestinian PM Salam Fayyad in Ramallah, where she promised vigorous 
and personal involvement in stalled Mideast peace efforts and 
criticized Israel's demolition of Palestinian homes in Jerusalem as 
unhelpful.  Clinton also displayed strong public support for Abbas. 
Maariv reported that Clinton stressed that the new U.S. 
administration supports the PA and views it as a partner in the 
peace process.  HaQaretz quoted Secretary Clinton as saying during a 
news conference in Ramallah: "The Palestinian Authority is the only 
legitimate government of the Palestinian people," she told a news 
conference, standing next to Abbas.  Talking to reporters after 
meeting Clinton, Abbas criticized Iran, one of Hamas' main backers. 
He charged that Iran is trying to deepen the Palestinian divide and 
said Iran needs to take care of its own issues and not intervene in 
Palestinian affairs. 
 
Media reported that, in recent days, Israel has issued orders for 
the demolition of dozens of Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem, 
saying the homes were built illegally.  Palestinians say they cannot 
receive proper building permits from Israeli authorities, and the 
planned demolitions are a means to assert Israel's control over the 
disputed city.  "Clearly, this kind of activity is unhelpful," 
Clinton said, adding that she would raise it with the Israeli 
government as well as municipal officials in Jerusalem.  She said 
such actions violate the Roadmap.  HaQaretz quoted Hatem Abdul 
Qader, a Palestinian official on Jerusalem affairs, as saying that 
Clinton spoke shortly after Israel issued a new order to demolish 
five residential buildings containing 55 apartments, saying: "It's 
an open demographic war."  He said lawyers have challenged the 
orders, halting demolitions until March 10.  HaQaretz quoted Stephan 
Miller, a spokesman for city hall, as saying that the buildings 
under demolition notice were empty and had been built illegally. 
HaQaretz reported that Jerusalem Mayor Nir Barkat charged that 
Palestinians had fed Clinton misinformation and that they were 
taking advantage of her visit to push their agenda.  He said that 
the buildings were built on area that the municipality had set aside 
as open spaces and parks. Yesterday HaQaretz published a letter 
signed by 23 Israel Prize laureates including A.B. Yehoshua, Amos 
Oz, David Grossman, Nathan Zach, Prof. Ze'ev Sternhell, Shulamit 
Aloni and Lia van Leer, protesting Barkat's intention to demolish 
illegally-built buildings in East Jerusalem. 
Bottom of Form 
 
The Jerusalem Post bannered a report -- "Preventing a Cascade of 
Instability"  -- issued yesterday by the Washington Institute for 
Near East Policy according to which Israel is seriously considering 
taking unilateral military action to stop Iran from acquiring 
nuclear weapons.  The report also says Israel's time frame for 
action is growing shorter, not only because of Iranian advances, but 
because Tehran might soon acquire upgraded air defenses and disperse 
its nuclear program to additional locations.   The report also 
argues that international sanctions against Iran need to be 
intensified urgently for the engagement the Obama administration is 
planning with Tehran to be effective.   An early draft of the report 
was endorsed by Dennis Ross before he withdrew upon joining the 
Obama administration, in which he is serving as a special 
representative dealing with various countries in the region, 
including Iran.   Senator Evan Bayh of the Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence, and Congressman Gary Ackerman, chairman of the 
House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on the Middle East, were among 
the signatories.  The bipartisan group also recommended increasing 
security guarantees and the supply of missile defenses and other 
protective measures to allies in the Middle East, both to reassure 
them of America's commitment to them and to dampen the perceived 
effectiveness, and hence appeal, of nuclear weapons for Iran. 
However, The Jerusalem Post reported that the report, several of 
whose authors met with high-level Israeli officials to assess their 
perspective, notes that Israel is not interested in becoming part of 
an American nuclear umbrella, even as Gulf countries want more 
assurances on that front. Top of Form 
 
 
HaQaretz and other media reported that Netanyahu is expected to meet 
with Yisrael Beiteinu leader Avigdor Lieberman today to discuss the 
formation of a coalition government.  Lieberman will ask Netanyahu 
to give him the Foreign Ministry portfolio and to keep Justice 
Minister Daniel Friedmann in office.  The Jerusalem Post and other 
media reported that Netanyahu will press Lieberman to accept the 
treasury portfolio instead.  Media reported that, in addition, 
Lieberman is expected to ask his faction be given the 
communications; industry trade and labor, and interior security 
portfolios.  Although Netanyahu has reportedly largely agreed to 
make Lieberman his foreign minister, he is thought to still be 
weighing the potential political damage the appointment of the 
hawkish politicians would do to the image of his government. 
Netanyahu faces strong opposition from within his party, 
particularly as former FM MK Silvan Shalom told Netanyahu in a 
private meeting that the only portfolio he was interested in was the 
Foreign Ministry and that, during the election campaign. Netanyahu 
had promised to give him the post.  ShasQs mouthpiece Yom Leyom 
reported that Shas would get the Interior, Housing and Construction, 
Religious Affairs, and likely the Health portfolios.  Yom Leyom also 
reported that Shas will get the Israel Lands Administration. 
HaQaretz reported that Lieberman allegedly received hundreds of 
thousands of shekels when he was a Knesset member and a minister 
from the company established by his daughter.  According to the 
investigation, Lieberman allegedly received the money as severance 
pay, after working for the company for only two years. 
 
HaQaretz and Israel Radio reported that British Foreign Office 
Minister Bill Rammell told a parliamentary committee in London 
yesterday that the British government is open to talks with 
HizbullahQs political wing.  "We have reconsidered the position...in 
light of more positive developments within Lebanon.  For that reason 
we have explored establishing contacts."  He said he was referring 
to the formation in July last year of a unity government in which 
Hizbullah and its allies hold effective veto power, as agreed under 
a deal that ended a paralyzing political conflict in the country. 
The media reported that Hizbullah Secretary General Hassan Nasrallah 
attended an anti-Zionist convention in Tehran. 
 
HaQaretz reported that yesterday Netanyahu sidelined IsraelQs 
Ambassador to the U.S. Sallai Meridor, asking him to leave the room 
during a meeting with Secretary Clinton in Jerusalem.  The newspaper 
quoted NetanyahuQs office as saying yesterday: The Americans decided 
that only three participants from each side stay at the meeting. 
HaQaretz noted that an unexpected attendee at the meeting was former 
Israeli diplomat Alon Pinkas, an associate of Labor Party leader 
Ehud Barak.  Pinkas became friends with Clinton during his tenure in 
New York and has recently been advising Netanyahu on Israel's ties 
with the U. S. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday Housing and Construction 
Minister Zeev Boim (Kadima) tacked as QbaselessQ and QimaginaryQ a 
Peace Now report that said that 73,102 apartment units were in 
various stages of approval in the West Bank and east Jerusalem. 
 
Maariv reported that U.S. pressure is stalling a QhugeQ sale of 
large Israeli-made drones to Russia. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the IDF is delaying the release of its own 
investigations into various incidents that took place during 
Operation Cast Lead due to concerns the information could be used in 
potential war crimes indictments against officers overseas. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Israel and Turkey are involved in quiet but 
intensive talks to end the crisis in relations between the two 
countries.  According to a senior Jerusalem source, officials from 
both countries have exchanged messages regarding the need to restore 
relations to an even keel and hope to do so in the coming days.  The 
messages sent by Israel and Turkey stressed the strategic value of 
their relationship. 
 
HaQaretz reported that yesterday Ron Prosor, Israel's Ambassador to 
Great Britain, blasted London's decision to cancel the transfer of 
its Tel Aviv embassy to a building owned by Africa-Israel because of 
the company's role in building West Bank settlements.   Prosor told 
HaQaretz that the move represented "surrender to those who slander 
Israel." 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a short film decrying the blockade 
of Gaza released yesterday on the Internet by Yoni Goodman, the 
animation director of the acclaimed movie QWaltz with Bashir," was 
immediately blasted by conservative media expert Yariv Ben-Eliezer 
-Q David Ben-GurionQs grandson -Q as an Qugly, disgusting piece of 
work.Q  HaQaretz also reviewed the film. 
 
Yediot reported that former Israeli president Moshe Katsav could be 
indicted shortly for serious sexual offenses. 
 
Major Hebrew-language media led with reports on repercussions of the 
recession in Israel. 
 
HaQaretz reported that, after three years and almost 20 hearings, a 
trial still has yet to begin against Mas'ad Barikat, a Bedouin from 
the Sinai Peninsula suspected of smuggling weapons, drugs, and 
foreign workers from Egypt to Israel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------- 
¶1.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz: QAn Israeli conservative [Benjamin Netanyahu] will try to 
convince an American Democratic president to act in the Iranian 
crisis the way John F. Kennedy did during the Cuban missile crisis. 
If Netanyahu succeeds, the West will be able to overcome the worst 
danger it has faced since the Cold War. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Resolution 2010" 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(3/5): QAn Israeli conservative [Benjamin Netanyahu] will try to 
convince an American Democratic president to act in the Iranian 
crisis the way John F. Kennedy did during the Cuban missile crisis. 
If Netanyahu succeeds, the West will be able to overcome the worst 
danger it has faced since the Cold War.  If he fails, Israel will 
face the most difficult dilemma in its history.... Just as the 
victory in 1948 emerged from a series of correct decisions David 
Ben-Gurion made in 1946 and 1947, so it is now. Israel's future 
depends on making wise, precise and courageous decisions.  Livni 
decided that the person to make those decisions would be Netanyahu; 
this week she herself crowned him man of the hour. The Kadima 
chairwoman has thus forced Israelis to stand behind Bibi, who is 
about to take on a task of Ben-Gurionesque proportions. 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Very liberal columnist Gideon Levy sardonically wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: QLabor Chairman [Ehud Barak] 
simply belongs in the defense post and on the Right's dream team. 
 
 
Senior military affairs analyst Reuven Pedatzur wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: QThe defense establishment will 
continue to develop [missile defense] systems as it sees fit.  The 
army's top brass and Defense Ministry bigwigs know they are immune 
from criticism and do not have to answer for their mistakes. 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: QWhether [U.S.-Syria] relations freeze 
over again will depend very much on what [the U.S. envoys] hear from 
Assad. 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in Yediot Aharonot: QContrary to 
what you have been used to hearing in the world media, for you, Jews 
of Europe, Israel is not the problem.  It is the solution. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Barak for Defense" 
 
Very liberal columnist Gideon Levy sardonically wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (3/5): QLabor Chairman [Ehud 
Barak] simply belongs in the defense post and on the Right's dream 
team.  The public wants it and the Labor electorate wants it -- so 
run, Barak, run and get the desired job.  It's his natural place: 
the Right.  After the proven success of the worthless war in the 
Gaza Strip, we cannot do without his outstanding services. Iran will 
tremble, Hamas will shake: Hurray!  Hurray!  The next defense 
minister is on his way.... Barak will be the next defense minister, 
with or without his party. There are not many things more certain in 
Israeli politics. So we will repeat once again: Run, Barak, run. 
Put aside your party, which is not really your party, and join 
Netanyahu.  [Far Right Knesset Member] Ketzeleh -- Yaakov Katz of 
the National Union Party -- will be your deputy, and that's all the 
strength you'll need. 
 
II.  "No Way to Intercept Rockets" 
 
Senior military affairs analyst Reuven Pedatzur wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (3/5): QAnyone who has followed 
the defense establishment's decision-making process over the past 
eight years concerning the development of a missile defense system 
against rockets launched from Gaza cannot help but wonder how the 
IDF and the Administration for the Development of Weapons (ADW) have 
managed to make such poor and misguided decisions.... Sadly, 
ministers and lawmakers will not use the [critical State] 
Comptroller's report to rein in the defense establishment, the ADW 
and the IDF.   The defense establishment will continue to develop 
systems as it sees fit.  The army's top brass and Defense Ministry 
bigwigs know they are immune from criticism and do not have to 
answer for their mistakes. 
 
III.  QThe Significance of Going to Damascus 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (3/5): QWhile the decision to send Dan 
Shapiro from the National Security Council and Jeff Feltman from the 
State Department to Syria represents a shift in policy -- they are 
the highest ranking administration officials to go to Syria since 
deputy secretary of state Richard Armitage in 2005 -- it doesn't 
mean the U.S. is on the verge of a breakthrough with Syria.  The 
Obama administration is very much in the policy review stage.... 
[The U.S. envoys] will want to hear Syrian President Bashar Assad's 
take on a whole gamut of issues, not only those related to 
Israel.... If the envoys don't like what they hear, then -- just as 
happened with Durban 2 -- the U.S. might simply conclude that the 
conversation was going nowhere and say there was nothing more to 
talk about until Damascus changed its tune.   But if they hear 
something pleasant to their ears, Feltman and Shapiro may hold a 
series of talks with the Syrians, or the U.S. may want to ratchet up 
the level of the diplomats conducting the conversation. Had the U.S 
wanted to signal a serious thaw in relations, Mitchell -- or even 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton -- would be making the 
pilgrimage.  Feltman and Shapiro represent not a thaw, but a 
de-icing.  Whether relations freeze over again will depend very much 
on what they hear from Assad. 
 
IV.  QIsrael is the Jew of Yesteryear 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in Yediot Aharonot (3/5): QA 
[European] Jew can no longer walk in the street carrying Jewish 
symbols, stay in Jewish institutions that are not surrounded with 
police and guards, without being tightly closed and frightened. 
Yes, those who hide Jewish symbols and assimilate in society will 
survive -Q until unpleasantness arrives from their friends, their 
colleagues, school, and life.... This trend is rapidly growing in 
the world.  It has nothing to do with Israel: Israel is the tool 
that allows one to reach achievements.  Israel is the Jew of 
yesteryear.... What is the difference between 1939 and 2009?  Today, 
as opposed to then, the Jews have a country, a successful, rich 
state, in which the standard of living is not as low as it used to 
be, compared with Europe.... Contrary to what you have been used to 
hearing in the world media, for you, Jews of Europe, Israel is not 
the problem.  It is the solution. 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
Shmuel Rosner wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv: QThe man whom 
President Barack Obama intends to appoint as chairman of the NIC 
should be cause for great concern in Israel.  At best, it is a 
strange appointment; at worst, it is dangerous. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Bad News" 
 
Shmuel Rosner wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv (3/4): QThe 
National Intelligence Assessment that was published in the United 
States in 2007 was a serious blow for Israel.  What was discussed 
 
was Iran, and the American intelligence community sent out a message 
that everyone could breathe a sigh of relief: The Iranian program 
for developing a nuclear bomb had been halted, they claimed.  This 
ridiculous assertion, which has since been rectified, was 
deliberate.  The goal was to prevent former President George W. Bush 
from launching a military strike against Iran in the last year of 
his term in office.  Mission accomplished.  [Charles QChas 
Freeman], the person responsible for that report carries a title 
that very few people are aware of: Chairman of the National 
Intelligence Council.  The man whom President Barack Obama intends 
to appoint as chairman of the NIC should be cause for great concern 
in Israel.  At best, it is a strange appointment; at worst, it is 
dangerous.... The list of FreemanQs transgressions, in Israeli eyes, 
is long.  Among his sins is the claim that Washington gives Israel a 
carte blanche to do whatever it wants, and that only American 
pressure can force Israel to do anything.... The person in question 
has raised much more biting criticisms of Israel and he will fill a 
very sensitive and vital role.  In any case, Obama, who wants to 
maintain his image of being a friend of Israel, now faces a tough 
dilemma.  The weapon that he has placed in the hands of those who 
claimed all along that his friendship was a facade and that his 
administration will let Israel down is especially lethal.  And they 
will not be afraid to use it." 
 
CUNNINGHAM