09TELAVIV1129
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu May 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1129/01 1411007
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211007Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1916
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5455
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 2035
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5987
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6266
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5496
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 4051
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6319
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3128
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1332
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0025
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7534
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2512
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6527
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8576
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1354
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 2075
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001129 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Aftermath of Obama-Netanyahu Meeting 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Leading media quoted Secretary of State Hillary Clinton as saying 
yesterday at a Senate hearing, following the successful 
test-launching of an Iranian missile, that if Iran managed to 
produce a nuclear weapon it would "spark an arms race" in the Middle 
East.  Israel Radio reported that she stressed the importance of 
progress on the Palestinian track.  Leading media reported that, in 
an interview with Al Jazeera-TV, Clinton called for an absolute stop 
to all settlement activity, including freezing construction for 
natural growth.  The Jerusalem Post and other media quoted sources 
close to PM Benjamin Netanyahu as saying that the terms of a 
settlement freeze still needed to be defined. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Defense Ministry sources told the newspaper 
yesterday that PM Benjamin Netanyahu and DM Ehud Barak have agreed 
on a plan to evacuate unauthorized outposts in the West Bank, mainly 
those located on Palestinian land, within weeks.  The sources were 
quoted as saying that Barak intends to dismantle a number of 
outposts out of 26 illegal ones.  HaQaretz quoted cabinet ministers, 
including those from Likud, as saying yesterday that Netanyahu 
probably promised President Obama in their meeting that Israel would 
dismantle outposts soon.  Major media reported that Barak told the 
Yesha Council of Jewish Settlements in the Territories yesterday 
that Israel will dismantle the illegal outposts by force if dialogue 
proves fruitless.  Barak is trying to reach an agreement with the 
settlers on dismantling the outposts.  HaQaretz reported that 
evacuating illegal outposts in the West Bank is expected to be the 
Netanyahu government's first gesture toward Obama and the PA.  This 
morning electronic media reported that Israeli security forces 
evacuated the West Bank settlement outpost of Maoz Esther, hauling 
away seven metal containers converted to cabins.  Media quoted Peace 
Now Secretary-General Yariv Oppenheimer as saying in response, "The 
evacuation of the tiny outpost is a PR stunt and is no substitute 
for the evacuation of the significant outposts in the territories. 
The evacuation of a few tents is no way to seriously deal with 
illegal construction in the territories." 
 
Major media reported that the U.S. will continue funding the 
development of Arrow 3, the next generation missile in Israel's 
ballistic-missile defense system.  HaQaretz reported that a decision 
on the matter was made during the annual meeting of strategic 
dialogue between Israel and the U.S., held at the Pentagon this 
week.  HaQaretz recalled that, in recent months, there were grave 
concerns that the cuts planned in the Pentagon would also affect 
funding for the Arrow 3, whose total development cost is estimated 
at $800 million. 
 
Electronic media reported that yesterday the FBI arrested four men 
in what authorities called a plot to detonate a bomb outside a 
Riverdale, Bronx synagogue and to shoot military planes at the New 
York Air National Guard base with guided missiles.  Israel Radio 
reported that the suspects also targeted a Jewish community center. 
 
Most media marked "Jerusalem Day," which celebrates 42 years of the 
reunification of Jerusalem.  HaQaretz quoted Nabil Abu Rudeineh, 
spokesman for Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, as saying that if 
Israel opts for pece and has a leader who is willing to make 
genuie compromises, a peace agreement could be reached ithin three 
to six months.  HaQaretz quoted Palesinian sources as saying that 
the PA would only be willing to relinquish Palestinian sovereignty 
over the Temple Mount as part of a final-status agreement in 
exchange for Islamic sovereignty over the site.  Israel Radio quoted 
the Israeli NGO Palestinian Media Watch as saying that official PA 
media systematically rebuff historical Jewish claims to Jerusalem 
and its holy sites.  Various media cited statistics compiled by the 
Jerusalem Institute for Israel Studies that for the first time in 
years the migration balance is in JerusalemQs favor. 
 
Israel Radio quoted Uzi Arad, the head of IsraelQs National Security 
Council, as saying that the U.S. administration has not yet 
formulated a peace plan.  Arad reportedly said that details that 
appeared in the Israeli media are more numerous than those presented 
to Netanyahu in Washington.  Maariv quoted a senior GOI source as 
saying that Israel fears that President ObamaQs peace initiative 
will turn Israel from a major player to a minor one.  The newspaper 
quoted another GOI source as saying that bilateral relations and 
cooperation have not changed.  The media quoted NetanyahuQs PR chief 
Ron Dermer as saying yesterday during the PMQs flight back from 
Washington that talking about the Qtwo states for two peoples 
solution is Qchildish and silly.Q  Maariv said that DermerQs widely 
quoted slip of the tongue attested to a wide gap between Israeli and 
American positions. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted PA officials as saying yesterday that they 
had been QsurprisedQ to hear about President ObamaQs new peace plan 
from the Israeli media, noting that Washington had not informed the 
PA leadership about the initiative.  The Jerusalem Post quoted a PA 
official as saying that Mahmoud Abbas and his aides were currently 
studying the plan, which, he added, included Qseveral positive 
points.Q  The official stressed, however, that some of the proposals 
mentioned in the plan were completely unacceptable to the 
Palestinians.   Senior PA official Qadura Fares was quoted as saying 
in an interview with Makor Rishon-Hatzofe that the Palestinians hope 
that ObamaQs statements will translate into actions.  Former PA 
minister Sufian Abu-Zayde told the same newspaper that the 
Palestinians have had enough of idle and fruitless talks with 
Israel.  Israel Radio quoted Egyptian FM Ahmed Abu al-Gheit as 
saying in an interview with the London-based Ash-Sharq Al-Awsat as 
saying that he does not believe that the Arab states will be willing 
to start multi-channel negotiations and normalize relations with 
Israel until Israel takes serious steps that will lead the Arab 
states to believe its intentions. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that, during a meeting with Jewish 
members of Congress, PM Netanyahu struck a pragmatic note in 
expressing the need to address the threat posed by Iran.  The 
Jerusalem Post reported that Deputy FM Danny Ayalon told the 
newspaper that ObamaQs statements about how to advance the peace 
process do not differ significantly from those of George W. Bush. 
Yediot quoted European sources as saying that a Qsenior Saudi 
officialQ told a European foreign minister that the real option 
against Iran can eventually only be military. 
 
Maariv reported that Russia has suspended its sales of MiG 31E 
fighter planes to Syria, following Israeli pressure. 
 
Leading media cited claims by the Lebanese daily As-Safir that 
Mossad recruited a Lebanese agent to be in contact with Hizbullah 
leader Hassan Nasrallah.  Maariv quoted Nasrallah as saying on 
HizbullahQs Al Manar-TV that the real danger stems from IsraelQs 
nuclear capability, not IranQs.  Israel Radio quoted UN 
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Alain Le Roy as 
saying that it is unlikely that Hizbullah has bolstered its forces 
in southern Lebanon since the Second Lebanon War  However, he 
admitted that he was not absolutel sure of this fact.  Nonetheless, 
the radio citedthe concern of Western diplomats that Hizbullah tht 
Hizbullah filled its arsenal in the area and that UNIFIL does not 
manage to prevent the flow of weapons to the area. 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning in Qalqilya two IDF soldiers 
were lightly injured by a PA policeman and that they fired back, 
wounded him -- perhaps a case of mistaken identification. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the GOI has frozen the expansion of 
Israeli-operated quarries in the West Bank and has banned the 
establishment of new quarries for six months, following a High Court 
petition challenging the legality of the excavations. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Aftermath of Obama-Netanyahu Meeting: 
------------------------------------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Friend of Israel" 
 
Very liberal columnist Gideon Levy wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/21): QIt's already clear: The President of 
U.S. is a great friend of Israel.  If Barack Obama continues what he 
started this week, he might prove to be the friendliest president to 
Israel ever.  Richard Nixon saved Israel from the Arab states in 
1973, and Obama is about to save Israel from itself.  Nixon sent us 
arms and ammunition at a critical time, and Obama is sending us, at 
a time no less critical, the substance of a complete peace plan, a 
plan that would save Israel.  All that remains is whether Obama 
stays determined and decisive, as he was earlier this week. In one 
move he changed Washington's madness and the attitude toward the 
Israeli occupation.  Now we will see if he succeeds in altering the 
same madness in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv.  It's a long road, and Obama 
began well.... [Benjamin NetanyahuQs] visit has already made one 
contribution: Obama tore off the mask of so-called peace-loving 
Israel.... We must be thankful to Obama.  Four months after taking 
office, he is trying to rescue Israel, the Middle East, and 
basically the entire world, whose most dangerous conflict is this 
one.  The threats are many; first and foremost refusals by Israel, a 
loss of interest by Obama, and Palestinian divisions.  The ball is 
in Netanyahu's court. If he ends the occupation, he'll get peace and 
security; if he doesn't, he won't. It's not about another minor 
deal, but about the future of the Zionist enterprise.  Such an 
opportunity will not return.  Yes, we can.  Obama has proved it; now 
it's our turn. 
 
II.  "Outposts ad Centrifuges" 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in HaQaretz (5/21): QTalking about peace, 
even making peace, won't stop the ayatollahs. And if the ayatollahs 
are not stopped in the coming year, the peace discourse will lose 
its meaning and any peace agreement would be empty. Anyone wanting 
peace must find an answer for Iran. This is the eleventh hour. It's 
time for the ostriches to take their heads out of the sand. There 
is no time. Netanyahu's government must act before Obama's speech in 
Cairo in early June. It must present without delay a peace vision 
that is both inspiring and realistic. Evacuating outposts and 
halting construction in the settlements must be part of this vision. 
But it must focus on the proposal for Israel and the Arabs to sign a 
treaty to build Palestine. A coalition of moderate forces can thus 
act jointly in the Middle East to change the situation on the 
ground. On his return from Washington, Netanyahu is supposed to 
realize that it's now or never. The left may be irritating, but the 
right is restrictive. Israel must act if it is to answer to its 
challenges. It must put together an Israeli initiative. But to 
formulate an Israeli initiative, Netanyahu must finally release 
himself from the grip of the deluded right. 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  "The Peace Plan That IsnQt -- Yet" 
 
Zalman Shoval, a senior Likud member and former ambassador to the 
U.S., wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: (5/21): 
QWhat stands out clearly throughout the [Saudi peace] QplanQ is that 
its authors ignored the principle that compromise was a two-way 
street and that not only Israel would have to make concessions. 
Evidently, the [U.S.] administration is aware of the many 
shortcomings and negative aspects of the QplanQ in its present form, 
and consequently it has taken steps in its contacts with Arab 
leaders to introduce changes -- both as to the contents and to its 
form.  In this context there was the statement a few weeks ago of 
Secretary by State Hillary Clinton Qthat the Arabs must through 
words and deeds show that the spirit of the peace initiative can 
begin to govern attitudes towards Israel now,Q while President 
Obama, in his press conference with the King of Jordan, indicated 
that though the Arab initiative could be seen as a Qconstructive 
beginning,Q the Arab countries should "demonstrate their commitment 
to the peace process.Q  After his meeting with Netanyahu, he called 
on Arab states to QnormalizeQ relations with Israel.  A similar 
statement was made by Vice President Joseph Biden and in the same 
vein, The New York Times wrote last week that QMr. Obama should 
challenge Arab leaders to respond, perhaps by initiating openly 
acknowledged diplomatic contacts and trade with Israel.Q  One of the 
objects of diplomacy is sometimes to latch onto a certain situation 
and to change it to one's own advantage.  Unfortunately, the Arab 
peace plan as it stands today has yet to convince Israel that we 
have a real partner in the quest of peace in our region, but if the 
Arabs were ready for genuine, unconditional, negotiations with the 
object of peace, things could take a turn for the better. 
 
IV.  QObama Is Dividing Jerusalem 
 
Settler leader Israel Harel wrote in HaQaretz (5/21): QBesides the 
demand to exert powerful pressure on Israel, [Israeli] peacemakers 
demanded that Obama also end the Qspecial relationshipQ between the 
United States and Israel.  These relations, the Israeli patriots 
explained, are damaging to U.S. interests.  Here, too, their labors 
bore fruit.  The speech on a vision of peace for the Middle East, 
slated for June 4, will not be given at the White House, not even at 
a joint session of Congress.  Only by delivering the speech in 
Cairo, intentionally skipping a visit to Jerusalem (and even to Tel 
Aviv!), will the spirit of peace alight on the lips of the American 
messiah.  Obama has little knowledge of the history, ideology and 
psychology of the Arab opposition to the Jewish state's existence. 
But he has a strategy: to thaw relations with Islam. It is clear 
what will be demanded in return. Obama has tossed a lot of balls 
into the air, maybe too many.  Even a magician like him cannot catch 
them all.  The last ball, the especially heavy one of the Obama 
plan, might land on his foot, but also on the feet of everyone in 
the region, who will pay the price imposed on them by the person who 
wants (by force) to change the order of things.  That will also be 
the case if he does not set aside his disconnected initiatives and 
quickly connect to reality in other places in the world, as well as 
at home.  Today, Jerusalem Day, a state ceremony will be held 
marking 42 years since the liberation of Israel's capital.  In his 
speech, Netanyahu can somewhat cool down Obama's messianic fervor 
and (politely) make clear to whom -- exclusively -- Jerusalem 
belongs.  He can pledge that after the Paratroopers liberated the 
city in 1967, no foreign power will ever again pass through its 
gates. 
MORENO