09THEHAGUE451
CWC:  PRESENTATIONS BY DG CANDIDATES, JULY  15,
Fri Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy The Hague
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTC #0451/01 2051552
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241552Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3089
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1038
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 0726
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN PRIORITY 1808
RUEHSW/AMEMBASSY BERN PRIORITY 4145
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI PRIORITY 1895
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA PRIORITY 0246
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 1888
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 1433
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DTRA ALEX WASHINGTON DC//OSAC PRIORITYUNCLAS THE HAGUE 000451 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ISN/CB, VCI/CCA, L/NPV, IO/MPR 
SECDEF FOR OSD/GSA/CN,CP&GT 
JOINT STAFF FOR DD PMA-A FOR WTC 
COMMERCE FOR BIS (BROWN, DENYER AND CRISTOFARO) 
NSC FOR LUTES 
WINPAC FOR WALTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL AU FI GM ID TU UK AG
SUBJECT: CWC:  PRESENTATIONS BY DG CANDIDATES, JULY  15, 
2009 (EC-57) 
 
REF: A. THE HAGUE 352 
     ¶B. THE HAGUE 371 
     ¶C. HAGUE 411 
     ¶D. THE HAGUE 437 
 
(U) This is CWC-44-09 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The seven candidates to succeed Rogelio 
Pfirter (Argentina) as the next Director-General 
(DG) of the Organization for the Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) each presented themselves 
to the Executive Council (EC) on July 15.  During 
the day-long closed session presided over by EC 
Chairperson Ambassador Jorge Lomonaco (Mexico), 
each candidate had ten minutes to make their 
presentation followed by a question and answer 
period in which one delegation from each of the 
five regional groups posed a question.  The order 
of candidates was chosen randomly the day before. 
Lomonaco limited questions to two minutes and 
answers to three minutes.  Surprisingly for the 
OPCW, everyone strictly observed time limits.  The 
procedural success of the day was a coup for 
Lomonaco's leadership and handling of the DG 
selection process, and provided a good opportunity 
for all EC delegations to compare the candidates. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Curricula vitae and nomination letters for 
all seven candidates have been sent to ISN/CB and 
are available publicly as official OPCW documents. 
Written copies of each candidate's presentation 
have also been sent back to ISN/CB.  The following 
report offers the highlights of each presentation, 
the questions posed and the candidate's answers. 
 
----------------- 
JOHN FREEMAN (UK) 
----------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) John Freeman, OPCW's Deputy Director- 
General, is well-known to permanent delegations in 
The Hague.  The theme of Freeman's presentation was 
that the future of the OPCW is anchored in the 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).  Not 
surprisingly, he described his vision for the 
Organization as one of continuity, stating that the 
OPCW needs stability, steadiness of purpose, and 
evolution, not revolution.  Freeman stated that the 
core challenge faced by the Organization is 
ensuring implementation of the CWC, with the 
destruction of chemical weapons (CW) stockpiles 
being of paramount importance.  He also highlighted 
the importance of nonproliferation -- calling for 
balanced implementation of the verification regime 
-- and universality -- recognizing that the few 
remaining non-member states are unique, requiring 
different approaches.   Freeman said that Article 
VII (national implementation) needs to be tied to 
assistance and cooperation, described Article X 
(assistance and protection) as growing in 
importance and requiring more effort and resources, 
and stated that Article XI (international 
cooperation and assistance) is not an optional 
extra but rather a treaty commitment.  Referring to 
 
Article XI, Freeman said that the next DG needs to 
uphold the CWC's non-discriminatory aspect.  On 
management, he said that effectiveness is the core 
objective, and he cited the Organization's 
increasingly efficient use of limited/lessening 
resources.  Freeman highlighted staffing and 
stressed the need to recruit excellent staff that 
reflect the diversity of the OPCW's membership, 
both in gender and nationality. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Q&A: South Africa asked how, after 2012, 
Freeman would use resources previously devoted to 
destruction activities.  Freeman said that, 
assuming a steady level of resources, he would 
respond to member states' wishes, ranging from 
enhancement of non-proliferation to increasing 
international cooperation and assistance.  Raising 
Article XI, Pakistan asked how scientific and 
technological developments could enhance the free 
exchange of technology and what Freeman would do to 
support the removal of restrictions to such 
exchange.  Freeman said he is alert to the rights 
of all member states and to the non-discriminatory 
nature of the CWC.  He said that the OPCW should 
provide assistance programs that support member 
states' needs and desires; Freeman also committed 
to advocating for the adjustment of regimes that 
are injurious to the object and purpose of the CWC. 
Estonia asked what the next DG can do about the 
growing politicization of the Organization, which 
does not contribute to its efficiency.  Freeman 
said there is a balance between politics and 
technical matters, saying that the TS should be an 
apolitical, technical body to support member states 
and the policy-making organs.  Brazil asked Freeman 
what specific initiatives he would propose to 
encourage greater representation of TS staff from 
developing countries.  Freeman noted that, in the 
early days of the Organization, the TS used to send 
out teams to engage member states and encourage 
them to put forward applicants for TS jobs; he 
suggested re-instituting the practice, in addition 
to raising the issue during all bilateral and 
regional visits by the DG and senior management. 
Australia asked Freeman for his thoughts on 
industry verification and what role he would play, 
given the divergent views on the issue.  Freeman 
said that the DG needs to advocate his position 
clearly but could only go so far and cannot solve 
everything. 
 
-------------------- 
AAPO POLHO (FINLAND) 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Aapo Polho is currently Finland's 
Ambassador to NATO and Belgium.  Polho praised DG 
Pfirter, saying the OPCW is in very good shape.  He 
listed the Organization's priorities as destruction 
of all existing CW, prevention of the emergence of 
new CW, responding to requests for international 
cooperation and assistance, and keeping management 
Qcooperation and assistance, and keeping management 
efficient and fiscally responsible.  Polho stated 
that failure to meet the 2012 deadline for CW 
destruction could lead to a credibility crisis, but 
he suggested that such a crisis could be averted if 
possessors not meeting the deadline demonstrate 
their unwavering commitment to the CWC and complete 
 
CW destruction.  He stressed the importance of 
universality and full implementation of the CWC in 
preventing non-member states and non-state actors 
from using chemical weapons.  Polho said that 
developing countries without CW or any chemical 
industry have the right to assistance against the 
threat of use of CW, as well as access to 
protection technology.  On management and budget, 
he stated zero nominal growth (ZNG) budgets will 
continue to be the rule.  Regarding tenure, Polho 
said that professionalism must be maintained 
against high turn-over due to the tenure policy and 
a limited pool of experts from which to draw; staff 
members need to be valued and have onward 
possibilities when they leave the TS. More needs to 
be done to achieve greater gender and geographical 
balance, he said. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Q&A:  Sri Lanka asked Polho what strategy 
he would use to reach out to the remaining non- 
member states.  Polho responded that some of the 
remaining seven countries can hopefully be 
convinced that they do not want their reputations 
sullied when they have no reason to remain outside 
of the Convention. As for Egypt, Israel and Syria, 
Polho said that they each need to come to the 
realization that chemical weapons do not enhance 
their security and that CW poses more of a 
political burden than a military asset.  The Czech 
Republic asked how the OPCW can interact and 
cooperate with other international organizations. 
Polho said the OPCW is a combination of an arms 
control and an assistance organization and has 
great scope in which to interact with organizations 
of both strains; he mentioned the special 
connection between the OPCW and the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).  Peru asked how the 
verification regime can be improved to recognize 
new technologies and combat any black market in CW. 
Polho responded that universality is one tool 
against clandestine activities; complete national 
implementation is also necessary.  He said that, 
through the Scientific Advisory Board (SAB), the 
OPCW needs to keep pace with technological 
advances, which can pose risks never imagined when 
the CWC was negotiated.  Austria asked if Polho 
sees the possibility of a credibility crisis if 
2012 is not met and what he would do in the run-up 
to 2012.  Polho said that possessors need to 
convince everyone that if they are unable to meet 
the deadline, they remain dedicated to their 
obligations under the CWC and to completely 
destroying all CW stockpiles.  In the run-up to 
2012, Polho said that all possessors need to be 
encouraged to do their utmost, and he said that one 
possessor's inability to meet the deadline should 
not create a domino effect.  Cameroon asked about 
the relationship between the OPCW and counter- 
Qthe relationship between the OPCW and counter- 
terrorism organizations.  Polho responded that the 
Organization has certain expertise to offer other 
organizations and could provide this expertise, 
along with concrete assistance in case of future CW 
use. 
 
------------------------ 
PETER GOTTWALD (GERMANY) 
------------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) Peter Gottwald is the Federal Commissioner 
of Government for Arms Control and Disarmament in 
Germany. Gottwald stated that the OPCW's core tasks 
are laid out clearly in the CWC, and he praised the 
solution-oriented approach of DG Pfirter and the 
Organization's strong consensus spirit.  He said 
that the OPCW needs to be attractive to all 
members, including those without CW or chemical 
industry.  Turning to destruction, Gottwald 
asserted that the CWC clearly has no provision for 
an extension beyond the 2012 deadline.  He 
supported the verification regime, saying the TS 
must inspect and monitor all relevant industry 
facilities while working in partnership with 
chemical industry.  Gottwald noted that the CWC is 
not just an arms control and disarmament treaty, 
stressing that the assistance provisions of the 
Convention need to be implemented.  On countering 
terrorism, he said that the OPCW must cooperate 
closely with member states and other international 
organizations.  Gottwald stated that the OPCW needs 
to be a service-oriented organization and can only 
do so if its staff is motivated to meet objectives 
efficiently and effectively.  He said that prudent 
financial management should remain the maxim, with 
ZNG budgets continuing as long as possible. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Q&A:  Macedonia asked what the role of the 
OPCW should be with other international 
organizations and how it could enhance cooperation 
with them.  Gottwald said that the OPCW has a clear 
sense of purpose as well as a model verification 
regime, and that there is room for the Organization 
to develop synergies with the other disarmament and 
development organizations (e.g., IAEA, CTBTO, 
UNIDO).  Argentina asked what limits there are to 
Article XI's full implementation.  Gottwald said 
there is a link between obligations under Articles 
XI, X and VII and that the challenge is to balance 
different needs within available resources.  France 
asked what Gottwald would do if some possessors 
miss 2012.  He said it would be necessary to work 
out a pragmatic, realistic solution that preserves 
the integrity of the CWC and the OPCW.  Sudan asked 
what, after 2012, Gottwald would do with resources 
previously used for destruction.  While Gottwald 
noted that resources might go down as destruction 
finishes, he responded that he would first consult 
with member states to assess their needs and then 
provide proposals to meet expectations and reach 
consensus.  Iran asked what Gottwald would do to 
help address unresolved issues, such as the site 
selection methodology for other chemical production 
facilities (OCPFs).  Gottwald reiterated the need 
to consult, both among member states and with 
industry and other stakeholders, and to reach 
Qindustry and other stakeholders, and to reach 
consensus on such issues. 
 
---------------------------- 
ANTON THALMANN (SWITZERLAND) 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Anton Thalmann is the Deputy State 
Secretary and Political Director in Switzerland's 
Federal Department of Foreign Affairs.  Thalmann 
was the first candidate to deliver a PowerPoint 
presentation, complete with an image of a bridge 
spanning an Alpine chasm.  He called destruction a 
 
core mandate of the OPCW until completed; even 
after destruction of existing weapons it will be 
necessary to maintain disarmament and 
demilitarization expertise.  Thalmann also cited 
the importance of the complete and global 
implementation of all provisions of the CWC, 
including Articles VII, X and XI.  He noted the 
need to address non-proliferation while not being 
solely focused on it.  On Article XI, Thalmann said 
many member states' expectations for assistance in 
promoting peaceful uses of chemistry have not yet 
fully been met. Turning to the role of the DG, 
Thalmann said that he would follow DG Pfirter's 
approach, specifically maintaining ZNG budgets and 
preserving TS expertise in all aspects.  He then 
stated that while he would not act as a Swiss 
representative, he would draw on Switzerland's long 
tradition of independence and neutrality and would 
also strive to build bridges in order to guard the 
spirit of consensus and dialogue. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Q&A:  Uruguay asked how the OPCW can 
respond to terrorism by non-state actors.  Thalmann 
stressed the need to prevent chemical weapons from 
falling into the wrong hands, which would require 
strong cooperation with other organizations and 
with national police forces. He said that the OPCW 
needs to develop outreach to deal with terrorism in 
the future.  Italy asked what the TS can do to 
induce remaining non-member states to join the CWC. 
Noting that the OPCW cannot replace UN bodies 
responsible for achieving peace or major powers 
engaged in resolving regional conflicts, Thalmann 
said that the TS can induce non-member states by 
including them in meetings and training exercises 
aimed at dispelling mistrust.  Tunisia (echoing 
Sudan and South Africa previously) asked how the 
OPCW can utilize all of its resources after the 
destruction stage is completed.  Thalmann responded 
the Organization would be faced with either 
reducing its budget or redistributing funds to 
other areas; the DG would need to consult with 
member states to define new priorities.  Iran asked 
Thalmann for his action plan to ensure full 
implementation of all rights and obligations under 
Article XI.  He responded that he would take an 
indiscriminate approach to ensure that countries 
from the "South" get a fair hearing for their 
justified demands concerning access to free trade 
in chemicals for peaceful purposes.  Poland asked 
about the OPCW's role in responding to current and 
future security threats and challenges.  Thalmann 
said that the OPCW is not an island and has a 
complementary role to play in the international 
security system, along with the Security Council, 
IAEA and others. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
SUDJADNAN PARNOHADININGRAT (INDONESIA) 
QSUDJADNAN PARNOHADININGRAT (INDONESIA) 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Sudjadnan Parnohadiningrat is Indonesia's 
Ambassador to the United States.  Sudjadnan started 
his presentation by focusing on Indonesia's role in 
international fora and stating that Indonesia had 
decided to pursue the DG position to reaffirm its 
commitment to disarmament and non-proliferation and 
to contribute more to the Organization.  He went on 
 
to describe Indonesia as the third-largest 
democracy in the world with the largest Muslim 
population, and noted that the country recently had 
completed full national implementation of the CWC. 
Sudjadnan listed Indonesia's support for various 
regional OPCW activities but said that the country 
wanted to contribute more by offering him to lead 
the Organization.  (Del note:  Throughout his 
presentation and the question and answer period, 
Sudjadnan referred to himself in the third person. 
End Note.)  Turning to substantive issues, 
Sudjadnan listed three pillars of the CWC: 
disarmament, non-proliferation and economic 
cooperation.  He noted that all member states share 
a collective responsibility to ensure that all 
members fully implement the Convention.  Sudjadnan 
closed by saying that meeting the 2012 destruction 
deadline is crucial, calling for strengthening the 
verification regime and noting the need to promote 
international cooperation and assistance. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Q&A:  The Netherlands asked what sort of 
DG is needed to deal with the OPCW's different 
challenges.  Sudjadnan responded that the DG must 
be a leader and administrator who can prioritize, 
motivate the TS, and master how technical people 
work.  Libya (like previous African delegations) 
asked how, after 2012, Sudjadnan would allocate 
resources previously used for destruction.  He 
responded that the issue is how the 2012 deadline 
can be met, noting the obligation to fully destroy 
by the date in the CWC.  Sudjadnan added that 
resources need to be used to ensure destruction is 
completed while carrying out inspections to ensure 
non-proliferation.  Referring to results-based 
management, India asked what the right way is to 
assess the TS's performance, which areas require 
improvement, and how they should be handled. 
Sudjadnan began his rambling response by stating 
the need to make meticulous calculations of short-, 
medium- and long-term priorities in order to 
achieve maximum results with minimum resources. 
Then, after searching through the draft 2010 
budget, he said that key performance indicators can 
be achieved by calculating how many inspection days 
could be performed with available resources for 
inspections.  Russia asked what Sudjadnan would do 
to preserve the verification regime's effectiveness 
and professionalism.  He noted the need to balance 
between serving member states, guiding staff to 
promote a culture of governance, and effective 
budgetary discipline to ensure minimal use of 
resources for maximum results.  Cuba asked how to 
achieve full implementation of Article XI. 
Sudjadnan said that economic cooperation and 
advancement -- "the third pillar of the CWC" -- 
should be an incentive for both member states and 
Qshould be an incentive for both member states and 
non-member states alike and that the emphasis 
should be on cooperating at the global and regional 
level. He suggested using tripartite arrangements 
through regional groups and inviting countries with 
sufficient capacity to promote full implementation 
of Article XI. 
 
--------------------- 
AHMET UZUMCU (TURKEY) 
--------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Ahmet Uzumcu is currently Turkey's 
Permanent Representative to the United Nations in 
Geneva. Uzumcu described disarmament as a core 
objective of the OPCW but admitted that destruction 
is costly and time-consuming.  He observed that 
possessors show no sign of wavering in their 
commitment to complete destruction, and he stressed 
the importance of consensus and transparency as 
tools to achieving disarmament.  On non- 
proliferation, Uzumcu praised the wide 
acceptability and success of the OPCW's 
verification regime but affirmed the importance of 
national implementation for non-proliferation 
activities to function properly.  With the shift in 
focus from destruction to industrial verification, 
Uzumcu noted the need for close cooperation and 
consultation with chemical industry and the SAB. He 
said that industry can also play a role in 
supporting peaceful uses of chemistry, and he 
highlighted assistance protection as important to 
member states and an incentive to non-member 
states.  While not being a counter-terrorism 
organization, the OPCW has an important role to 
play and should cooperate with the UN, specifically 
the Security Council's 1540 Committee.  Uzumcu 
noted the OPCW's relative obscurity and called for 
using public diplomacy to raise its profile and 
help create synergies.  On management, he stressed 
the need to ensure the effective and efficient 
function of the TS in a result-oriented, non- 
discriminatory, transparent and accountable manner. 
Uzumcu also supported ZNG budgets to meet the 
objective of continued efficient use of available 
resources.  On staffing, he noted that the tenure 
policy has its pros and cons; he also highlighted 
the importance of training staff, as well as the 
need to maintain institutional knowledge by keeping 
core personnel. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Q&A:  Morocco asked the African Group 
question of how to allocate destruction resources 
after 2012.  Responding in fluent French and noting 
that only 15% of verification resources are 
currently used for industry, Uzumcu said more 
resources should be deployed for industry 
inspections to bolster non-proliferation, while 
additional resources could also be targeted to 
Articles X and XI to support training courses and 
capacity-building.  Pakistan asked what the OPCW 
can do practically to attract the remaining seven 
non-member states.  Uzumcu stated that universality 
is necessary for full implementation of all 
components of the CWC, including non-proliferation, 
and he said that the TS and member states should 
stress the benefits of CWC -- including Articles X 
and XI -- and that chemical weapons no longer have 
any significant political or military use. 
Slovakia asked for Uzumcu's vision for developing 
QSlovakia asked for Uzumcu's vision for developing 
relations between the OPCW and other organizations, 
industry and civil society.  He said that close 
cooperation and interaction with other 
organizations is necessary to avoid duplication of 
efforts and to ensure complementarity, while 
interaction with chemical industry would help the 
OPCW keep abreast of technological and scientific 
developments.  Costa Rica asked how he would 
redress the OPCW's lack of visibility in Latin 
America and Africa.  Uzumcu responded that greater 
 
publicity would benefit the Organization, and he 
suggested engaging different actors by inviting 
academic groups, think tanks and industry for 
dialogue and to disseminate ideas.  Spain asked how 
to develop the OPCW's contribution to counter- 
terrorism, specifically in regard to Articles VII, 
X and XI.  Uzumcu said that full implementation of 
the CWC would be the best contribution, and he 
noted that the Open-ended Working Group on 
Terrorism has served as a platform for exchanging 
ideas and sharing best practices. 
 
---------------------- 
BENCHAA DANI (ALGERIA) 
---------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) Benchaa Dani is Algeria's Ambassador to 
The Netherlands and Permanent Representative to the 
OPCW.  Dani made a brief pitch for why Algeria 
views the DG position as important, citing the 
country's practical commitment to the CWC as 
evidenced by support for regional workshops and 
other OPCW activities, as well as Algeria's active 
role in The Hague.  Dani regularly referred to his 
experience gained as Algeria's PermRep, saying that 
it has prepared him to be the next DG.  He 
particularly referred to his chairmanship of the 
Committee of the Whole during the Second Review 
Conference (RevCon) in April 2008 and as a tangible 
example of his leadership qualities. (Del note: To 
many delegations who witnessed him in this role, 
this was not a strong recommendation.)  Dani 
stressed that the next DG needs to be chosen by 
consensus.  Turning to the Organization's 
priorities and challenges, he rambled off a laundry 
list, including:  meeting the 2012 destruction 
deadline; strengthening the verification and 
inspection regimes; preventing non-state actors 
from acquiring CW materials; the need for 
assistance and protection activities to support 
national capacity building; achieving universality; 
achieving full national implementation of the CWC; 
and the need to assist developing countries, citing 
the globalization of chemical industry as offering 
new opportunities for promoting the full exchange 
of scientific and technological knowledge.  Dani 
also referred to horizontal cooperation between the 
TS and member states, suggesting the establishment 
of working groups comprised of delegates and 
relevant TS staff to implement recommendations from 
the RevCon. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Q&A:  India asked what the most important 
unresolved issues facing the OPCW are and how they 
can be resolved.  Referring to the political 
atmosphere in The Hague, Dani said that much 
attention has been paid to destruction and 
countered that other issues, particularly Articles 
X and XI, should be concentrated on.  Lithuania 
asked what role the DG should have in supporting 
the policy-making organs and consensus.  Dani 
responded that the TS must give members all of the 
Qresponded that the TS must give members all of the 
necessary tools (e.g., documents, expertise) to 
strengthen the decision-making process and that the 
DG should work closely with delegations as a bridge 
and consensus-builder.  Chile asked which issue 
will be the most difficult for the next DG to 
address.  Responding in Spanish, Dani started by 
 
saying that the question posed a dilemma similar to 
a father having to choose amongst his children; 
there are some articles of the CWC that are not 
fully implemented, particularly Articles X and XI; 
post-2012, non-proliferation will be the greatest 
challenge, but terrorism also poses a threat and a 
challenge.  The U.S. asked what Dani sees as the 
future for ZNG budgets and the tenure policy. 
Noting the necessity of management capacities, Dani 
said that the DG must work closely with his deputy 
and the nine TS directors; as DG, Dani would choose 
to delegate management tasks, based on his personal 
experience as a manager.  Citing the validity of 
observing ZNG budgets for the time being, Dani did 
note that after 2012, the budget will need to be 
changed, with more resources devoted to 
implementing other articles, not just inspections. 
Breaking from the usual African Group question, 
Nigeria asked Dani how prepared he is to be the 
next DG.  In a notably different response, Dani 
said he is encouraged by new trends in 
international cooperation and in disarmament, 
particularly since President Obama's election. 
Quoting the Obama slogan "Yes, we can," Dani said, 
"Yes, I'm ready." 
 
¶17. (SBU) (Del comment: The seven candidates' 
presentations were all polished since earlier 
meetings with individuals and groups of 
delegations, including the Western European and 
Others Group (WEOG).  Their responses to questions 
provided more insight into how they might handle 
the job and steer through controversial issues. 
The day-long exercise proved to be a good 
opportunity for the entire Executive Council to 
compare all the candidates. 
End comment.) 
 
¶18. (U) BEIK SENDS 
 
GALLAGHER