09TORONTO294
CANADA'S FM SPEAKS ON ARCTIC, AFGHANISTAN
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO6427
RR RUEHQU
DE RUEHON #0294 3272218
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 232218Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0013
INFO ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0001
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0001
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 0001
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 0001UNCLAS TORONTO 000294 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CA AF XQ
SUBJECT: CANADA'S FM SPEAKS ON ARCTIC, AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In a November 23 speech in Toronto that had few 
surprises, Minister of Foreign Affairs Lawrence Cannon laid out 
Canada's foreign policy priorities, highlighting Afghanistan and a 
plan for the Arctic.  While Afghanistan topped Cannon's list of 
foreign policy priorities, the promotion of Canada's Northern 
Strategy in the Arctic was the clear focus of the speech.  Canada's 
plan for the Arctic rests on four principles:  (1) exercising 
Canada's sovereignty; (2) promoting economic and social 
development; (3) protecting Canada's environmental heritage; and 
(4) improving and devolving governance.  Though he strayed little 
from his prepared remarks, Cannon did respond to a question about 
the Northwest Passage by strongly emphasizing the view that it is 
the "Canadian Northwest Passage," and is "no doubt within Canadian 
sovereign territory."  End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a luncheon speech to a small but influential crowd, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Lawrence Cannon invoked the lyrics, 
"the True North strong and free" of the Canadian national anthem, 
devoting the majority of his speech to promoting Canada's Northern 
Strategy for exercising its "sovereign rights and jurisdiction" in 
the Arctic.  He outlined the "four pillars" of the Northern 
Strategy:  (1) Exercising Canadian sovereignty; (2) promoting 
economic and social development; (3) protecting Canada's 
environmental heritage; and (4) improving and devolving governance. 
 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Cannon focused most heavily on "exercising sovereignty," 
by emphasizing the Canadian military commitment to demonstrating 
control over the Arctic.  In particular, he noted the establishment 
of a Canadian Forces Arctic Training Centre in Resolute Bay, the 
expansion of the Canadian Rangers, and the development of a 
deep-water docking and refueling facility in Nunavut.  Cannon also 
referred to ongoing efforts to map the extended continental shelf 
in the Arctic (in cooperation with the U.S.)in order to bolster 
efforts to obtain international recognition of its claims of 
sovereignty, pointing to a 2013 target of making the data public. 
Although Cannon nearly steered clear of mentioning specific 
contentious claims during his prepared speech (aside from a 
reference to Russia "challeng[ing]" Canada's security), he 
responded to a pointed question from a journalism student about the 
Northwest Passage by strongly emphasizing the view that it is the 
"Canadian Northwest Passage," and is "no doubt within Canadian 
sovereign territory."  He added that, while arctic ice is 
shrinking, scientists predict that currents will take melting ice 
toward Canada's territory, thus making probable exploitation of the 
Northwest Passage for commercial traffic up to 40 years away.  He 
said settling arctic shelf claims under the law of the Sea was a 
more pressing issue than discussions over the Northwest Pasasge. 
 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Regarding the principles of promoting economic and social 
development, protecting the climate and improving governance, 
Cannon included few details, though he reiterated Canada's position 
to "vigorously" defend the practice of seal hunting and the GOC's 
intention to challenge the current ban at the World Trade 
Organization.  He also noted that Canada continues to "require" 
foreign vessels entering what it claims to be Canadian Arctic 
waters to report to the Canadian Coast Guard. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Playing off his recent visit to Afghanistan last week, 
Cannon also praised President Karzai's recent commitments to 
establishing a stable and democratic government, but noted the 
"significant problems" with the recent presidential election.  In 
particular, Cannon admonished Karzai to appoint cabinet ministers 
and governors based on merit and to take steps to reform the 
justice system.  Cannon also mentioned Canada's continued 
commitment to Afghans and allies to combat threats of global 
terrorism, stating that they "can count on Canada for help." 
Nevertheless, he reiterated Canada's own commitment to withdrawing 
its troops in 2011. 
JOHNSON