09UNVIEVIENNA3
AFGHAN MINISTERS TALK COUNTERNARCOTICS IN VIENNA
Fri Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNVIE
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUNV #0003/01 0090826
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090826Z JAN 09
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8879
INFO RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0247
AFGHA/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 0158
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0074
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS UNVIE VIENNA 000003 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SNAR KCRM PREL EUN NATO AF IR CA GM JA PK SW UN
 
SUBJECT:  AFGHAN MINISTERS TALK COUNTERNARCOTICS IN VIENNA 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  On the margins of the Paris Pact meeting in Vienna on 
December 15-16, Ambassador and DCM met with Afghanistan's Minister 
of Counternarcotics General Khodaidad, Deputy Minister of Interior 
General Daud Daud, and other Afghan officials.  The Ministers 
complained about the lack of counternarcotics funding from nations 
other than the U.S., stressed the importance of "quick, visible" 
rewards to discourage poppy cultivation, described their goal for 
eradication in 2009, and expressed their concern over the lack of 
ISAF action, against drug targets and the slow progress in 
cooperation efforts with Iran and Pakistan.  Ambassador informed 
them that UNVIE had been engaging Canada and Germany on the Good 
Performers Initiative (GPI), which should resonate with these 
countries' counter-narcotics policies that are focused on "soft" 
measures (development assistance) rather than hard measures 
(eradication).  Ambassador also suggested that the Afghans engage 
Sweden, which is interested in intensifying its work in Afghanistan. 
 End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
U.S. "Only Contributor" 
to CN in Afghanistan 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Minister Khodaidad and Deputy Minister Daud said that for 
the past year and a half only the U.S. had contributed to 
counternarcotics and they were deeply grateful. This support 
included their ability to travel to the provinces and meet with 
governors and key officials that can have an impact on 
counternarcotics.  Khodaidad expressed concern for the lack of 
interest in funding the counternarcotics effort among others in the 
donor community.  In particular, he cited the need for more support 
from the EU, EC, Japan, and Canada.  Ambassador informed that UNVIE 
has been engaging Canada and Germany on GPI.  The program should 
resonate with countries like these because their counternarcotics 
policies tend to focus on "soft" measures (development assistance) 
rather than hard measures (eradication).  In addition to engaging 
those states, Ambassador also suggested that the Afghans engage 
Sweden as the Foreign Minister is interested in intensifying his 
government's work in Afghanistan. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Need to Increase Quick Impact Projects 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  When asked about the situation in the south, Khodaidad 
explained that a lot of funding has been provided to Helmand, 
Kandahar, and Oruzgan over the years by partner nations to combat 
narcotics, but the impact has been minimal in deterring further 
cultivation. In his view, infrastructure takes 15-20 years to put in 
place, not quick enough to reward farmers who turn away from poppy. 
He added that Afghans do not like to grow poppy and do so under 
pressure from Taliban, traffickers, or from dire economic 
circumstances.  Therefore, he said, visible and quick rewards from 
governors can have a profound impact. Khodaidad believes in the need 
to publicize the fact that development assistance is provided as a 
reward for the Afghans' stance against poppy cultivation. He is 
engaging other ministries to publicize their projects/assistance in 
this perspective.  Daud expressed appreciation for information on 
drug trafficking provided by the U.S. and U.K., which resulted in 
arrests in Nimroz province. Both Ministers stated that significant 
proceeds from the drug trade ("black money") are being deposited in 
Dubai and Switzerland. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Progress on Eradication Preparations 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Daud said that the Poppy Eradication Force (PEF) and 
Counter Narcotics Infantry Kandak (CNIK) had begun joint operations 
training on December 14 and that they planned to deploy to Helmand 
and Farah. Their eradication goal for 2009 is "206,000 hectares" (he 
probably meant 20,600 or 26,000 hectares).  They were confident that 
governor led eradication (GLE) would take place this year in 
Kandahar and Oruzgan.  Daud said he expected 26-27 poppy free 
provinces this year.  In his view, a few million dollars in Good 
Performers Initiative (GPI) rewards for each province is not enough. 
 He believed that $10-20 million per province were necessary.  He 
estimated that if this amount were made available through the GPI, 
there would be no need for an eradication program.  Ambassador 
cautioned that the U.S. believes in a balanced approach of 
incentives and disincentives. 
------------------------------ 
ISAF Support for CN Operations 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Khodaidad expressed concern that ISAF forces had not 
begun to target drug labs.  He has made clear to partner nations 
that the GOA is not inviting ISAF to support the police during 
eradication, but only needs them for interdiction support.  Still, 
he feels the commitment made in Budapest (in October by the NATO 
defense ministers) is not clear to many states.  Ambassador added 
that UNODC Executive Director Antonio Costa is one of the strongest 
supporters of ISAF drug interdiction operations. 
 
------------------------ 
Afghan Cooperation with 
Pakistan and Iran 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  On cooperation with Pakistan and Iran, Minister Khodaidad 
explained that progress was slow and communication occurred mainly 
through the UN or UK.  The respective ministries only communicate 
via the international community but not face-to-face. This situation 
is lamentable because 85% of the heroin is trafficked via Iran and 
Pakistan and several major traffickers live in Iran.  Recently 360 
gallons of acetic anhydride (AA) were seized for the first time in 
Iran.  To advance Afghan-Iranian cooperation, the Ministry of 
Counternarcotics is avoiding political issues and trying to engage 
through technical cooperation. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Given 2008 data, Daud's goals for eradication (even at 
20,600 hectares) and poppy-free provinces (26-27) sounded ambitious. 
 Khodaidad, while expressing appreciation for U.S. assistance, 
seemed concerned and unsure about re-engaging other partners on the 
issue of counternarcotics.  He obviously was eager for ISAF 
participation in narcotics interdiction operations.  Both ministers 
recognized the link between reward and eradication, and the 
importance of contributions to the Good Performers Initiative from 
other partner nations.  While Daud's plea for doubling the reward 
for poppy-free provinces is understandable, he should also 
understand that there should be a balance between incentives and 
disincentives. 
 
Schulte