09UNVIEVIENNA127
UN Commission Adopts Fourteen Drug Control Resolutions
Wed Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNVIE
VZCZCXRO9684
RR RUEHDBU RUEHKW
DE RUEHUNV #0127/01 0841516
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251516Z MAR 09
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9208
INFO RUCNNAR/VIENNA NARCOTICS COLLECTIVE
RUEHPG/AMEMBASSY PRAGUE 0098
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0266
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 0149
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0277
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0031UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 UNVIE VIENNA 000127 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PGOV UN KCRM AF UNCND CU IR
 
SUBJECT:  UN Commission Adopts Fourteen Drug Control Resolutions 
 
REF: A) UNVIE Vienna 110, B) Glover-Tsai Email of March 19, 
C)  UNVIE 85, D)  SECSTATE 25200 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Following on the High-Level Segment (Ref A), the regular 
session of the 52nd UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND), held 
March 16-20, adopted 14 drug control-related resolutions to guide 
the work of Member States and the UN Office on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC) in the coming year.  The Secretariat clarified that none of 
the resolutions would require regular budget funding. 
 
¶2.  (U) The United States delegation (USDEL) co-sponsored the 
following resolutions: 
- to establish a standing working group to improve the governance 
and finance situation of UNODC; 
- to address illicit trafficking in cannabis seeds; 
- to strengthen drug analysis laboratories; 
- to endorse the development of UNODC regional strategic frameworks; 
and, 
- to combat money laundering. 
 
¶3.  (U) USDEL joined consensus on additional resolutions that 
focused on: 
- assessing drug control commitments over the next decade in line 
with the recently adopted Political Declaration and Action Plan, 
- alternative development within the framework of elimination of 
illicit drug crops; 
      -regional cooperation among Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan; 
      -international support for East Africa and West Africa (two 
resolutions); 
and, 
-countering drug-facilitated sexual assault. 
 
¶4.  (U) USDEL made concerted efforts to advance the U.S. position 
that opioids and other controlled medications should be available, 
with proper controls to prevent diversion, to all patients who need 
them.  USDEL  succeeded in keeping "the availability of access to 
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances for medical and 
scientific purposes" on the CND's agenda.  European Union Member 
States, Australia, the World Health Organization (WHO) and several 
non-governmental organizations supported USDEL's motion. 
 
¶5.  (U) USDEL  hosted two well-attended side events on the margins 
of the CND to advance U.S. positions on demand reduction and on 
precursor chemical control. 
 
¶6.  (U) ONDCP funded a reception hosted by UNVIE Ambassador Gregory 
Schulte to honor non-governmental organizations (NGO) active in the 
area of drug control, prevention, treatment and care.  Ambassador 
Schulte thanked the NGO representatives for their supportive role in 
preparing for the CND and their input into the review of the 
progress achieved since the 1998 UN General Assembly Special Session 
on Drugs (UNGASS).  As part of increased outreach with NGOs, USDEL 
also actively attended a variety of events hosted by a broad 
spectrum of NGOs.  END SUMMARY. 
 
UNITED STATES, G-77 COOPERATE 
ON FINANCE AND GOVERNANCE 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (U) After six months of intensive discussions within the 
framework of the Working Group on Finance and Governance, the 
co-chairs of the Working Group - Namibia and Sweden - introduced a 
resolution to adopt a variety of recommendations aimed at improving 
the financial and administrative health of UNODC.  Notably, the 
recommendations endorsed the establishment of a standing Working 
Group on Finance and Governance to advise the two governing bodies, 
the CND and the UN Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal 
Justice (Crime Commission).  USDEL worked closely with UN 
secretariat representatives, the co-chairs of the Working Group, and 
Argentina (on behalf of the G-77) in order to ensure that the costs 
of the standing Working Group would not result in any "unfunded 
mandates," i.e., any  program budget implication (PBI) for the 
2008-2009 biennium.  In contrast to previous discussions, the G-77 
this time had a strong incentive to ensure that the resolution did 
not incur a PBI, as it might have prevented the Working Group from 
being established.  USDEL worked with the Secretariat and various 
member states to identify the recommendations with problematic 
financial implications and helped craft language in the resolution 
that avoided budget implications while steering clear of the equally 
thorny issue of "reopening the substantive debate."  In addition, 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000127  002 OF 007 
 
 
USDEL worked with Sweden to ensure that the resolution would advance 
the standing Working Group as a pragmatic, result-oriented, 
efficient and cooperative body to promote dialogue between Member 
States and UNODC.  On the margins, individual G-77 member states, 
including Argentina and Pakistan, noted that it was their national 
positions to be constructive members of the standing Working Group, 
rather than to use it as a platform for continuous negotiations. 
 
CUBA WANTS TO CO-CHAIR 
FINGOV WORKING GROUP 
----------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) At the adoption of the resolution, the Cuban delegation 
reconfirmed the candidacy of its ambassador (Norma Goicochea 
Estenoz) as one of the two co-chairpersons for the standing Working 
Group, and announced that her candidacy has received the endorsement 
of the G-77 group.  The two co-chairs will be elected at the 
intersessional meetings to be held after the Crime Commission, after 
consultations and nominations by the Extended Bureaus of the CND and 
the Crime Commission, to serve a one-year term. No other candidates 
have stepped forward. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) (NOTE: Despite assurances from individual G-77 Member 
States, UNVIE and INL are concerned about the manner in which 
Goicochea would conduct herself as Chair of the working group, 
although we have heard that Goicochea will be departing Vienna in a 
year.  Although we do not see it as feasible at this stage to fight 
Cuba's candidacy, we have made clear to the UNODC secretariat and 
other delegations that we view Cuba as an inappropriate Chair of 
this working group, given Cuba's paltry support to UNODC funding and 
its questionable record in implementing the drug conventions and 
reportedly providing shelter in the past to the drug trade.  To 
ensure a balance in what we fear could be a highly politicized 
exercise, it will be important to have a major donor country as the 
other co-chair.  UNVIE has approached Japan and Namibia on the idea 
of having Japan serve in that capacity.  Septel will report further 
on the Cuban candidacy.  END NOTE.) 
 
US CO-SPONSORED RESOLUTIONS: 
CANNABIS, DRUG LABS, UNODC REGIONAL 
PROGRAMS, AND MONEY LAUNDERING 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (U) CANNABIS:  USDEL co-sponsored a resolution introduced by 
Japan on cannabis seeds. The resolution focused on examining the use 
of cannabis seeds for illicit purposes.  Specifically, it requested 
the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) to gather 
regulatory information on cannabis seeds, including sale of seeds on 
the Internet for delivery through mail or private delivery services. 
 It also requested UNODC to conduct a global survey on the sale of 
cannabis seeds and urged Member States to consider measures to 
prevent trade in cannabis seeds for illicit purposes. USG 
interventions ensured that measures called for in the resolution 
would not result in additional financial burden for UNODC or INCB, 
unless extra-budgetary resources were provided.  The agreed upon 
text also assuaged concerns by some EU Member States and Switzerland 
that the resolution would lay the foundation for controls of 
cannabis seed, which the 1961 Convention specifically exempts. 
Germany and Spain also advocated that the resolution not impact 
adversely the manufacture of hemp and other products derived from 
cannabis seed.  In addition to USDEL, France supported Japan's 
efforts to highlight and examine the scope of the problem posed by 
trade in cannabis seeds. 
 
¶11.  (U) DRUG LABS: Argentina and Finland introduced a resolution, 
which USDEL co-sponsored, to advance UNODC's work to evaluate, upon 
request, the performance of drug laboratories through its quality 
assurance program.  The resolution also called on Member States, 
sub-regional and regional organizations to provide expertise for the 
development of cooperative networks among laboratories and 
scientists, particularly by exploring ways for exchange of 
information and expertise.  The resolution served as a follow-up to 
an EU-sponsored initiative in 2007 to highlight the importance of 
laboratory certification for good practice in drug analysis. 
 
¶12.  (U) UNODC REGIONAL PROGRAMS: Canada, Japan, EU Member States 
and USDEL joined the African Group to co-sponsor a resolution that 
endorsed UNODC's efforts to develop regional strategic frameworks to 
guide its technical assistance activities around the globe.  These 
regional frameworks will serve as a coherent guide for UNODC 
programming and help ensure broad cooperation with regional and 
sub-regional organizations, as well as other relevant entities 
within the UN system, such as the Department of Peacekeeping 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000127  003 OF 007 
 
 
Operations and the UN Development Program.  The push to develop 
regional frameworks is part of UNODC's overall efforts to move away 
from a piecemeal project-by-project approach to its field 
activities. 
 
¶13.  (U) ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING: Introduced by Mexico, the U.S. 
co-sponsored a resolution focused on continued implementation of 
anti-money laundering provisions in the 1988 UN Convention against 
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, the 
UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC) and the 
UN Convention against Corruption (UNCAC).  It calls for capacity 
building in regulatory systems, as well as in criminal justice 
institutions and, as appropriate, legislative change to address 
evolving money laundering techniques, and facilitation of bilateral, 
and multilateral cooperation against money laundering. USDEL 
succeeded in ensuring the resolution took note of the work and 
progress of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and FATF-Style 
Regional Bodies (FSRBs), despite opposition from Iran. (Note: The 
endorsement of FATF was particularly significant because the USDEL, 
EU and others were unable to get an endorsement of FATF in the 
Political Declaration.  End Note.)  The resolution also contained 
references about linkages between drug trafficking and organized 
crime (as advocated by Russian Federation and Colombia), 
specifically trafficking-related money laundering using the internet 
and other emerging tools. 
 
ADDITIONAL RESOLUTIONS LAY 
GROUNDWORK FOR INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION IN DRUG CONTOL 
---------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (U) In addition to those resolutions noted above, USDEL joined 
consensus on the following resolutions: 
 
¶15.  (U) DATA COLLECTION: Assessing data on drug control commitments 
over the next decade: Australia, Argentina and Venezuela sponsored a 
resolution to develop a process for improving the collection, 
reporting and analysis of data to monitor the implementation of the 
Political Declaration and Action Plan on International Cooperation 
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World 
Drug Problem (Ref A).  USDEL worked closely with the drafters to 
ensure the establishment of an appropriate process with input from 
Member States, as well as input from regional and other 
international organizations with data collection expertise.  The 
resolution establishes an open-ended intergovernmental working group 
in 2009 to review the current data collection tools with a view to 
submitting a revised set of these tools for adoption at the 2010 
session.  Per Ref B, USDEL did not co-sponsor this resolution. 
 
¶16.  (U) ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT: Thailand and Peru introduced a 
resolution promoting best practices and lessons learned for 
sustainable alternative development programs.  Working closely with 
Colombia, USDEL succeeded in ensuring that the resolution made a 
clear connection between alternative development and the reduction 
in illicit drug crops, thereby making a distinction from broader 
development activities.  Although initially reluctant to break with 
co-sponsor Thailand on this issue, Peru also supported the inclusion 
of the framework of elimination of illicit drug crops.  The 
resolution also requests UNODC to consider organizing an 
international conference in 2010 as a further vehicle for promoting 
best practices. 
 
¶17.  (U) TRANSIT STATES BORDERING AFGHANISTAN:  The G-77-sponsored 
resolution to strengthen law enforcement capacities of main transit 
states bordering Afghanistan was originally tabled by Iran and 
Pakistan.  The resolution called for regional cooperation to fight 
trafficking in opium out of Afghanistan and in precursor chemicals 
into Afghanistan.  It drew attention to UNODC's regional 
initiatives, such as the Paris Pact, the Rainbow Strategy, as well 
as the Triangle Initiative among Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan.  It 
requested Member States and UNODC to provide or facilitate technical 
assistance and financial support for such purposes.  At Russian 
insistence, the resolution included references to various 
Russian-supported fora and initiatives for the region, such as the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.  The resolution also welcomed the 
next ministerial meeting of the Triangular Initiative in Islamabad 
in June 2009.  USDEL worked with Iran and Pakistan, as well as 
Canada, UK, France, Italy, and Egypt, to address issues of concern 
to the United States, (e.g., replacing initial language on 
"providing advanced detection equipment, scanners, forensic drug 
laboratories and testing kits" with "providing relevant technical 
equipment and facilities." )   Per Ref B, USDEL did not co-sponsor 
this resolution, although the United States was included among the 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000127  004 OF 007 
 
 
list of countries contributing to UNODC to support such programs. 
 
¶18.  (U) INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT FOR EAST AFRICA:  This resolution 
endorsed efforts to address the emergence of East Africa as a 
transit region for heroin shipments. Similar in content to a 2008 
resolution regarding West Africa, this resolution was adopted 
without significant debate. In addition to continued 
counternarcotics efforts by East African states, the resolution 
solicited assistance (from financial institutions and other 
potential donors) for counternarcotics capacity-building and UNODC 
facilitation of coordinated efforts against narcotics smuggling in 
the sub-region. 
 
¶19.  (U) WEST AFRICA: The resolution drew attention to adverse 
consequences resulting from the transit of cocaine in the sub-region 
and to sub-regional counternarcotics efforts.  It sought increased 
supply and demand reduction efforts in origin, transit and 
destination States, cited several relevant multilateral efforts and 
sought financial and technical assistance for implementation of the 
(West African States and ECOWAS) Regional Response Action Plan. 
USDEL succeeded in inserting language to encourage collaboration 
with West African States, including law enforcement cooperation in 
order to strengthen prosecutions and enhance knowledge of drug 
trafficking operations. 
 
¶20.  (U) USE OF PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY TO COUNTER 
DRUG-FACILITATED SEXUAL ASSAULT ("DATE RAPE"):  USDEL worked with 
concerned Member States, including the EU, Australia, and 
Switzerland, to overcome difficulties in the resolution, since it 
contained a variety of substances both illicit and licit, 
internationally controlled and not controlled, and both 
pharmaceuticals and precursor chemicals.  The resulting resolution 
urged member states within their national legal framework to 
consider imposing stricter controls or to take other measures aimed 
at discouraging the use of such substances in order to prevent the 
commission of drug-facilitated sexual assault. 
 
¶20.  (U) COOPERATION BETWEEN LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN AND THE 
STATES OF WEST AFRICA: Sponsored by Venezuela, this resolution 
focused on cocaine trafficking involving the two regions. The 
resolution cited relevant discussion at several events in the two 
regions and invited dialogue by and resources from Member States for 
interregional initiatives. Per Ref B, USDEL did not co-sponsor this 
resolution. 
 
¶21.  (U) MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE FOR SECURITY AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE 
CARIBBEAN:  Sponsored by the G-77, this resolution was originally 
tabled by Cuba and the Dominican Republic.  It welcomed the recent 
Ministerial meeting in Santo Domingo and the subsequent adoption of 
a Political Declaration and Action Plan to combat drug trafficking, 
organized crime and terrorism in the Caribbean.  The resolution 
further encouraged international support and financial contributions 
for the implementation of the Action Plan and the Santo Domingo 
Partnership Monitoring Mechanism, which will facilitate 
consultations at the expert and policy levels.  USDEL had to work 
with Cuba and the Dominican Republic to address issues of concern to 
us, such as making it clear that the implementation would be based 
on voluntary contributions.  Per Ref B, USDEL did not co-sponsor 
this resolution. 
 
¶22.  (U) INVOLVEMENT OF WOMEN AND GIRLS AS DRUG COURIERS:  Sponsored 
by the African Group, this resolution sought to increase attention, 
resources and research on the involvement of women and girls in drug 
trafficking, especially as couriers.  The text requests UNODC to 
analyze existing data in order to better understand gender issues 
related to drug trafficking. 
 
IMPROVING ACCESS TO ESSENTIAL MEDICINES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶23.  (U) USDEL made concerted efforts to advance the U.S. position 
that opioids and other controlled medications should be available, 
with adequate controls to prevent diversion, to all patients who 
need them.  USDEL succeeded in keeping "the availability of access 
to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances for medical and 
scientific purposes" on the agenda for the 2010 CND.  European Union 
Member States, Australia, the World Health Organization (WHO) and 
several non-governmental organizations supported USDEL's motion for 
this item to be on the agenda for next year.  In addition, USDEL led 
several delegations, including the UK, Switzerland and France, in 
approaching sponsors India and Turkey, to advocate a reference to 
access to essential medicines in their draft resolution, which 
focused on the need for a balance between demand for and supply of 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000127  005 OF 007 
 
 
licit opiates. However, it became clear over the course of the 
meeting that consensus around this resolution had eroded on a range 
of issues.  Ultimately, India and Turkey decided to withdraw the 
draft resolution. 
 
¶24.  (U) (NOTE: USDEL will need to be ready to address the issue of 
improving access to opiates for pain relief in the near future, as 
there is almost certainly going to be a draft resolution tabled at 
the 53rd meeting in 2010 (the Secretariat had removed it from 
consideration).  As the United States has a good story to tell on 
this issue, the United States will need to consider a proactive 
strategy for U.S. engagement.  In this regard, India and Turkey 
already approached USDEL to work cooperatively during the 
intersessional period. END NOTE.) 
 
U.S.-HOSTED SIDE EVENTS 
ON DEMAND REDUCTION AND 
ON PRECURSOR CHEMICAL CONTROL 
----------------------------- 
 
¶25.  (U) USDEL hosted two well attended side events on the margins 
of the CND to advance U.S. positions on demand reduction and on 
precursor chemical control.  The first event, led by Dr. H. Westley 
Clark, HHS Director for the Center of Substance Abuse Treatment, 
showcased U.S. experience in improving access to treatment and 
mainstreaming drug abuse treatment into health systems.  The second 
event, conducted by DEA, highlighted the roles that pharmaceutical 
preparations play in the clandestine manufacture of methamphetamine. 
 USDEL used the event to demonstrate the importance of supplying the 
International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) with estimates of the 
licit requirements for those chemicals and pharmaceutical 
preparations.  With these estimates, governments can conduct "quick 
reality checks" to determine whether importation of chemicals and 
preparations are warranted. 
 
ADVANCING OUTREACH WITH NGOS 
---------------------------- 
 
¶26.  (U) ONDCP funded a reception on March 18 hosted by UNVIE 
Ambassador Schulte in honor of non-governmental organizations active 
in the area of drug control, prevention, treatment and care. 
Ambassador Schulte thanked the NGO representatives for their 
supportive role in preparing for the CND and their input into the 
review of the progress achieved since the 1998 UN General Assembly 
Special Session on Drugs (UNGASS) through their "Beyond 2008" 
declaration and conclusions. The reception was well attended by a 
wide array of organizations, with attendees representing American 
and internationally-based NGOs, as well as Members States. Many 
guests expressed their appreciation for the invitation and welcomed 
the gesture as an indication that their input on the way forward in 
drug policy would be considered. 
 
¶27.  (U) Members of the U.S. delegation also met with a group of 
NGOs representing the Harm Reduction Coalition, Human Rights Watch, 
the Open Society Institute, the International Drug Policy Consortium 
(IDPC), and Virginians against Drug Violence, to discuss areas of 
common ground, where the USG could work with them on an array of 
drug policy issues.  Though many of these organizations have been, 
and continue to be, sharply critical of elements of U.S. policy, all 
were appreciative of the collaborative and open approach of the U.S. 
delegation at this year's CND.  Key issues raised included how to 
translate the Administration's new policy on needle exchange 
programs into action, concerns over incarceration rates for 
drug-related offenses, need for CND to push States to improve access 
to opioids for palliative care, need to improve communication 
channels in the CND around human rights, public health issues, and 
eradication and alternative development. 
 
¶27.  (U) USDEL also actively attended a variety of events hosted by 
a broad spectrum of NGOs.  At one such event, the Drug Free America 
Foundation (DFAF) presented to the President of the INCB a petition 
with almost 6 million names of supporters of the three UN drug 
control Conventions. The petition was the result of two years of 
work by Project SUNDIAL (Supporting UN Drug Initiatives and 
Legislation), an initiative of DFAF to demonstrate the broad support 
of citizens of the world for the work of the INCB.  The Swedish 
National Association for a Drug-Free Society also used the occasion 
to announce the formation of a new international anti-drug umbrella 
group of NGOs called the World Federation against Drugs, which will 
hold an annual conference in Stockholm and provide information on 
successful anti-drug strategies and programs around the world. 
 
IRAN TO CHAIR 2010 CND 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000127  006 OF 007 
 
 
---------------------- 
 
¶28.  (U) As expected (Ref C), Namibian chair announced, on the last 
day of the CND, that the Asia Group, which will take the rotating 
chairmanship of the 53rd CND in 2010, has endorsed Iran as its 
candidate.  The Namibian chair urged other regional groups to 
propose candidates to the bureau of the 53rd CND.  She added that 
the reconvened session in December will formally elect the Chair and 
the bureau.  USDEL followed Ref D guidance. 
 
INCB-HOSTED EVENT: ILLEGAL 
INTERNET PHARMACIES 
-------------------------- 
 
¶29.  (U) The INCB invited interested Member States to participate in 
their presentation of the "Guidelines for Governments on Preventing 
the Illegal Sale of Internationally Controlled Substances through 
the Internet."  Dr. Hamid Ghodse, INCB President, in his opening 
remarks stressed the need for collaboration among States to 
successfully address the problem of cybercrime and indicated that 
the guidelines were developed to facilitate this goal.  The INCB 
provided an overview of the global cybercrime situation including 
special reference to illegal Internet pharmacies trafficking in 
controlled substances. They also promoted U.S. experience in 
combating illegal Internet pharmacies as a model.  Following the 
presentation the official publication was released for 
distribution. 
 
DINNER AT THE RESIDENCE OF 
THE AMBASSADOR OF FINLAND 
-------------------------- 
 
¶30.  (U) A representative from USDEL attended an invitational dinner 
at the residence of the Ambassador of Finland, along with delegates 
from Australia, Canada, Finland, Germany, Netherlands and Czech 
Republic. With no formal agenda, discussions focused around three 
issues: the lack of consensus on the "harm reduction" concept; the 
role of NGO's in drug policy, and the intravenous drug use problem 
and its intertwined HIV/AIDS epidemic in Russia. 
 
COMPOSITION OF USDEL 
-------------------- 
 
¶31.  (U) INL Assistant Secretary David T. Johnson, ONDCP Acting 
Director Ed Jurith and UNVIE Ambassador Greg Schulte led USDEL. 
INL's John Sullivan served as the alternate head of delegation. 
Additional USDEL members were as follows: ONDCP Richard Baum, HHS 
Dr. H. Westley Clark, INL/PC Christine Cline, DEA Denise Curry, 
UNVIE Adam Davis, ONDCP Christine Kourtides, S/GAC Colin McIff, 
INL/PC Kathleen Pala, L/LEI Virginia Prugh, DEA Christine Sannerud, 
ONDCP June Sivilli, INL/PC Cassandra Stuart, UNVIE Soching Tsai and 
DOJ Lena Watkins. 
 
COMMENT: CHANGING PERCEPTIONS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶32.  (SBU) USDEL made a concerted effort at this year's CND to 
demonstrate the United States' balanced approach to drug policy, in 
particular highlighting U.S. support for demand reduction and the 
importance of prevention, treatment and care, and rehabilitation. 
The new U.S. policy on needle/syringe exchange and our long standing 
position in favor of medication-assisted therapy underscored that 
balance.  The alliance USDEL built with some like-minded countries, 
such as Japan, Russia, and Colombia, as well as USDEL's outreach to 
the EU and to the G-77 since last November, contributed to 
acceptable compromises.  In addition, UNVIE brokered an agreement 
between the EU and the G-77 on structuring the Action Plan, one of 
the EU's three main goals for the high-level segment.  During the 
negotiations prior to and after the CND, the Namibian chair praised 
UNVIE's negotiating approach as "assertive but not aggressive." 
After the CND, UNVIE's Dutch contact expressed appreciation for the 
tone of the USDEL this year, noting that instead of focusing on such 
things as "coffee shops" and the "illegality of harm reduction," 
USDEL was much more "conciliatory, open-minded, constructive and 
actively engaged in the drug demand reduction dialogue." 
 
¶33.  (SBU) Many Member States and NGO representatives expressed 
surprise over the amount of resources the United States Federal 
Government spends annually on demand reduction activities ($3.4 
billion in FY 2008).  NGO representatives, in particular, welcomed 
increased dialogue with USDEL representatives and the opportunity 
for their voice to be heard.   USDEL was also able to work 
multilaterally with other delegations to amend the Iranian and Cuban 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000127  007 OF 007 
 
 
resolutions to make them acceptable to us.  Egypt, a key player at 
the CND though only an observer, said that the non-controversial 
nature of the resolutions this year contributed to the success.  The 
rapport and goodwill UNVIE built over the last several months with a 
broad range of Member States facilitated the negotiations during the 
CND.  On the margins, Chairperson Ambassador Ashipala-Musavyi 
(Namibia) noted appreciation for USG support and efforts to 
coordinate closely and to provide maximum flexibility in 
negotiations.  We will need to continue to work to maintain the 
goodwill for the Reconvened CND meeting in December 2009.  And all 
this goodwill notwithstanding, Washington should also be prepared to 
tackle the "harm reduction" issue at the next CND, because it is 
likely that its proponents will continue to push for CND endorsement 
of this concept. 
 
SCHULTE