09USUNNEWYORK1083
ISRAELI PRACTICES IN THE WEST BANK, GAZA AND GOLAN
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4596
RR RUEHIK
DE RUCNDT #1083/01 3352323
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 012323Z DEC 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7737
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZJ/HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001083 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KPAL IS
SUBJECT: ISRAELI PRACTICES IN THE WEST BANK, GAZA AND GOLAN 
- FOURTH COMMITTEE DEBATE 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001083  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The UN General Assembly's Fourth Committee met 
November 9 - 10 to debate the annual "Report of the Special 
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the 
Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the 
Occupied Territories" (aka the Special Committee).  The 
debate included statements from 27 countries (primarily Arab 
League and Organization of the Islamic Conference members) in 
addition to the chair of the Special Committee and the 
Palestinian Observer Mission.  Most condemned Israel's 
"occupation," military offensives against Gaza and Lebanon, 
the construction of the separation barrier and settlements, 
and "collective punishment" imposed by Israel against 
Palestinians.  Many also praised the findings of the 
Goldstone Report. Israel deemed the report biased, and stated 
that such reports do not do anything advance the peace 
process.  Sweden, on behalf of the EU, reiterated a 
commitment to the peace process.  Several countries 
criticized the UN secretariat for the late issuance of the 
report. 
 
Report of the Special Committee 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Chairperson of the Special Committee, Palitha T. B. Kohona 
of Sri Lanka, stated that that the committee examined the 
issue of human rights in the occupied territories by holding 
meetings in Cairo, Amman, and Damascus and found that the 
human rights situation continues to deteriorate.  It cited as 
examples during the Israeli military operation in Gaza the 
use of white phosphorus munitions and the "targeting" of 
UNRWA facilities.  Kohona said report emphasizes the 
"dramatic humanitarian impact of the populations living in 
the Gaza Strip."  The report alleged that Israel did not 
allow the Special Committee access to "the occupied 
territories" which Israel controls. 
 
General Debate 
-------------- 
¶3. The Palestinian Observer Mission brought activists from 
the Israeli Coalition Against Home Demolition and 
Palestinians from East Jerusalem who had recently been 
evicted by the Israeli army to observe the committee.  The 
Palestinians accused Israel of "a brutal military aggression 
against the Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza 
Strip, resulting in serious human rights violations and grave 
breaches of international humanitarian law - war crimes," as 
concluded in the Goldstone Report.  Restrictions on movement, 
expansion of settlements and the checkpoints that restrict 
the movement of persons and into and out of the West Bank 
were all cited as ongoing infringement of Palestinian rights. 
The Palestinian Observer Mission called for the establishment 
of an independent state with East Jerusalem as its capital. 
 
¶4. Israel noted the biased nature of the report, stating that 
it was "part of a well-calculated and systematic political 
campaign designed to vilify Israel and the right of Israel's 
citizens to live in peace and security".  Israel stated that 
the report failed to include any mention of the rockets fired 
on Israeli towns and villages since 2001 or the military 
build-up of Hamas via Iran's shipping of arms to Gaza. 
Israel reiterated its commitment to protecting human rights 
and to  reaching a permanent peace agreement to the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict that will permit both peoples to 
live in peace, security and dignity. 
 
¶5. Syria stated that the report, "for the fortieth 
consecutive year," drew attention to Israel's deliberate and 
systematic destruction of the legal character of the 
'occupied Syrian Golan.' Syria said that Israel destroyed 
Syrian villages, seized Syrian properties, plundered natural 
wealth, diverted water, imposed exorbitant taxes, refused to 
declare where mines are buried and is burying nuclear waste 
in the area.  Syria said Israel takes these actions "in a 
culture of impunity "and acts "above the law". 
 
¶6. Iran stated that the highest priority of the UN should be 
ending Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory, and 
reversing the declining humanitarian and human rights 
situation and grave violations of Palestinian rights.  It 
accused the Israelis of a "massacre of Gaza," citing the 
targeting of civilian populations, the use of white 
phosphorus munitions and the blockade on imports of 
humanitarian goods.  Iran said that the Goldstone report 
reaffirmed the findings of the Special Committee and that 
durable peace in the region is only possible through the 
establishment of Palestinian state. 
 
¶7. Lebanon noted the ability of the Israeli army to act with 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001083  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
impunity in the occupied territories and called for a "just 
and lasting resolution of the Middle East conflict based on 
relevant Security Council resolutions."  Lebanon condemned 
the "blockade" of Gaza and called for an opening of all 
border crossings. 
 
¶8. Other Arab states: The Arab states were uniform in their 
call for an end to the occupation of the Palestinian 
territories and in saying that Israel commits human rights 
violations.  Many cited the Goldstone Report as supporting 
the results of the Special Committee's report.  Qatar 
rejected the Israeli position that it is fighting terrorism, 
noting that most of the casualties were unarmed civilians. 
Qatar also reiterated that "the right to fight for liberation 
from foreign occupation is legitimate...and cannot be equated 
with military aggression by the occupation forces."  Jordan 
noted that the situation in the occupied territories had 
become a "tragedy" with the ongoing blockades, calling the 
Gaza strip "a huge prison."  Egypt, speaking on behalf of the 
NAM, said it "will continue to support the Palestinian people 
in order to bring an end to Israel's unlawful occupation that 
began in 1967, to apply justice and to fight impunity."  The 
other Arab League members who spoke during the debate were 
Algeria, Bahrain, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, the United 
Arab Emirates, and Yemen. 
 
¶9. OIC members: Senegal called on Israel to end the blockade 
of the occupied territories and warned that this blockade 
could cause an "unprecedented humanitarian disaster". 
Malaysia said that a lack of territorial contiguity between 
parts of the occupied Palestinian Territory, expansion of 
settlements, demolitions of Palestinian houses, obstacles to 
movement, lack of access to employment, health care and 
education, and Israeli detention policies are among the 
issues that the Special Committee should monitor.  Pakistan 
noted "a serious deterioration of the human rights 
situation." Pakistan said that the impact of Israel's 
policies is felt on the ground in terms of lives and 
livelihoods, and has a negative impact on the peace process. 
Sudan and Bangladesh also delivered remarks. 
 
¶10. Sweden, on behalf of the EU, restated a commitment to a 
comprehensive peace settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict 
on the basis of international law and a two-state solution. 
The EU is concerned by settlement activities, home demolition 
and evictions, including in East Jerusalem.  The EU "remains 
gravely concerned by the humanitarian situation in Gaza" and 
called for the immediate and unconditional opening of 
crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid. 
 
¶11. African views: Uganda, Tanzania, and South Africa all 
called for an end to Israeli occupation of Palestinian 
territories and the establishment of a Palestinian state. 
South Africa noted the report and called for an end to 
Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people including 
the blockade, settlement building, and demolition of 
Palestinian houses.  Tanzania called on Israel to stop the 
construction of the separation barrier and to end the 
blockade of Gaza. 
 
¶12. Other views: Cuba called for an end to the Israeli 
occupation of Palestinian territories and noted the 
increasing number of poor people in the Gaza Strip due to 
Israeli blockades and aggression. Venezuela stated that 
Israeli impunity is the "main obstacle for peace."  Both 
noted that Israel is able to continue its practices due to 
the U.S. veto or threat of veto in the Security Council. 
DPRK called for an end to Israeli aggression and the 
establishment of a Palestinian state. 
 
¶13. Right of Reply:  At the end of the general debate Syria 
stated that Israel's claim that it protects human rights is 
"nonsense" and that the Goldstone report shows the world the 
war crimes that Israel committed.  Syria questioned why 
Israel did not allow the Special Committee access to the 
occupied territories.  It further stated that the rockets 
launched against Israel were a reaction to the illegal 
occupation.  The Palestinians stated that Israel does not 
allow its Arab citizens or Palestinian refugees human and 
political rights and noted that the settlers "get away with 
murder because the victims are Arabs" and that Israel 
continues to act with impunity. The Palestinians stated their 
intent to continue coming to the UN for redress of issues for 
the Palestinian people. 
RICE