09USUNNEWYORK114
SYG BAN BRIEFS ON AU SUMMIT, IRAQ, GAZA,
Wed Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7886
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHDU RUEHFL
RUEHGI RUEHIHL RUEHIK RUEHJO RUEHKUK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ
RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHNP RUEHPA RUEHPOD RUEHPW RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHSK
RUEHSR RUEHTRO RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUCNDT #0114/01 0420121
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110121Z FEB 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5803
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000114 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM UNSC SO SU ZI MA AF IS IZ PK
SUBJECT: SYG BAN BRIEFS ON AU SUMMIT, IRAQ, GAZA, 
AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Secretary-General Ban briefed the Security 
Council on his recent travels in February 9 consultations. 
Ban recounted his personal intervention on the Muhajeria 
crisis in Darfur, described a long list of challenges in 
Afghanistan and relayed a new sense of optimism in Iraq in 
the wake of regional elections.  He briefed the Council on 
plans for inquiries into the assassination of Benazir Bhutto 
and attacks on UN facilities in Gaza, and described Hamas's 
interference with delivery of humanitarian aid in Gaza.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon addressed a closed 
session of the Security Council on the afternoon of February 
9 to brief on the outcome of his recent trip to Madrid, 
Davos, Addis Ababa, South Asia and Iraq.  Ban began by 
telling the Council of his commitment to improving food 
security, as discussed in a high-level meeting in Madrid, and 
by stressing that intergovernmental negotiations on climate 
change required "political direction and impetus" at a very 
senior level. 
 
AU Summit 
--------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Somalia - Ban welcomed the election of Sheikh Sharif 
Sheikh Ahmed as president of Somalia and told Council members 
that money for Somali security forces was urgently needed, as 
was the return of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) 
to Mogadishu.  Ban stated the UN's willingness to reinforce 
the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and announced 
that African states are ready to deploy reinforcements to the 
force "in the very near future."  He told the Council that 
General Assembly approval would be needed before the UN could 
act to reinforce AMISOM. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Sudan - Ban reported extensive discussions on Sudan, 
telling the Council that his public and private intervention 
with the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and Sudanese 
government preceded the JEM's withdrawal from Muhajeria.  Ban 
recounted telling Sudanese President Bashir that UN personnel 
should be protected in the event of an International Criminal 
Court (ICC) issuance of an arrest warrant for Bashir: Bashir 
agreed.  Ban also briefed on Joint Chief Mediator Bassole's 
efforts to convene talks between Sudan and the JEM in Qatar, 
and said that he hoped such talks could lead to a framework 
agreement.  Many Council members praised UNAMID's decision to 
protect vulnerable civilian populations by remaining in 
Muhajeria despite strong pressure from the Sudanese 
government to withdraw.  The UK stressed that the Council 
should remain committed to the peace process even if an ICC 
warrant is issued, while Burkina Faso asked the SYG to report 
on possible complications that could arise from an ICC 
decision.  China said that an arrest warrant would not help 
the situation and hoped that AU representatives would have an 
opportunity to brief the Council on the AU's position in the 
near future.  France asked if the AU had provided assurances 
with regard to respect for UNAMID and international staff in 
Sudan in the case that an arrest warrant is issued. 
 
¶5. (SBU) DRC - The SYG described a "dramatic turn for the 
better" in Eastern DRC as a result of improved cooperation 
between DRC and its neighbors and said that he was 
considering a late February visit to DRC, including a stop in 
Goma.  He said that he would ask Special Envoy Obasanjo to 
continue to work with regional leaders to maintain momentum 
in the meantime. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Zimbabwe - Ban welcomed the MDC's decision to join a 
unity government, but expressed skepticism that the move 
would lead to "real power sharing."  President Mugabe 
declined a Ban request to release opposition prisoners, he 
said, but agreed that the unity government should allow full 
access to international aid organizations.  Ban said that he 
was dispatching UN A/SYG Haile Menkerios to the new 
government's inauguration on February 13, and that he would 
review UN agencies' posture on the ground after the new 
government was sworn in.  Several Council members welcomed 
the unity government announcement, while the UK said that its 
performance would have to be closely monitored. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Other issues - Ban said that A/SYG Menkerios was 
currently in Madagascar at his request, meeting with the 
president and mayor and attempting to defuse tensions through 
the UN's good offices.  The SYG reported that AU leaders were 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000114  002 OF 003 
 
 
concerned about the situation in Madagascar, and that they 
spoke out in favor of a return to constitutional order in 
Mauritania and Guinea.  Ban said that the UN would continue 
to work for a return to constitutional legality in Mauritania 
and Guinea through the UN Office for West Africa (UNOWA). 
 
Afghanistan/Pakistan 
-------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Ban reported that the Afghan government seemed to be 
on the defensive during his visit, particularly with regard 
to the security situation and President Karzai's decision to 
delay the date of presidential elections from May to August 
¶2009.  In their conversations, Karzai told Ban that he was 
committed to democracy and wants to ensure a legitimate 
transition: Ban answered that any transitional arrangement 
after the constitutional expiration of Karzai's term in May 
must be based on a broad political consensus.  The 
Secretary-General described the Afghan government's hope to 
conclude an agreement with NATO and other international 
forces to cut down on the number of civilian casualties due 
to military operations.  While sympathetic, Ban added that 
any reform to counter-terrorism strategy needed to be 
accompanied by reform within the Afghan government to 
increase capacity and tackle drug-related corruption.  Ban 
emphasized UNAMA's commitment to improving coordination of 
international efforts in Afghanistan.  Despite daunting 
security challenges, UNAMA will expand its footprint from 18 
to 23 offices in 2009, he said.  China strongly supported the 
SYG's thoughts on Afghanistan, and said that the 
international community should focus on stabilization, 
civilian protection and reconstruction.  Russia welcomed the 
Afghan government's initiative on civilian casualties. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Ban emphasized that terrorism in South Asia could 
not be eliminated without improved regional cooperation, 
particularly between Afghanistan and Pakistan.  He told 
Council members that Pakistani President Zardari and PM 
Gilani had described Pakistan as a major victim of terror. 
They stressed to him Pakistan's commitment to cooperate with 
Afghanistan and to conclude a quick investigation into 
Pakistani links to the Mumbai terror attacks of November 
¶2008.  Ban said that Pakistani leaders also welcomed his 
announcement of a UN inquiry into the assassination of 
Benazir Bhutto, and promised full cooperation.  He said that 
the inquiry expected to release its findings within six 
months. 
 
India/Sri Lanka 
--------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The SYG said that while in India to press a global 
warming agenda, he commended the Indian government for its 
restraint in the wake of recent terrorist attacks.  Ban 
reported that Indian leaders were open to rapprochement with 
Pakistan but insisted on full Pakistani cooperation with 
India's investigation of the Mumbai attacks.  Ban said that, 
while in India, he called Sri Lankan President Rajapaksa to 
register his concern over reports of high civilian casualties 
in the government's offensive against the LTTE rebels.  The 
SYG was disappointed with Rajapaksa's denial that many 
civilians had suffered casualties, but said that efforts were 
ongoing to negotiate safe passage for civilians from 
rebel-held to government-held areas. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Ban delivered a nearly glowing report of his visit 
to Iraq, where he encountered a "new optimism and confidence" 
among Iraqi leaders.  He praised UNAMI's work in ensuring 
that Iraqi authorities were fully prepared, saying that UNAMI 
is now "fully justified."  If prevailing security trends 
continue, he said, the UN will continue to relocate its 
personnel from Amman to Baghdad.  At the request of the Iraqi 
government, he relayed to Council members the Iraqis' strong 
desire that sanctions against Iraq be reviewed. 
 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Ban laid out a four-pronged Gaza agenda: 
consolidating the ceasefire, expediting relief, promoting 
Palestinian unity and reinvigorating the peace process.  He 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000114  003 OF 003 
 
 
threw his support behind the Cairo relief conference planned 
for March 2, but declared his "dismay" at Hamas's seizure of 
UN goods, which he described as "totally unacceptable."  He 
said that Hamas must return the goods and provide assurances 
that such seizures will not be repeated, but that Israel must 
also act to facilitate free humanitarian access and open 
checkpoints.  Ban said that the UN would review its internal 
measures to prevent diversion and ensure that donated aid 
reached its intended recipients.  He also announced his 
intention to establish a Board of Inquiry into damage to UN 
facilities.  The Board will be headed by Ian Martin (outgoing 
SRSG and head of the UN Mission in Nepal), will have military 
experts on staff and is expected to issue its report within a 
month.  Ban said that terms of reference for the Board were 
not yet complete, but that they would be shared with Security 
Council members when ready.  Libya prepared a draft 
Presidential Statement welcoming the SYG's initiative to 
establish the Board and seeking a briefing by the Board on 
its findings.  Russia also welcomed the Board.  France 
welcomed the SYG's "resolute stance on stolen aid." 
 
U.S. statement 
-------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Ambassador Rice welcomed the Secretary-General's 
comprehensive report and active diplomacy -- in particular 
his visit and support to Iraq after the provincial elections 
and his leadership on Afghanistan.  She welcomed the SYG's 
strong and balanced statement on Darfur and praised UNAMID's 
determination in remaining in Mujaheria.  On Gaza, she 
expressed the U.S.'s grave concern over Hamas's confiscation 
of humanitarian assistance. 
 
 
 
Rice