09USUNNEWYORK834
IRAN: UNSC MULLS SANCTIONS IMPLEMENTATION, IAEA
Mon Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4978
OO RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0834/01 2571242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141242Z SEP 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7175
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHII/VIENNA IAEA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000834 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM MNUC ETTC KNNP IR UNSC
SUBJECT: IRAN: UNSC MULLS SANCTIONS IMPLEMENTATION, IAEA 
REPORT 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000834  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: On September 9, the chair of the Iran 
Sanctions Committee briefed the UN Security Council on the 
Committee's activities over the previous ninety days, 
highlighting in particular a final round of letters and the 
publishing of an "Implementation Assistance Notice" to 
respond to reported sanctions violations.  The UK and France 
both pointed to troubling findings in the IAEA Director 
General's latest report, in particular Iran's failure to end 
proliferation sensitive nuclear activities, and welcomed the 
Committee's work to respond to sanctions violations.  Russia 
drew attention to positive elements in the IAEA report and 
said there should be no decisions on next steps until Iran's 
counter-offer to the recent proposal for dialogue can be 
studied thoroughly.  China expressed hope that Iran steps up 
cooperation to resolve outstanding issues raised in the IAEA 
report.  Ambassador Rice noted that the P-5 1 had still not 
received a constructive response to its offer of dialogue, 
then highlighted sect 
ions of the IAEA report that showed Iran was not in 
compliance with its international obligations.  She welcomed 
the Committee's recent work and encouraged it to remain 
vigilant.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On September 9, Japanese Perm Rep Takasu, chair of 
the Security Council's Iran Sanctions Committee ("1737 
Committee"), briefed the Council in closed consultations on 
the Committee's activities over the previous ninety days 
(June 16 through September 9).  He spoke of the Committee's 
letters to two Member States involved in a transfer of 
arms-related material in violation of paragraph 5 of 
resolution 1747 (2007).  (NOTE: This incident involved the 
M/V Monchegorsk, a Cypriot-flagged vessel found shipping 
arms-related materiel from Iran to Syria.  END NOTE).  Takasu 
noted that these letters had recalled these states' 
obligations under the UN Charter.  He highlighted the 
Committee's approval and publication on its website of an 
"Implementation Assistance Notice" about the incident, which 
contained information that might be useful to Member State 
states in implementing their obligations under the relevant 
resolutions.  Takasu also updated the Council on other 
routine business of the Committee and the number of 
implementation reports the Committee had received from Member 
States. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) UK Perm Rep Sawers welcomed the 1737 Committee's 
willingness to review "lessons learned" in the course of its 
work to improve implementation of the Iran sanctions 
resolutions, highlighting in particular the Committee's 
publication of an "Implementation Assistance Notice about the 
Monchegorsk incident as helpful.  He said the most recent 
report by the IAEA Director General made clear that Iran 
continues to fail to meet its international obligations and 
expanded on the report's findings about outstanding questions 
regarding a military dimension to Iran's nuclear program. 
Sawers called the latest offer of dialogue with Iran 
"generous," but said that if Iran continues to isolate 
itself, then the international community must remain 
determined to maintain pressure. 
 
¶4. (SBU) France Perm Rep Araud also pointed to the IAEA 
report, observing that no country had ever begun a civil 
nuclear program with the enrichment of uranium ("it's as if 
you bought the gasoline before you bought the car!").  He 
criticized Iran's refusal to grant the IAEA access to people 
and sites needed to verify the non-military dimensions of its 
nuclear program.  Araud underscored the need for full 
implementation of sanctions and noted in this context the 
Committee's investigation into the Monchegorsk incident, as 
well as Iran's reported role in the violation of the North 
Korea sanctions regime.  If Iran does not revaluate its 
behavior, Araud said, then the international community must 
draw conclusions and shoulder its responsibilities 
accordingly. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Russian Deputy Perm Rep Dolgov asserted that the 
Committee's work must be focused on the international 
community's sole goal: resolving questions about Iran's 
nuclear program by exclusively non-military means.  He said 
that this Council session was not the place to discuss the 
IAEA report, as discussions were already underway on this 
topic in Vienna.  Noting references to the report by other 
Council members, Dolgov insisted that the report was "not 
unambiguous" and had positive elements that could not be 
ignored.  He added that clear signals had been received that 
a formal response from Tehran to the offer of dialogue would 
be sent soon.  When received, Dolgov said, Russia will study 
the offer closely.  "We're not in favor of pre-deciding next 
steps, such as the strengthening of sanctions," he asserted," 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000834  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
until we've had a chance to first study the proposal. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Chinese Counselor La expressed hope that Iran could 
step up its cooperation with the IAEA and resolve the issues 
raised in the recent report.  He said he wished the Committee 
to play a constructive role in this regard. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Ambassador Rice noted that the P-5 1 had still not 
received a "constructive response" from Iran to its offer to 
engage in direct talks on the nuclear issue.  She added that 
any response would be reviewed seriously.  Rice also 
highlighted the most troubling findings of the IAEA report, 
notably Iran's ongoing refusal to suspend 
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities, and said that 
limited steps Iran had taken recently to respond to the 
international community's concerns "fell well short" of 
Iran's obligations.  She said that Iran's refusal to comply 
with its obligations reinforced the critical work of the 1737 
Committee, adding that the United States urges the Committee 
to remain vigilant. 
RICE