09USUNNEWYORK1150
UNSC: COUNCIL'S DECEMBER MEETING ON THE MIDDLE
Wed Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4440
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #1150/01 3571910
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231910Z DEC 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7900
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 001150 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL KWBG UNSC IS LE
SUBJECT: UNSC: COUNCIL'S DECEMBER MEETING ON THE MIDDLE 
EAST - LIBYAN SLIDESHOW 
 
REF: STATE 127868 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: UN Special Coordinator for the Peace 
Process Serry briefed the Council during its monthly meeting 
on the Middle East on December 17.  He highlighted the lack 
of progress in seeking the two parties' return to the 
negotiating table.  While noting that Israeli Prime Minister 
Netanyahu's announcement of a ten-month moratorium was a 
"step beyond" previous Israeli positions, he also noted its 
shortcomings and the December 13 cabinet decision allocating 
further funds to settlers.  On Gaza, he reiterated his call 
for a "different approach," citing the continued lack of 
progress in trying to restart UN projects there, 
import/export restrictions at the crossings, and the clear 
attempts to import arms into Gaza.  The Libyan Perm Rep 
insisted on delivering his remarks in the Council Chamber, 
given that it was his last Middle East meeting, and not in 
consultations, as previously agreed.  He highlighted what he 
termed Council in-action on the Middle East and Israel's lack 
of accountability for violations of human rights.  During his 
remarks, he produced a slideshow, including a set of pictures 
that he inaccurately characterized as showing a restrained 
Palestinian protester being killed by an IDF soldier. 
Ambassador Rice criticized the Libyan "rhetorical display 
designed to enflame."  The majority of Council members in 
consultations stressed the need for the parties to return to 
consultations.  A number of members recognized the Israeli 
settlements moratorium but called for a full freeze.  They 
also commented on the continuing difficulties in Gaza and 
pressed for implementation of resolution 1860.  Several 
members voiced support for the Palestinian Authority's 
efforts and for Abu Mazen.  Council members also welcomed the 
Lebanese Parliament's vote of confidence in the new 
government.  End summary. 
 
Special Coordinator's Briefing 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) UN Special Coordinator for the Peace Process Robert 
Serry briefed the Security Council during its monthly meeting 
on the Middle East on December 17. Serry enumerated the many 
obstacles that still hinder an effective peace agreement in 
the region, including low confidence between both parties, 
tensions in Jerusalem, settlement activity, and instability 
in Gaza.  He described the urgency of the situation in the 
Middle East as a "race against time" for a decisive move 
towards a political endgame.  Serry called on Israel to 
implement its Roadmap commitments, ease its stifling measures 
against Palestinian civilians, and move towards a resumption 
of negotiations.  He called on the Palestinians to engage 
constructively with Israel on negotiation efforts and to 
continue their work on state-building projects.  Serry noted 
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu's November 26 announcement 
of a ten-month moratorium on West Bank settlement 
construction which he termed "a step beyond previous Israeli 
government positions".  He stated that the moratorium does 
not apply to the municipal boundaries of East Jerusalem. He 
also said an additional 110,000 settlers in the West Bank 
were granted budget allocations on December 13. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Addressing the situation in the West Bank, Serry 
characterized the Palestinian security forces' capabilities 
as improving. Despite this, 575 obstacles to movement still 
exist, he said, and Israeli forces conducted 64 incursions 
during the reporting period.  Of growing concern, Serry said, 
are the increasing number of "price tag" attacks by Israeli 
settlers against Palestinian civilians because of the new 
moratorium.  He noted in particular the "deplorable 
desecration" of the mosque in Yasuf.  Serry reported that, 
while President Mahmoud Abbas has confirmed his decision not 
to run in future Palestinian elections, the Palestinian 
Liberation Organization's (PLO) Central Council authorized 
the extension of Abbas' current term until elections can be 
held.  He said that the Central Council will meet again in 
¶2010. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On Gaza, Serry called for a "different approach," 
calling the blockade "unacceptable and counterproductive." 
He stated that imports were at approximately a quarter of 
their May 2007 level and that most of these imports are food 
and hygiene items.  He said that Israeli authorities have 
still not authorized the UN to complete work on UNRWA and 
UNDP projects for housing, schools, and health facilities. 
Serry reiterated the call for the release of Gilad Shalit 
along with the 9,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli 
prisons.  He reported that an S-5K rocket was fired from Gaza 
on December 5 and Egyptian authorities seized a truck 
carrying a ton of explosives destined for Gaza on November 
¶23.  Aside from these incidents, ten rockets and mortars were 
fired from Gaza towards Israel, without any reported 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001150  002 OF 004 
 
 
injuries.  An Israeli airstrike on November 27 injured four 
Palestinian militants, and one Palestinian man died on 
December 12 after being shot by Israeli forces near the 
border. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Turning to the region, Serry noted his December 9 
visit to Damascus regarding prospects for a resumption of the 
Israeli-Syrian track and noted that the situation in the 
Golan remains stable.  He warned of a current Knesset bill 
that, if passed after its third reading, could make any 
future territorial return more complex.  On Lebanon, Serry 
noted the confirmation of the new government, headed by Prime 
Minister Hariri.  He reminded the Council that Israeli air 
violations over Lebanese territory continue nearly every day. 
 
 
Libya Criticizes Council Inaction 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Abrogating the consensus agreed to in this month's 
Program of Work that members would exchange views in 
consultations rather than in public, the Libyan delegation 
insisted on exercising its right to speak in the Chamber. 
The Libyan delegation also decided to use visual aids.  In 
his statement, the Libyan Perm Rep explained that he sought 
to use his delegation's last appearance in a Security Council 
meeting on the Middle East to evaluate the work of the 
Council.  He noted that Libya had worked hard on the 
situation over the past two years, at times giving up its own 
national position, to make progress toward peace.  Despite 
this, he lamented, Israel had remained "above the law and 
beyond accountability."  He reviewed the events of Operation 
Cast Lead, including the use of white phosphorus (which he 
alleged was banned under international law), which had killed 
1,500 civilians and destroyed United Nations facilities. 
Although the Security Council adopted a resolution and the 
Board of Inquiry had drafted a report on the matter, he 
claimed, nothing had happened in response.  Libyan Perm Rep 
Shalgham also decried the many double standards used against 
Palestinians, claiming, "If the Palestinians elect a militant 
group, they are called terrorists.  But if the Israelis elect 
terrorists, they are called democratic." 
 
¶7.  (SBU) During the Libyan Perm Rep's remarks, a slideshow 
played showing dead and injured Palestinians.  Two-thirds of 
the way through his remarks, he directed the Council's 
attention to the projector screen, which displayed a photo of 
a young man restrained and blindfolded, standing surrounded 
by Israeli Defense Force (IDF) soldiers.  In the second 
photo, the young man is lying on the ground.  The Perm Rep 
said that the pictures had been published three days prior, 
and that one of the Israeli soldiers had killed the young man 
while he was restrained.  (Note: The photos match footage 
distributed by B'Tselem of a Palestinian protester detained 
by the IDF at Ni'ilin, in July 2008.  He was shot in the foot 
with a rubber bullet by an IDF soldier, apparently on orders, 
but not killed.  We understand that the case against two IDF 
members is ongoing.  End note.)  Next, Shalgham showed 
several maps of Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza.  Commenting 
on the increasing size of the settlements, he asked the 
Council where a Palestinian state would be created. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Shalgham again spoke of double standards, this time 
comparing the uproar created over the detainment of Gilad 
Shalit to the little publicity given to the over 11,000 
Palestinian men, women and children held in prison by Israel. 
 He asked rhetorically if Shalit was a Boy Scout and if he 
had gone for a picnic to where he was captured, or if he had 
gone there to kill.  Libya criticized "some members" for 
being hypocritical in making speeches on human rights, but 
failing to vote in favor of General Assembly resolution 64/10 
on the Goldstone Report.  In conclusion, he said that Libya's 
time on the Council had been a "bitter experience," and he 
regretted that "the poor Palestinians, the Arab system and 
the official Arab order" had taken a weak position on the 
issue. 
 
US Response to Libyan display 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) After the Libyan statement, Ambassador Rice asked 
for the floor.  She reserved the right to make her longer 
statement in consultations but said, "I just want to say 
that, while we certainly respect any member's right to speak 
in the Chamber and say what they think, we think the better 
part of wisdom is to focus on the goal we all share, which is 
achieving a genuine two-State solution.  A rhetorical display 
designed to enflame is not necessarily a constructive way to 
advance that goal.  The United States remains fully committed 
to achieving a negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001150  003 OF 004 
 
 
conflict, and we hope and expect that our colleagues on the 
Security Council will continue to be supportive in that 
endeavor." 
 
Council consultations: 
Parties need to return to the table 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The other 14 Council members spoke in 
consultations after the briefing.  Ambassador Rice spoke 
first and drew from reftel.  The UK Perm Rep, referred to the 
Libyan Perm Rep's remarks, and said grandstanding in the 
Chamber is not helpful.  He said that Security Council 
members need to be sure that "all we do is for the benefit of 
progress and not just public rhetoric."  The Chinese Deputy 
Perm Rep noted the previous day's anniversary of the 
Council's passage of resolution 1850 and hoped the 
international community, Israel, and the Palestinians would 
strengthen their efforts and move the peace process forward. 
The French Perm Rep emphasized that everyone knows the 
parameters of peace -- two states, but the two protagonists 
are facing internal challenges.  He called for the 
international community to galvanize and press the two sides 
to sit down together, voiced support for the U.S. initiative, 
said he was sure that European Union and Arab states stand 
ready to assist, noting President Sarkozy's continuing 
readiness to host a summit for peace. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The Russian Perm Rep said the Moscow conference 
would be convened immediately after the resumption of 
negotiations with the full coordination of both parties.  The 
Austrian and Croatian Perm Reps referred to the Council of 
the EU's annual conclusions on the peace process, published 
earlier in the month, and urged the parties to overcome the 
standstill.  The Vietnamese representative underscored that 
this was their last meeting on the Middle East and reaffirmed 
Vietnam's intent to help the international community obtain a 
two-state solution.  The Turkish Perm Rep reiterated Turkey's 
readiness to resume its role in indirect talks between Israel 
and Syria. 
 
Settlements moratorium 
---------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The French Perm Rep called the Israeli decision on 
the settlements moratorium a "step in the right direction" 
but noted that any settlement is illegal.  The Chinese Deputy 
Perm Rep and UK and Ugandan Perm Reps also called the 
moratorium a step forward but urged a full freeze.  The 
Mexican Perm Rep referred to the Israeli "partial restriction 
on settlements" which he said should not be ignored but that 
it does not fully respect the Roadmap, especially with regard 
to East Jerusalem.  The Japanese Perm Rep said it is 
essential for Israel to implement all of its obligations, 
including a freeze of all settlements, including natural 
growth.  Both the Austrian and Croatian Perm Reps took note 
of Israel's moratorium, called for an immediate end to 
settlements, and commented that the freeze was undercut by 
the Israeli cabinet's approval of a new National Priorities 
Map.  The Chinese Deputy Perm Rep called for a refrain from 
any measures to change the status in East Jerusalem. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) The Turkish Perm Rep also took note of the 
moratorium which he termed limited in scope and timeframe and 
urged Israel to meet all of its obligations.  He also 
referred to forced evictions in East Jerusalem and the 
substantial number of East Jerusalemites who have lost their 
residency rights in 2009.  He noted OCHA's recent report that 
Palestinians have the right to build on only one percent of 
Area C land.  The Russian Perm Rep called for both sides to 
abide by their commitments, especially in East Jerusalem, and 
the need to fight against extremism and to refrain from any 
steps that might impact the final settlement.  The Vietnamese 
representative called for both sides to refrain from 
provocative acts.  Turkey and Mexico expressed deep concern 
at the arson attack at the mosque in Yasuf and called for 
Israel to bring those responsible to justice and to prevent 
other such attacks. 
 
Support for the PA and Abu Mazen 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The French Perm Rep called for support, especially 
financial support, of the Palestinian Authority and of 
President Abbas, especially by those who are most vocal in 
defense of the Palestinians.  He noted France and the PA's 
recent signature of the "Framework Document of Partnership" 
on December 15 and the 200 million Euros in assistance, as 
promised by France at the Paris Conference.  The Mexican and 
Ugandan Perm Reps highlighted the PLO's extension of 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001150  004 OF 004 
 
 
President Abbas' term.  The Vietnamese and Russian Perm Rep 
called for Palestinian reconciliation, with the Russian 
noting that Abu Mazen should be the national leader.  Burkina 
Faso called for Palestinians to think of the higher interests 
of the Palestinian people and urged reconciliation.  The 
Mexican Perm Rep asked Serry what else could be done to 
support Abu Mazen.  Serry, responding at the end of 
consultations, said that Israel could further enable the 
Palestinian agenda of state-building.  He commented that 
Israeli actions in East Jerusalem are a potential tinderbox 
and he hoped Prime Minister Netanyahu would take the issue 
under his control.  Serry said the Palestinians must move 
towards the negotiating table.  He referred to his recent 
meetings in Washington and said that Special Envoy Mitchell 
would be returning to the region after the New Year.  Serry 
underscored that the international community must create the 
atmosphere for both parties to "come back to the table." 
 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶15.  (SBU) A number of states commented on the negative 
situation in Gaza -- the continuing blockade, rocket fire, 
and arms smuggling -- and called for implementation of 
resolution 1860.  The Austrian Perm Rep underscored that 
Israeli citizens should live free of fear from attacks.  The 
Chinese Deputy Perm Rep called on donors to honor their 
assistance commitments.  The French Perm Rep called for 
Shalit's release, and, in direct response to the Libyan Perm 
Rep's comments in the Chamber about Shalit, noted that Shalit 
had been abducted from Israeli territory.  The Mexican Perm 
Rep called for a new approach on Gaza and asked Serry for his 
thoughts.  Serry responded at the end of consultations, 
noting that he has been pressing for a new strategy on Gaza 
since his first briefing to the Council.  He underscored that 
both he and the Secretary-General have not left a stone 
unturned in trying to open up Gaza for reconstruction.  He 
described a UN housing project near Khan Younis that is 
almost completed and would provide housing for 500 families 
if Israel allows into Gaza the final materials.  Serry 
concluded that he hopes there will soon be closure on Shalit 
since his release could be a linchpin for the resumption of 
UN projects. 
 
Violations of human rights 
-------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) The Austrian Perm Rep, specifically responded to 
the Libyan Perm Rep's remarks in the Chamber, by reiterating 
Austria's call for national investigations of all violations 
of international humanitarian law and international human 
rights law.  He also voiced an expectation that the parties 
would cooperate with the Secretary-General when he draws up 
his report to the General Assembly on the implementation of 
GA resolution 64/10.  He noted that the Austrian mission had 
been informed by the Israelis of "some of what they are 
doing" to investigate but that they have not heard from the 
other side.  He also pointedly responded to "members who give 
long speeches on human rights" that he regretted the lack of 
consensus in the negotiations on the GA resolution which 
resulted in the EU member states not being able to vote in 
favor of it. 
 
Lebanon 
------- 
 
¶17.  (SBU) The Burkinabe, Croatian, French, Japanese, 
Russian, and Ugandan Perm Reps welcomed the Lebanese 
Parliament's vote of confidence in the government.  Croatia 
call for the new government to address the disarmament of 
militias.  The French Perm Rep emphasized the need for the 
full implementation of UNSCR 1701. 
RICE