09USUNNEWYORK488
AMBASSADOR RICE'S MEETING WITH NAMIBIAN PERMREP
Tue May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0488 1321439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121439Z MAY 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6530
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHWD/AMEMBASSY WINDHOEK PRIORITY 1329UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL UNSCS SF SO WA XA ZU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR RICE'S MEETING WITH NAMIBIAN PERMREP 
MBUENDE 
 
¶1. (SBU)  SUMMARY. During a May 5 meeting with Ambassador 
Rice, Namibian PermRep Kaire Mbuende expressed frustration 
with the constraints of the traditional UN voting block 
dynamic and suggested that the U.S. and Namibian PermReps 
work more directly together on key issues.  Mbuende confirmed 
Namibia's support of the United State's Human Rights Council 
bid and called for constructive engagement with human rights 
offenders.  Mbuende also underscored Namibia's commitment to 
the peaceful use of its uranium, discussed Namibia's recent 
work as co-facilitator of the UN System Wide Coherence 
process, and its support for gender architecture resolution. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Mbuende noted that the, "UN is a strange place," and 
that the voting block mentality frequently forces countries 
away from their traditional bilateral allies.  Commenting on 
Namibia's G-77 chairmanship, he said that although his 
country's values were, "closer to Germany," the voting block 
structure dictated that Namibia collaborate closely with 
Pakistan.  Mbuende lamented this dynamic, noting his desire 
to bridge gaps and problem-solve with allies by meeting 
regularly and exchanging views at a high level.  Mbuende 
stated that Namibia's participation in UN mandate review 
negotiations within a small group of 12 PermReps was 
particularly fruitful due to the direct, high-level 
discussions that were possible.  Ambassador Rice lamented the 
bloc voting dynamic and expressed a strong desire to break 
new ground with Namibia and find ways of working together on 
common UN priorities. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Turning to the UN System Wide Coherence (SWC) 
process, Mbuende said that he is grateful for the U.S. 
position on gender architecture.  He hopes to reach consensus 
on a gender architecture resolution by early September, 
although he is frustrated with two-to-three countries that 
are slowing the process by using the issue as a bargaining 
chip.  Mbuende also expressed dismay with some other 
(unnamed) countries that prefer to hold the gender 
architecture resolution until consensus is reached on all 
aspects of SWC.  He said that interventions at the PR level 
could help move discussions forward when working-level 
experts come to an impasse.  Ambassador Rice welcomed this 
idea, and encouraged Mbuende to reach out when her 
involvement would be beneficial. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Regarding the Millennium Challenge Compact, Mbuende 
lamented that internal political bickering within SWAPO had 
delayed its implementation.  He said some in the Namibian 
government had discouraged some Compact initiatives and 
acknowledged and that Washington was displeased with 
inflammatory comments made by some about Millennium Challenge 
Account funds.  He stressed that these comments were not 
representative of the government's views and that Namibia 
should use the funds to encourage new technological 
investments in the areas of climate change and alternative 
energy, as well as energy self-sufficiency.  Ambassador Rice 
suggested that Namibia could be a model to others if it 
achieves this goal, to which Mbuende agreed and noted 
Namibia's need for progress. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Ambassador Rice asked for Namibia's support for the 
U.S.'s Human Rights Council candidacy.  Mbuende noted that 
Namibia has disagreed with the HRC's working methods in the 
past and emphasized that the Council should guide human 
rights offenders towards improving their records, rather than 
simply condemning their actions.  After stating that human 
rights are too serious an issue to be politicized, Mbuende 
said that the U.S. would be a good candidate for the HRC and 
confirmed Namibia's support of the U.S bid. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Ambassador Rice raised the importance of Namibia's 
compliance with UNSCR 1737, stressing that the sale of 
uranium to Iran is prohibited.  Mbeunde agreed and emphasized 
that Namibia is dedicated to the peaceful use of uranium, and 
is currently developing a national policy on its use.  He 
explained that uranium is not traded by the Namibian 
government itself, but by privately owned mining companies. 
He noted that Iran has long been a shareholder in one of the 
companies and refuses to sell its stake to the Namibian 
government.  Mbeunde opined that because the uranium mining 
companies are mainly British, Australian and 
Canadian-controlled, there is little risk of a sale to Iran. 
Rice