09USUNNEWYORK755
NEW SRSG AD MELKERT ADRESSES THE COUNCIL ON
Fri Aug 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO0023
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUCNDT #0755 2192101
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 072101Z AUG 09 ZDK
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7046
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000755 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ KU
SUBJECT: NEW SRSG AD MELKERT ADRESSES THE COUNCIL ON 
IRAQ/UNAMI 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: In his first address August 5 to the 
Security Council as Special Representative of the 
Secretary-General (SRSG) to Iraq, Ad Melkert emphasized the 
optimism and energy in Iraq and drawing upon his UNDP 
background, emphasized the importance of economic and social 
reforms in Iraq.  His address was well-received by Council 
members, who focused on disputed internal boundaries, 
upcoming elections and national unity as key priorities in 
Iraq in the coming months.  Iraqi PR Bayati also addressed 
the Council, and provided a comprehensive update on the Iraqi 
government,s economic, political and foreign relations 
initiatives.  End Summary. 
¶2. (U) Although he refrained from commenting extensively on 
Iraq,s political situation because he was not yet working in 
Iraq, Melkert used the occasion of the Council meeting to 
provide an overview of his priorities as SRSG and head of the 
UN Assistance Mission to Iraq (UNAMI).  He began by saying 
"this is not only an unparalleled moment of opportunity, but 
also one of great sensitivity.  There are many factors, some 
internal, some external, that could still tip the scale." 
Melkert declared that "the time has come to place economic 
and social conditions up front."  He said UNAMI would work 
more closely with the IMF and the World Bank, and would look 
to "invest in the productivity and social cohesion of the 
country as a whole."  Although his emphasis on economic and 
social priorities marked a departure from the vision of 
ex-SRSG Staffan de Mistura, Melkert,s outline of UNAMI 
priorities in the near-term was quite similar.  UNAMI would 
continue to assist the Independent High Electoral Commission 
in preparing for upcoming elections and would continue its 
work on internal disputed boundaries and national 
reconciliation. 
¶3. (SBU) In closed consultation following his intervention, 
Melkert also mentioned the importance of the regional 
dimension, as well as finding an appropriate follow-on 
mechanism to the Iraq Compact that clearly put the Government 
of Iraq in the lead.  UN deputy director for Middle East 
issues Jehangir Khan told D/POL Counselor on August 5 that 
Melkert was very interested in the P3/UN initiative to 
achieve progress on Iraq/Kuwait issues, and said this would 
be one of his highest priorities when he arrives in Baghdad 
at the end of August. 
¶4. (U) Iraqi PR Bayati also briefed the Council.  He painted 
a positive picture, and described in detail the political, 
economic and diplomatic initiatives of the Iraqi government. 
He said the "withdrawal of United States forces from Iraqi 
cities initiates a new stage in Iraqi-United States 
relations, which will focus on economic, cultural and social 
areas rather than solely on political and security issues..." 
 He noted progress in the return of refugees and in 
reconstruction.  After listing the recent visits of Foreign 
Ministers to Iraq, Bayati reviewed FM Zebari,s and PM 
Maliki,s recent visit to New York, in which both stressed 
that "Iraq no longer constitutes a threat to international 
peace and security." 
¶5. (U) Council members highlighted the issues of disputed 
internal boundaries, upcoming elections and national unity as 
particularly important in the coming months.  Ambassador Rice 
thanked Melkert for his impressive briefing so early in his 
tenure, and said his economic and development background 
would be an important asset for UNAMI.  She emphasized that 
UNAMI,s role would be particularly important over the next 
year in assisting Iraq on internal boundaries, elections and 
the sustainable and voluntary reintegration of Iraqi refugees 
and IDPs.  Mexico, Austria and Costa Rica raised the 
importance of human rights and protection of children in 
armed conflict, and reiterated their call for Iraq to impose 
a moratorium on the death penalty.  Russia, the UK and France 
said UNAMI,s attention to elections and disputed boundaries 
would be particularly important in the coming year.  China 
agreed, and noted the importance of adopting a comprehensive 
hydrocarbon law.  Libya praised the withdrawal of U.S. troops 
but said that only the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops 
would remove "any justification for violence."  Turkey gave a 
long statement that 1) criticized the KRG,s draft 
constitution and expressed concern over the disputed internal 
boundaries process, including Kirkuk; 2) complained that 
Arab-Kurdish tension was on the rise; 3) criticized the Iraqi 
government for failing to take concrete steps to "clamp down" 
on the PKK; and 4) noted that Turkey was willing to engage in 
dialogue about water resources, but "one side cannot just ask 
for more water." 
RICE