10ABIDJAN69
COTE D'IVOIRE: TENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Wed Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO5787
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #0069/01 0481500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171459Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0159
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 ABIDJAN 000069 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KTIP KMCA ELAB IV
SUBJECT: COTE D'IVOIRE: TENTH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: 10 STATE 2094 
 
¶1. (SBU) Per reftel instructions, post submits the following 
information on Cote d'Ivoire for the Tenth Annual Trafficking in 
Persons (TIP) Report. POC for this report is Political Officer 
(FS-04) Tanya Salseth, phone: (225) 22.49.45.70, fax: (225) 
22.49.40.10. Poloff spent 30 hours in the preparation of this 
report. Pol LES Specialist spent 5 hours. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) COTE D'IVOIRE'S TIP SITUATION 
 
 
 
¶A. Sources of available information on TIP include local and 
international NGOs, Interpol, the Ivoirian National Police, the 
German Development Agency GTZ, the Ministry of Justice, the 
Ministry of Family and Social Services, the Ministry of 
Agriculture, the Ministry of Labor and Civil Service, UNICEF, and 
the Human Rights Division of the United Nations Operation in Cote 
d'Ivoire (UNOCI). All of the aforementioned organizations and 
ministries have been working on the trafficking problem for several 
years; however, trafficking statistics - particularly on arrests, 
convictions and prosecutions of traffickers - are not regularly 
compiled or shared by all government ministries. The National 
Police keep some statistics on traffickers that it intercepts, and 
the Ministry of Family keeps statistics on the number of children 
who are repatriated to their home countries. International and 
national NGOs working in Cote d'Ivoire are engaged on the issue, 
but on a small scale, with projects that impact one city, a few 
villages, or particular neighborhoods of Abidjan. Given the limited 
range and focus of their projects, NGOs can only provide estimates 
of the nationwide extent of the trafficking phenomenon. 
 
 
 
As no hard statistics on trafficking currently exist, the 
Government of Cote d'Ivoire's (GoCI) 2007 - 2009 National Action 
Plan Against Trafficking and the Worst Forms of Child Labor planned 
and budgeted for a series of six studies on child trafficking and 
child labor to be carried out in different economic sectors, 
including mining, industry, agriculture, commerce, transport, and 
domestic/household work. However, because funds for the National 
Action Plan have not yet been disbursed by the Ministry of Economy 
and Finance, these studies have not yet been launched. 
 
 
 
¶B. Cote d'Ivoire is primarily a country of destination for 
international trafficking of women and children, though it also 
serves as a country of transit and origin. Internal trafficking is 
much more prevalent, with victims primarily trafficked from the 
north of the country to the more economically-prosperous south. 
Boys are trafficked from Ghana, Mali, and Burkina Faso to work in 
the agricultural sector (primarily cocoa, coffee, pineapple, and 
rubber plantations); from Guinea to work in the mining sector; from 
Togo to work in construction; and from Benin to work in carpentry 
and construction. Girls are trafficked from Ghana, Togo, and Benin 
to work as domestic servants and street vendors. Women and girls 
are also trafficked from Ghana and Nigeria to work as waitresses 
and prostitutes in restaurants and bars. 
 
 
 
¶C. Interpol's Abidjan Bureau reports that trafficked children are 
often confronted with harsh treatment and extreme working 
conditions. Trafficked children intercepted by police have suffered 
from violence and abuse, as well as exhaustion from long hours of 
labor. 
 
 
 
¶D. The most vulnerable group for internal trafficking are children 
from the poorest parts of the country who do not have birth 
certificates, making it easier for traffickers to conceal their 
identity. Women and children are more at risk of being trafficked, 
with girls especially vulnerable to the phenomenon due to lower 
rates of school attendance. Children who have never attended school 
or who have dropped out of school are particularly at risk. Post 
has no reports of adult men being trafficked to or within the 
country. 
 
 
 
¶E. Domestic trafficking is much more common than international 
trafficking.  A November 2009 study conducted by the International 
Office of Migration (IOM) indicates that traffickers use three 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  002 OF 010 
 
 
types of methods to traffic victims:  family networks, organized 
networks, and the internet.  So-called "family" networks, in which 
traffickers are often related to their victims by blood or ethnic 
ties, are by far the most common. In these cases, traffickers can 
be family members, distant relatives, or family "friends" who 
exploit the West African traditional system of communal raising of 
children for their own personal benefit. Traffickers take advantage 
of familial or friendship-based ties and deceive parents with 
promises of providing schooling, money, or an apprenticeship to 
their children if they are entrusted to their care. These offers 
are enticing to parents who have many mouths to feed and are 
unaware of the trafficking phenomenon. 
 
 
 
The IOM study also asserts that some organized trafficking networks 
exist. IOM claims that these networks are usually run by a single 
associate, who sets up a chain of personnel, each responsible for 
handling one stage of the trafficking process, including 
recruiting, transporting, lodging, document 
production/falsification, employment placement, etc.  The study 
indicates that these types of trafficking networks use extremely 
sophisticated methods of communication and may possibly be linked 
to the trafficking of drugs and/or small arms. 
 
 
 
The third method cited in the IOM study involves cybercriminality, 
where traffickers advertise marriage or job offers through the 
internet to initially attract victims and then traffic them for 
other purposes.  The IOM study claims that the internet has 
assisted informal trafficking networks - most of which spring up in 
relation to one-time events.  For example, IOM believes a large 
internet-based recruitment operation to hire approximately 1,000 
laborers to work on large public works projects in Dubai was 
actually a cover operation to traffic victims. IOM also said 
similar reports surfaced during the year regarding small-scale 
transport and employment operations.  They promised transportation 
to and jobs in South Africa during the 2010 World Cup, but were 
actually a means to attract new victims.  During the reporting 
period, there was an increase in the number of reported cases of 
traffickers promising girls and women employment, but then forcing 
them into prostitution once they arrived in country (see Section 
4.e.)  None of these cases involved internet-based methods. 
 
 
 
Traffickers continue to adapt their methods to avoid detection by 
the police. Police usually apprehend trucks and mini-buses 
transporting trafficked children at borders and at checkpoints in 
the interior of the country. However, a transporter (driver paid to 
transport people or goods), and not a trafficker, is usually behind 
the wheel of the vehicle. When traffickers are directly involved in 
transporting children or women, they move in much smaller groups in 
order to avoid attention. Sometimes, traffickers make children 
leave the vehicles and cross the border on foot in order to avoid 
detection by security and defense forces. Once they have crossed 
the borders, they re-board their buses. Police have also 
intercepted traffickers at night, as they travel on secondary roads 
which wind through dense forest. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) GOVERNMENT ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
 
 
 
¶A. The international press first drew the attention of Ivoirians to 
the phenomenon of trafficking in Cote d'Ivoire with reports of 
Malian boys working in slave-like conditions on cocoa farms. 
Although the Ivoirian government initially dismissed these negative 
reports as a way of "discrediting" Cote d'Ivoire, there has been a 
significant change for the better in the government's attitude and 
approach in recent years.  Government officials - including 
President Gbagbo and Prime Minister Soro - have publicly 
acknowledged that a problem exists and must be dealt with. Although 
many Ivoirian citizens are still grappling with the difference 
between children helping their parents on family farms and child 
trafficking  involving the worst forms of child labor, they are 
much less defensive about negative international reports on the 
trafficking phenomenon. 
 
 
 
¶B. There are nine ministries involved in anti-trafficking efforts, 
with the Ministry of Family and Social Affairs officially 
designated as the lead. In the recent past, the Ministry of Labor 
has begun to share the lead on anti-TIP efforts. The Ministry of 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  003 OF 010 
 
 
Family heads the National Committee for the Fight against 
Trafficking and Child Exploitation (NCFTCE), which serves as a 
coordinating body among the nine ministries. Several ministries 
have created specific anti-trafficking units. In 2005, the Ministry 
of Agriculture established the first governmental unit solely 
dedicated to coordinating the fight against trafficking, child 
labor and exploitation in the cocoa industry. In 2006, other 
ministries followed suit, including the Ministry of Labor and the 
Ministry of Family. The Ministry of Interior has also been key in 
the fight against trafficking: in 2006, the National Police created 
a Department for the Fight against Child Trafficking and Juvenile 
Delinquency (DFCTJD) within the criminal division unit based in 
Abidjan. In January 2007, DFCTJD took over the child protection 
portfolio of the vice brigade unit, which focuses on cases of women 
trafficked for sexual exploitation. During the reporting period, 
the DFCTJD continued to work closely with the vice brigade on 
sexual trafficking cases. Outside of Abidjan, prefects and 
sub-prefects represent the government and take the lead on all 
regional and local government anti-TIP initiatives. When the 
Ministry of Education implements anti-trafficking and child labor 
programs, they are handled by the Ministry's Autonomous Department 
for Literacy. The Ministry of Justice handles matters related to 
child trafficking through its Department for Child and Youth 
Affairs. 
 
 
 
¶C. The government's ability to address the problem of trafficking 
is hampered by: the ongoing political crisis and absence of a 
cohesive government; the absence of a comprehensive 
anti-trafficking law; insufficient knowledge of the phenomenon on 
the part of law enforcement officials and judges; little 
collaboration and sharing of knowledge and statistics on anti-TIP 
efforts by judges, police, and NGOs; and insufficient financial 
resources to assist NGOs and police working on protection and 
prevention efforts.  The government also overemphasizes treating 
the symptoms of trafficking (reinsertion and repatriation of 
victims), rather than attacking the root causes (e.g., apprehending 
traffickers through greater law enforcement efforts or training 
judges to apply existing laws to convict traffickers). Corruption 
remains a widespread phenomenon in Cote d'Ivoire: given the 
depressed economic conditions exacerbated by the political crisis, 
it remains relatively easy for transporters and traffickers to 
bribe their way through security checkpoints and border crossings. 
 
 
 
Because of the ongoing political crisis and its impact on the 
Ivoirian economy, the Government of Cote d'Ivoire faces severe 
budgetary problems and lacks the resources necessary to carry out 
anti-trafficking programs. In 2009, organizations such as UNICEF, 
GTZ, and the ICI (International Cocoa Initiative) continued to fund 
the majority of anti-TIP programs. Despite the tight fiscal 
situation, the government allocated resources to anti-trafficking 
efforts; however, the Ministry of Finance has not yet made the 
money available. 
 
 
 
¶D. The government monitors its anti-trafficking efforts through the 
following organs: 1) the National Committee for the Fight Against 
Trafficking and Child Exploitation (NCFTCE); 2) the Ministry of 
Interior's Criminal Police Anti-Trafficking Unit; 3) the follow-up 
committee set up to monitor the Mali - Cote d'Ivoire 
Anti-Trafficking Cooperation Agreement; 4) the National Commission 
for Child Protection (CNPE),  a think tank and an implementation 
body created in 2005 to better protect children against abuse, 
trafficking and economic and sexual exploitation; and 5) the 
National Follow-Up Commission set up in July 2006 to monitor the 
implementation of the July 2005 Multilateral Anti-Trafficking 
Cooperation Agreement among ten West African countries. The 
government shares information about its anti-trafficking efforts 
through these five bodies and through regional and international 
organizations. It also publicizes its efforts during events such as 
the World Day against Child Labor on July 31. 
 
 
 
¶E.  Since the signing of the Ouagadougou Political Accord in 2007, 
the government has taken extensive measures to establish the 
identity of local populations, including the documenting of birth 
registration, citizenship, and nationality. From September 2008 to 
June 2009, the government implemented a massive, nationwide 
identification process in which over 6.5 million residents 
registered to receive identification documents.  Identifications 
cards for those who participated in the process had been printed, 
but were awaiting distribution at the end of the reporting period. 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  004 OF 010 
 
 
¶F.  Key ministries working on the trafficking problem have few or 
no resources for data collection. The Ministry of Justice, for 
example, keeps no consistent statistics on court decisions and must 
manually request court decisions from each of its 25 tribunals 
throughout the country to determine how many cases of a certain 
type occurred in a particular period.  In many cases, if some data 
are collected at a ministry trafficking office (as is the case for 
the police Anti-Trafficking Unit), the data are not comprehensive 
or exhaustive, as offices not only lack computers, but also trained 
staff to collect and process data.   Cote d'Ivoire's national think 
tank, BNETD, and the country's Institute of National Statistics 
(INS) employ technicians capable of creating a government database; 
however, no funds have yet been allocated for this purpose. 
 
 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
 
 
¶A. Cote d'Ivoire does not have a specific law prohibiting or 
punishing trafficking in persons. There is no specific law against 
slavery. The government drafted and submitted legislation against 
trafficking in persons to the National Assembly in April 2002, but 
it was not adopted before a  rebellion split the country in half in 
September 2002. No action had been taken when the mandate of the 
legislature ended in December 2005.  Legislative elections have not 
yet been held. 
 
 
 
The government can prosecute traffickers under the law prohibiting 
kidnapping of children (Penal Code, Article 371). 
 
The government can also use the law prohibiting the removal 
(alienation) of a person's freedom (Article 376), receiving or 
leaving a person as a financial security (Article 377), or imposing 
labor or a service on a person (Article 378). Mistreatment, 
torture, and starvation of minors are also punishable (Article 
362). These laws are used in trafficking cases. Despite these 
statutes and some arrests, the government acknowledges that an 
anti-trafficking law is needed to adequately investigate and 
prosecute trafficking. 
 
 
 
 - All forms of slavery or similar practices such as selling, 
trafficking children, practicing indentured servitude, bondage, 
forced labor or compulsory labor are punishable by the Ivoirian 
penal code: Articles 376 to 378 on forced labor or pawning a child; 
 
 
 
- Forced recruitment or compulsory recruitment of children with a 
view to using them in armed conflicts is forbidden by the Military 
Code; 
 
 
 
- Using, recruiting or offering children for prostitution purposes, 
for pornographic films, pictures or spectacles is punished by the 
penal code, specifically articles 335 to 337 on pimping and 
inciting minors to vice (sexual exploitation of children); 
 
 
 
- Physical violence against minors, depriving minors of food and 
care, attempts against children's freedom and life, and the 
kidnapping of children are punished by the penal code. Articles 
362, 370 and 371 of the penal ode and the law relating to 
kidnapping are most frequently used in trafficking cases; 
 
 
 
- Article 345 of the penal code punishes physical violence and 
injury; 
 
 
 
- Articles 354 to 360 of the penal code punish sexual violence. 
 
 
 
¶B. There are currently no specific penalties for trafficking in 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  005 OF 010 
 
 
persons for sexual exploitation.  There is no law criminalizing 
prostitution. Prostitution is legal between consenting adults and 
in private. Soliciting a client is a crime, as is procuring 
(pimping), even if the prostitute is an adult. Operating an 
establishment whose main purpose is prostitution is a crime. The 
police brigade charged with combating sexual exploitation uses 
Articles 334 through 341 to arrest traffickers and pimps involved 
in the sexual exploitation of girls and minors (attempts against 
good public moral conduct). - Article 334 provides for one month to 
two years of imprisonment and a fine of 30,000 CFA (60 USD) to 
300,000 CFA (600 USD) to anyone who engages in commercial 
pornographic activities; penalties are doubled if the offense is 
committed against a minor. 
 
 
 
- Article 335 makes pimping (whoever helps, assists and protects or 
knowingly protects somebody else who commits prostitution, even if 
the person is an adult) punishable by one to five years of 
imprisonment and a fine of one million FCFA (2,000 USD) to 10 
million FCFA (20,000 USD). 
 
 
 
- Article 336 doubles these penalties if the crime is committed 
against a person who is under 21; if the crime is carried out with 
threats, constraint, blows, or abuse of authority; if the offense 
is committed with a firearm; or committed by the father, mother, or 
any other person having authority over the person. 
 
 
 
- Article 337 provides for punishment of two to five years of 
imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 CFA (1,000 USD) to five million 
CFA (10,000 USD) for anyone who violates good moral conduct by 
inciting, favoring, or facilitating vice and corruption among 
minors of either sex. 
 
 
 
- Article 338 provides for imprisonment for 15 days to three months 
and a fine of 50,000 CFA (100 USD) to 500,000 CFA (1,000 USD) to 
whomever, through gestures, words, written documents or any other 
means, accosts or tries to accost persons of either sex in order to 
incite them to vice. 
 
 
 
- Article 339 provides for two to five years of imprisonment and a 
fine of one million CFA (2,000 USD) to 10 million CFA (20,000 USD) 
to whoever, owns, runs and finances a building used mainly for 
prostitution. 
 
 
 
- Article 340 provides for six months to two years of imprisonment 
and a fine of 500,000 CFA (1,000 USD) to five million CFA (10,000 
USD) to whomever knowingly puts private property at the disposal of 
persons committing prostitution. Laws regarding pimping are not 
well-enforced, and law enforcement generally tolerates 
prostitution, as long as it does not involve minors. 
 
 
 
 
 
¶C. There are currently no specific penalties for trafficking in 
persons for labor exploitation although there are penalties for 
forced labor. The government may prosecute traffickers under the 
law prohibiting kidnapping of children (Penal Code, Article 371) 
which states that anyone who, without fraud or violence, kidnaps or 
tries to kidnap a minor can be punished with one to five years' 
imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 CFA (100 USD) to 500,000 CFA 
(1,000 USD). 
 
 
 
The government may also use the law prohibiting the denial of a 
person's freedom (Article 376), which provides for imprisonment for 
five to 10 years and fines of 500,000 CFA (1,000 USD) to 5 million 
CFA (10,000 USD) for anyone who enters into a contract in order to 
alienate, either for free, or for money, the freedom of a third 
person. The defendant receives the maximum sentence when the person 
whose freedom has been denied is less than 15 years old. 
 
 
 
The government can also use the law prohibiting treating a person 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  006 OF 010 
 
 
as property (Article 377), which provides for six months to three 
years imprisonment and fines of 30,000 CFA (60 USD) to 300,000 CFA 
(600 USD) for anyone who treats a person as property, for whatever 
reason. The prison sentence is five years when the victim is under 
¶15. The government can also use the law prohibiting forced labor or 
a service on a person (Article 378), which provides for 
imprisonment from one to five years and fines between 360,000 CFA 
(720 USD) and one million CFA (2,000 USD) for anyone who forces a 
minor into a religious or traditional marriage or forces labor on 
someone. The government can also use the law prohibiting 
mistreatment, torture, or starvation of minors (Article 362), which 
provides for imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 
between 10,000 CFA (20 USD) and 100,000 CFA (200 USD) against 
anyone who commits violence against a minor or a person who is 
unable to protect himself or herself because of his/her physical or 
mental state, or voluntarily deprives that person of food or care 
to such an extent as to endanger the person's health. 
 
 
 
¶D. Rape is punishable by five to 20 years imprisonment (Penal Code 
Article 354). The sentence becomes life imprisonment if the 
perpetrator has one or more accomplices or is the father, an older 
relative, or a person who has responsibility for the victim's 
upbringing, or if the victim is under 15 years of age. The penalty 
for statutory rape or attempted rape of either a girl or a boy 
under the age of 15 is one to three years in prison and a fine of 
75,000 CFA (150 USD) to 750,000 CFA (1,500 USD) (Penal Code Article 
356). 
 
 
 
¶E. During the 2009 reporting period, the police, GTZ, UNOCI, and 
the Ministry of Family documented several cases of child 
trafficking. 
 
 
 
In February 2009, four Nigerian girls, ages 16, 17, 18, and 19, 
were trafficked to the village of Vaou for purposes of sexual 
exploitation.  The girls had been promised a trip to Germany, where 
they were told they would be given employment; however, they were 
forced to work as prostitutes on their arrival in Vaou. Two known 
Nigerian traffickers were suspected, but evaded capture and remain 
at large. 
 
 
 
In May 2009, Felicia Bygod, a 25-year-old Nigerian woman, 
trafficked two girls, ages 15 and 19, from Nigeria to Vavoua for 
purposes of sexual exploitation. The two girls were promised jobs 
in the United States and the UK, but were instead held against 
their will and used for prostitution. Police arrested and detained 
Bygod and transferred her to the Daloa court for prosecution. 
UNOCI confirmed that she was convicted on June 2 and sentenced to 
three years imprisonment and a fine of 1 million CFA ($2,000).  The 
two victims were repatriated with assistance from the Nigerian 
Embassy in Abidjan. 
 
 
 
In June 2009, UNOCI reported that 15 Burkinabe children, ages 8 to 
16, were trafficked to Cote d'Ivoire for the purposes of labor 
exploitation.  They were intercepted by local police in Soubre, and 
then transferred to GTZ which reunited them with their parents. 
Police claim they were not able to arrest the traffickers, as the 
children were traveling in two buses without any adult supervision. 
[Note: Statistics kept by the Anti-Trafficking Unit of the National 
Police indicate that 20 children were intercepted, 15 of whom were 
given to GTZ for care and 5 of whom were returned to their 
parents.] 
 
 
 
In September 2009, a female restaurant owner lured two girls, ages 
13 and 17, from Loguale to Odienne with promises of employment. 
Once the girls arrived in Odienne, however, they were forced into 
sex work.  The Odienne gendarmerie arrested the restaurant owner, 
but later released her after she paid 50,000 CFA ($105) to the 
girls' families. 
 
 
 
 
 
¶F. During the reporting period, the government did not offer any 
specialized training for law enforcement and immigration officials 
on identifying and treating victims of trafficking.  However, the 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  007 OF 010 
 
 
Ministry of Family (with assistance from ILO) held a workshop for 
25 families who volunteered to take in trafficking victims 
intercepted in their communities. With assistance from ECOWAS, the 
ministry also held an awareness campaign to sensitize 90 community 
leaders in the Zanzan region about the fight against trafficking. 
In total, ministry officials held awareness-raising campaigns in 38 
communities throughout the reporting period and reached an 
estimated 11,000 people. 
 
 
 
¶G. In July 2005, Cote d'Ivoire signed the Multilateral 
Anti-Trafficking Cooperation Agreement with nine other West African 
countries. The agreement calls for cross-border cooperation in the 
investigation of child trafficking networks and the prosecution of 
traffickers. When resources were available, Ivoirian police 
collaborated directly with law enforcement officials in other 
countries on trafficking cases.  During the reporting period, no 
cross-border trafficking collaboration occurred; however, Ivoirian 
law enforcement collaborated with their Ghanaian counterparts in a 
June 18-19 raid in Cote d'Ivoire, in which 62 children were 
intercepted and interviewed.  Due to limited funds, Ghanaian police 
were unable to take part in the actual operation. 
 
 
 
¶H. Although the Multilateral Anti-Trafficking Cooperation Agreement 
calls for extradition to signatory countries, to date, authorities 
arrest, try, and require traffickers to serve their sentence in 
Cote d'Ivoire before sending them out of the country. There is no 
law prohibiting Ivoirians from being extradited. 
 
 
 
¶I. Post has no evidence of government involvement in or tolerance 
of trafficking on an institutional or local level. However, there 
are allegations that many law enforcement agents and public 
officials are open to bribery and other types of corruption, and it 
is likely that some traffickers have managed to bribe their way 
through checkpoints and border crossings. No government officials 
have been directly implicated in trafficking cases. 
 
 
 
¶J. N/A 
 
 
 
¶K. Post does not know of any Ivoirian nationals involved in 
international peacekeeping missions who have engaged in or 
facilitated severe forms of trafficking or who exploited 
trafficking victims. 
 
 
 
¶L. Cote d'Ivoire is not known to be a source or destination country 
for child sex tourism. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
 
 
¶A.  There is no witness protection or restitution program for 
trafficking victims, nor is special protection provided beyond what 
is normally provided to witnesses in other criminal cases.  The 
government neither encourages nor discourages victims from 
assisting in the investigation and prosecution of trafficking. 
Usually traffickers are caught "red-handed," so victims do not need 
to appear in court. In less clear-cut cases, the absence of a law 
against trafficking complicates the legal procedure and limits the 
tools available to victims, prosecutors and law enforcement 
authorities. 
 
 
 
¶B. The government has no care facilities for foreign or domestic 
trafficking victims. The 2007 - 2009 National Action Plan allocated 
300 million CFA (USD 600,000) to construct five new centers and 
rehabilitate 10 existing structures to welcome victims of 
trafficking and child labor; however, the government has not yet 
made funds available to start work on these centers. During the 
reporting period, the Ministry of Family identified some existing 
government structures that could be converted into shelters and 
worked with UNICEF on a plan to rehabilitate these facilities. In 
the meantime, the Ministry of Family and the National Police 
continue to refer victims to NGOs that have shelters and can 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  008 OF 010 
 
 
provide assistance. 
 
 
 
¶C. Both the Ministry of Family and National Police employ a small 
number of social workers to assist trafficking victims after they 
are intercepted. However, the government relies on the help of 
local and international NGOs for medical and psychological 
assistance to victims. The government provides no financial or 
material assistance to these NGOs. The government also contacts 
embassies and consulates in Cote d'Ivoire for assistance with 
repatriating their nationals, though most of these diplomatic 
missions cannot offer financial or material support to victims. 
 
 
 
¶D. It is the responsibility of the Ministry of Family's Bureau of 
Social Protection (and/or one of the other government ministries 
involved in the fight against trafficking) to take responsibility 
for filing the necessary paperwork so that foreign victims are 
granted temporary resident status in Cote d'Ivoire. Trafficking 
victims who do not wish to be repatriated are not deported. For 
those victims who wish to return home, the government normally 
coordinates repatriation with the appropriate embassy or consulate. 
 
 
 
 
¶E. As detailed in Section B, the government does not operate any 
shelters for trafficking victims. 
 
 
 
¶F. In September 2008, the Ministry of Family (with the support of 
UNICEF) published a procedural manual detailing the government's 
formal procedures for identifying and caring for child labor and 
trafficking victims. The government continued to work with NGOs 
such as BICE, UNICEF, and IOM to increase coordination in the 
victim referral process. 
 
 
 
¶G. During the reporting period, the Ministry of Family reported 
that it assisted in the repatriation of 20 child victims of 
trafficking, including nine from Cote d'Ivoire, two from Burkina 
Faso, three from Benin, three from Ghana, and three from Togo. All 
of the children were trafficked to work in the informal sector. 
 
 
 
¶H. The vice brigade police unit interviews prostitutes following 
raids on brothels and bars and systematically asks women whether or 
not they have been trafficked. Police interview procedures often 
lack sophistication, however.  Police are not allowed to interview 
suspected child victims of trafficking without a Ministry of Family 
case worker present. 
 
 
 
¶I. Due to security and defense force training by the government and 
anti-TIP NGOs, traffickers are increasingly arrested and detained 
or jailed. Length of detention times varies widely and depends upon 
the individual police unit, tribunal, and officers involved with 
each case. Traffickers have been fined and prosecuted under 
TIP-related laws, although more often, they settle cases directly 
with victims families than through the justice system. 
 
 
 
¶J. Child trafficking victims are assigned a Ministry of Family case 
worker, who has the responsibility to inform victims about judicial 
proceedings and information related to their case. Case workers let 
children decide whether or not they wish to testify in court 
against their alleged traffickers. Foreign victims who are material 
witnesses in court cases against former employers must leave the 
country if they cannot find other employment. If the victim is an 
adult, he can file a complaint. If the victim is a child, the 
police usually attempt to return him to his family or to a 
community member. 
 
 
 
¶K. The government did not provide specialized training to 
government officials on identifying or providing assistance to 
trafficking victims during the reporting period, nor did it provide 
training to its embassies and consulates abroad on this issue.  No 
ministry keeps statistics on the number of trafficking victims 
assisted by Ivoirian embassies and consulates. 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  009 OF 010 
 
 
¶L. There was no formal government assistance for repatriated 
nationals who were victims of trafficking. 
 
 
 
¶M. Several international organizations and NGOs work on trafficking 
issues in Cote d'Ivoire, including Save the Children UK and Sweden, 
UNICEF, GTZ, BICE, IOM, and ILO. Local NGOs include Afrique Secours 
Assistance (ASA), the Amigo Doume Foundation, Soleterre, and Cote 
d'Ivoire Prosperite. As there are no government shelters in place 
for trafficking victims, the government often refers victims to 
NGOs after they are intercepted. The government provides little 
material or financial support to NGOs due to a lack of funding. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) PREVENTION 
 
 
 
¶A. The Ministry of Family continued to conduct sensitization and 
education campaigns to inform prefects, sub-prefects, social 
workers, community leaders, and members of the national anti-TIP 
village committees about recognition and prevention of trafficking. 
The Ministry estimates that it reached approximately 11,000 people 
through its campaigns during the reporting period. 
 
 
 
¶B. The Ministry of Interior has instructed police and gendarmes at 
various border points to stop and investigate those attempting to 
bring children into Cote d'Ivoire. In the past, both the Ministry 
of Family and the Ministry of Interior have conducted training 
sessions for security and defense forces manning these checkpoints, 
as well as for transporters who often pass through them to drop off 
goods and passengers. Cote d'Ivoire's borders with Mali, Burkina 
Faso, and Guinea are controlled by the Forces Nouvelles (FN). In 
the south, the government is unable to adequately patrol its long, 
porous borders, and it does not maintain publicly available 
statistics on border crossings. For this reason, it is difficult to 
estimate the trafficking problem across borders, particularly in 
the northern part of the country, which at the time of this report, 
remained under de facto control of the FN. 
 
 
 
¶C. The National Committee for the Fight Against Trafficking and 
Child Exploitation (NCFTCE) serves as the mechanism of coordination 
and communication among the various ministries and international 
and local NGOs working on the trafficking problem in Cote d'Ivoire. 
Although the committee usually meets at least twice a year, it did 
not meet in 2009. 
 
 
 
¶D. The 2007 - 2009 National Action Plan against Child Trafficking 
was developed by the Ministry of Family and the Ministry of Labor 
and Civil Service. The plan details a series of trafficking studies 
to be conducted, as well as plans for the construction of shelters 
for victims. Because the Ministry of Finance has not yet made funds 
available for projects, the Ministry of Labor is still waiting to 
implement the first steps of the National Action Plan. 
 
 
 
¶E. The police continued their periodic raids on brothels and bars 
suspected of employing minors for sexual exploitation. If minors 
are discovered in these establishments, the police immediately 
close them down until further notice. 
 
 
 
¶F. Post is unaware of any government efforts to reduce the 
participation of Ivoirian nationals in international child sex 
tourism. 
 
 
 
¶G. Post is unaware of any government training on trafficking or 
sexual exploitation for Ivoirian nationals deployed abroad in 
peacekeeping or other similar missions. 
 
¶7. (U)  PARTNERSHIPS 
 
¶A.  The government engages with other governments, civil society 
 
ABIDJAN 00000069  010 OF 010 
 
 
and multilateral organizations to focus attention and devote 
resources to human trafficking.  In a government report detailing 
action on the TIP problem from 2000-2009, the government cited ILO, 
ICI, UNICEF, GTZ, IOM, and the U.S. government as its principal 
partners in the fight against trafficking. 
 
¶B.  As the government dedicates insufficient resources to address 
the TIP problem within its own borders, it does not have the 
capability to provide assistance to other countries on this issue. 
NESBITT