10ABIDJAN98
Cote d'Ivoire 2010 Investment Climate Statement
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #0098/01 0221743
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221742Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0048
INFO RUCPCIM/CIM NTDB WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHAB/AMEMBASSY ABIDJANUNCLAS ABIDJAN 000098 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE EEB/IFD/OIA PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON OPIC KTDB USTR IV
SUBJECT: Cote d'Ivoire 2010 Investment Climate Statement 
 
REF: 09 STATE 124006 
 
¶1.   In response to reftel request, Embassy Abidjan's Investment 
Climate Statement 2010 follows in paragraph 2. 
 
 
 
 
¶2. Begin Text. 
 
Openness To Foreign Investment.  In September 2002, an attempted 
coup in Cote d'Ivoire began a crisis that divided the country 
politically, militarily, and economically.  In subsequent months, 
many foreign investors left the country.  Cote d'Ivoire has 
regained a great deal of stability and has seen modest economic 
growth in recent years.  However, national elections have not been 
held since the crisis began, a coalition of government and rebel 
leaders still governs the country, and to a large extent the 
northern and southern portions of the country still operate as 
separate economies.   Despite the ongoing political/economic 
crisis, the Ivorian government actively encourages foreign 
investment through mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures, 
takeovers, or startups.  It is not unusual for high-ranking Ivorian 
officials, including the President, to meet with potential foreign 
investors.  There are no significant limits on foreign investment 
nor are there generally differences in treatment of foreign and 
national investors, either in terms of the level of foreign 
ownership or sector of investment. The government does not screen 
investments and has no overall economic and industrial strategy 
that discriminates against foreign-owned firms. The investment code 
was designed to boost private sector investment and increase 
national production. The code includes incentives, such as tax 
breaks, for larger investments and for investments outside of 
Abidjan and other urban industrial areas. Cote d'Ivoire also has a 
Petroleum Investment Code and a Mining Investment Code, which were 
revised to encourage foreign investment in these sectors by 
exempting them from income and other taxes. The exemption also 
extends to the value added tax on equipment, materials and the 
first consignment of spare parts, except when there are equivalent 
products either made in Cote d'Ivoire or available in country at 
similar cost.  The government has privatized some parastatal 
enterprises, but additional privatizations are not likely until 
after national elections take place. 
 
The tax schedule, as revised in 2006, includes fiscal measures to 
reduce the corporate tax burden and stimulate economic activity. 
These measures include: 
 
--A corporate income tax of 27 percent (down from 35 percent prior 
to the 2006 revisions). 
 
--The awarding of a three-year corporate income tax exemption and 
free tax registration for the return of companies that left the 
country as a result of the crisis. 
 
Cote d'Ivoire has an investment promotion center called CEPICI, 
(Centre de Promotion des Investissements en Cote d'Ivoire, 
www.cepici.net  ), which provides investment 
information and assistance for entrepreneurs interested in starting 
a business or foreign enterprises interested in investing in Cote 
d'Ivoire. CEPICI provides a "one-stop-shop" for investors, an 
outreach program to match opportunities with potential investors, 
and a public-private liaison program. CEPICI also maintains a file 
of projects seeking foreign investment. 
 
The World Bank's 2010 "Doing Business" report ranks Cote d'Ivoire 
168 of 183 countries evaluated. 
 
Foreign companies are free to invest and list on the regional stock 
exchange (BRVM), which is based in Abidjan and is dominated by 
Ivorian and French companies. With the inception of the regional 
exchange, the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) 
members established the Regional Council for Savings and 
Investment, a regional securities regulatory body. 
 
In past privatizations, such as for management of the Port of 
Abidjan and for management of the electric and water companies, 
well-entrenched French companies with extensive histories in Africa 
won, which led to allegations of corruption on the part of losing 
investors. Bids are not always made public.  The government 
sometimes simply chooses from among companies that have proactively 
contacted it about an investment opportunity rather than proceeding 
through a public bid process. 
 
There are no laws specifically authorizing private firms to adopt 
articles of incorporation or association that limit or prohibit 
 
foreign investment, participation, or control. Furthermore, no such 
practices have been reported. 
 
The government does not use tax, labor, environment, or health and 
safety laws to impede or distort investment. Well-entrenched 
foreign companies historically have formed relationships with GOCI 
officials-who frequently influence the awarding of tenders. 
Additionally, larger firms (which in many cases are foreign 
companies) face particular government requests and barriers (e.g., 
caps on market share or pressure with regard to pre-payment of 
taxes) that smaller businesses (which in many cases are Ivorian 
companies) do not face.  There is no sector, however, where 
American investors have been formally refused the same treatment as 
other foreign investors. 
 
There are some limitations on foreign investment worth noting. As a 
means to monitor foreign exchange flows, for example, the external 
finance and credit office of the Finance Ministry must approve 
investments from outside the West African Franc (FCFA) zone. 
Despite regulations designed to control land speculation, in urban 
areas, foreigners own significant amounts of land. Free-hold tenure 
outside of urban areas, despite land reform, is difficult.   Most 
businesses, including agribusinesses and forestry companies, opt 
for long-term leases.  Many foreign investors see corruption, 
especially in the judicial system, as a major impediment to 
investment in Cote d'Ivoire.  Some foreign investors have described 
extraordinary difficulty and lengthy delays in establishing 
investment in Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
There are sizable U.S. investments in offshore gas and oil 
exploration and production, petroleum product distribution, cocoa 
and coffee processing and shipping, as well as a more modest 
investment in banking. There is a need for oil-servicing companies 
and oil exploration equipment and for experienced engineers and rig 
managers. 
 
Oil has become Cote d'Ivoire's leading export product, outpacing 
traditional leader cocoa. Development of new gold mines in recent 
years in the central and northern areas of the country also 
contributes to national economic growth and exports. Another area 
of commercial success is cellular phone service, which saw the 
entry of a fifth mobile operator in  December 2008  and the 
announcement of a sixth operator; all of the cellular phone service 
operators are largely financed by foreign capital.  U.S. investment 
is noticeably absent from the Ivorian telecommunications sector, 
which accounted for approximately $161 million (approximately 43 
percent) of new FDI inflows in 2009. 
 
The cocoa sector remains quite significant to the economy. It 
contributes up to 40 percent of export revenues and 20 percent of 
government fiscal revenues. Because of this sector's critical 
importance to the Ivorian economy, the government has an unwritten 
policy that prevents foreign companies from dominating it. Although 
the government has liberalized the market, it de facto limits the 
amount of cocoa that large foreign exporters can purchase and 
process to approximately 23% of the total harvest via a prohibition 
on foreign companies approaching farmers outside of either 
government-licensed middlemen or co-operatives. The Ivorian 
government has also established several private and public control 
agencies to regulate the industry. In October 2007, in response to 
several public accusations of widespread malfeasance in the cocoa 
sector, the Ivorian President ordered the public prosecutor to 
investigate the allegations, particularly those concerning 
embezzlement.  Several top officials in the sector are now in 
prison awaiting trial on charges of corruption.  In September 2008, 
the President dissolved the cocoa-coffee regulating bodies, 
replacing them with a transitional Cocoa-Coffee Management 
Committee, which continues to regulate the sector. The World Bank 
and IMF have continued their focus on the cocoa sector as a key 
economic bellwether and are pressing the Ivorian government to 
reform this sector. On October 14, 2009, the Cocoa Reform Committee 
set up by presidential decree on February 27, 2009, and charged 
with restructuring the cocoa sector submitted its draft proposal to 
the president.  The proposal has not been made public. 
 
The World Bank, IMF and the African Development Bank resumed their 
financial operations and lending in Cote d'Ivoire in mid-2007 after 
an accord was reached with the government to pay a negotiated 
percentage of its outstanding arrears to the WB and AfDB. In March 
2009, the IMF and the World Bank approved new programs for Cote 
d'Ivoire and approved the country's decision point for the Enhanced 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. 
 
Conversion And Transfer Policies.  Cote d'Ivoire is a member of the 
West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), which uses the 
Franc CFA (FCFA), a convertible currency. The French Central Bank 
 
continues to hold the international reserves of WAMEU member states 
and maintains a fixed rate of 655.956 CFA to the Euro. 
 
The WAEMU has unified foreign exchange regulations. Under these 
regulations, there are no restrictions for transfers within the 
community, and designated commercial banks are able to approve 
routine foreign exchange transactions inside the community. The 
transfer abroad of the proceeds of liquidation of foreign direct 
investments no longer requires prior government approval. 
 
Despite the ability to transfer funds freely within the WAEMU zone, 
when Ivoirians and expatriate residents are traveling from Cote 
d'Ivoire to another WAEMU country, they must declare the amount of 
currency being carried out of the country. When traveling from Cote 
d'Ivoire to a destination other than another WAEMU country, 
Ivoirians and expatriate residents are prohibited from carrying an 
amount of currency greater than the equivalent of two million CFA 
francs (approximately $4,395).  Larger amounts require the approval 
of the Ministry of Finance, and must be in travelers or bank 
checks. 
 
The Government must grant prior permission for investments coming 
from outside the WAEMU zone, and routinely does so. Once an 
investment is established and documented, the Government regularly 
approves remittances of dividends and/or repatriation of capital. 
The same holds true for requests for other sorts of transactions -- 
e.g., imports, licenses, and royalty fees. 
 
Multi-national firms in Cote d'Ivoire have complained that 
temporary liquidity shortfalls sometimes occur in the banking 
system. These problems are particularly of concern during the main 
cocoa harvest when companies are trying to transfer large sums of 
money as cocoa is purchased and exported. Companies continue to 
complain that the Government is slow in approving currency 
conversions. 
 
Expropriation And Compensation.  Cote d'Ivoire's public 
expropriation law includes compensation provisions similar to those 
in the United States. Historically, expropriation has not been an 
issue in Cote d'Ivoire, and the Embassy is not aware of any cases 
of government expropriation of private property. 
 
Private expropriation as a means to force settlement of contractual 
or investment disputes continues to be a problem. Investors should 
be aware that local individuals or local companies using what 
appear to be spurious court decisions have challenged the ownership 
of some foreign companies in recent years. On occasion the 
Government has blocked the bank accounts of U.S. and other foreign 
companies because of ownership and tax disputes. Corruption in the 
judicial system and security services has resulted in poor 
enforcement of private property rights, even in the sensitive cocoa 
sector, particularly when the expropriated entity is foreign held 
and the expropriator is Ivorian or is a long-term French or 
Lebanese resident of Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
Dispute Settlement.  The judicial system is dysfunctional. 
Enforcement of contract rights is often time-consuming and 
expensive as court cases move slowly. Judges sometimes fail to base 
their decisions on the legal or contractual merits of the case and 
tend to rule against foreign investors in favor of entrenched 
interests. In addition, cases are often postponed and appealed 
again and again, moving from court to court, in some cases for 
decades. It is widely believed that magistrates are sometimes 
subject to political or financial influence. To counteract this, 
some investors stipulate in contracts that disputes must be settled 
through international commercial arbitration. However, even if 
stipulated in the contract, decisions reached through international 
arbitration, and even through the African regional arbitration 
body, are sometimes not honored by local courts. 
 
Given that the average time from filing to resolution of a contract 
dispute is eight years the Government established an arbitration 
tribunal in 1999 for businesses to settle commercial disputes 
without going to court. The arbitration court is supposed to 
provide alternative modes of conflict resolution including 
arbitration, conciliation, mediation and expertise. 
 
In July 2004, the business community welcomed the expansion of the 
arbitration tribunal's mandate to include participation of local 
chambers of commerce. The business community was also pleased at 
the tribunal's ability to enforce awards more quickly. However, use 
of the tribunal in lieu of the court system has been limited; in 
the past ten years it has heard only 105 cases (18 in 2009). In 
addition to its local arbitration board, Cote d'Ivoire is a member 
of the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes. 
The Abidjan-based, regional Joint Court of Justice and Arbitration 
 
provides an alternative means of solving contractual disputes. 
 
There is political consensus on the need to reform the judicial 
system. However, the Ivorian government remains preoccupied with 
the ongoing political crisis; judicial reform, like many other 
legislative initiatives, remains on the back burner. Reform efforts 
are likely to continue to languish until after the next 
presidential elections, which did not take place as scheduled in 
November 2009, and have not yet been rescheduled. Under the pending 
reform plans, the GOCI would dismantle the Supreme Court, and 
divide its authority among several independent institutions. The 
current Judicial Chamber of the Supreme Court would become the High 
Appeals Court (Cour de Cassation). It would handle civil, penal, 
social, and labor cases when it deems that a lower court did not 
adequately apply the law. The current Administrative Chamber of the 
Supreme Court would become the Council of State (Conseil d'Etat), 
which would hear cases involving the State or public authorities or 
cases against the Government. The current Account Chamber of the 
Supreme Court would become a separate and independent Court of 
Auditors (Cour de Comptes), examining the accounts of the State and 
of local government, and hearing financial cases. 
 
Further reform plans call for deciding more cases by three-judge 
panels, instead of by a single judge; publishing decisions more 
quickly; enhancing computerization in the court system; training 
judges in commercial law; and increasing the number of appeals 
courts to reduce the backlog of commercial cases. 
 
Cote d'Ivoire has both commercial and bankruptcy laws that address 
liquidation of business liabilities. The Uniform Acts for the 
Organization and Harmonization of Business Law (OHADA) is a 
collection of uniform laws on bankruptcy, debt collections, and the 
rules governing business transactions. The OHADA permits three 
different types of bankruptcy liquidation: an ordered suspension of 
payment to permit a negotiated settlement, an ordered suspension of 
payment to permit restructuring of the company, similar to Chapter 
11, and the complete liquidation of assets, similar to Chapter 7. 
Creditors' rights, irrespective of nationality, are protected 
equally by the Act. Monetary judgments devolving from a bankruptcy 
are usually paid out in local currency. 
 
At present, there are no investment disputes involving U.S. firms 
in Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
Performance Requirements And Incentives.  Cote d'Ivoire does not 
maintain any regulations inconsistent with WTO Trade-Related 
Investment Measures (TRIMS). There are no general performance 
requirements applied to investments, nor does the government or the 
investment authority generally place conditions on location, local 
content, equity ownership, import substitution, export 
requirements, host country employment, technology transfer, or 
local financing. Cellular telephone operating companies must meet 
technology and performance requirements to maintain their licenses. 
The Investment Code, the Petroleum Code, and the Mining Code define 
the incentives available to new investors in Cote d'Ivoire (see 
section A.1. above). 
 
Right To Private Ownership And Establishment.  Foreign investors 
generally have access to all forms of remunerative activity on 
terms equal to those enjoyed by Ivoirians. The government 
encourages foreign investment in the privatization of state-owned 
and parastatal firms, though in most cases the state reserves an 
equity stake in the new company. 
 
Under its previous IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, the 
government committed to privatizing 30 parastatal enterprises by 
the end of 2003. While some privatizations occurred, the government 
has yet to sell the majority of its shares in a major local bank, a 
cotton company, and a sugar company, and its remaining shares in 
the telecommunications company. Plans to complete these 
privatizations are likely to remain on hold until after elections. 
 
In January 2005, the Council of Ministers approved measures to 
liberalize the telecommunications sector. The legislation remains 
blocked, however, and it is unlikely to be passed into law until a 
new National Assembly can be constituted with new elections. For 
the time being, the Ivorian regulatory agency continues to function 
under the authority granted to it by the 1995 telecommunications 
code. The new rules, as drafted, will end France Telecom's 
fixed-line monopoly through its subsidiary, Cote d'Ivoire Telecom. 
A new regulatory agency would also be created to manage the fully 
competitive market. 
 
Banks and insurance companies are subject to licensing 
requirements, but there are no restrictions aimed at limiting 
foreign ownership or the establishment of subsidiaries of foreign 
 
companies in this sector. There are no restrictions on foreign 
investment in computer services, or education and training 
services. However, there are restrictions on foreign investment in 
the health sector, law and accounting firms, and travel agencies. 
Investments in these sectors are subject to prior approval and 
require appropriate licenses and association with an Ivorian 
partner. Foreign companies operate successfully in all these 
service sectors. 
 
Protection Of Property Rights.  Ivoirian civil code provides for 
enforcement of private property rights.  The concept of mortgages 
exists, but mortgage lending is not well developed. There is no 
secondary market for mortgages.  Property and title registration 
systems exist in Cote d'Ivoire. The legal system protects and 
facilitates the acquisition and disposition of all property rights 
including land, buildings and mortgages. 
 
Outside of urban areas, private individuals or entities usually 
cannot obtain freehold tenure because the traditional property 
rights of villages and ethnic groups prevent the land from being 
sold. In urban areas where land is not held as a "tenancy in 
common" by a tribal or village head but is considered to be owned 
individually, it can still be difficult to obtain a free-hold deed 
to property even years after a closing. For that reason, most 
individuals and businesses tend to sign long-term leases. Although 
the legal system recognizes the right to contract for leaseholds in 
both urban and rural areas, in most cases traditional tribal 
land-owners do not have a clear understanding of property rights. 
This complicates the enforcement of property rights in rural areas. 
In addition, because free-hold tenure by individuals is not 
generally permitted in rural areas, would-be borrowers often have 
difficulty using real estate as collateral for loans. Even in urban 
settings the mortgage market is not well developed. As part of the 
legislative reforms mandated by the Linas-Marcoussis Peace 
agreement, in July 2004 the National Assembly adopted amendments to 
the law on rural-land ownership. This new law provides very limited 
free-hold ownership for rural lands, which had been traditionally 
held as a tenancy in common by villages. Rights are only protected, 
however, if the owner can provide proof of ownership through an 
assignment deed or purchase contract. 
 
The Ivorian Civil Code protects the acquisition and disposition of 
intellectual property rights. Legal protection for intellectual 
property may fall short of TRIPS standards due to uneven law 
enforcement and the lack of custom checks in porous borders, which 
permit trade of counterfeit textiles, pharmaceutical products, and 
vehicle parts. Cote d'Ivoire is a party to the Paris Convention, 
its 1958 revision, and the 1977 Bangui Agreement covering 16 
Francophone African countries in the African Intellectual Property 
Organization (OAPI), which has been TRIPS compliant since 2002. 
Under OAPI, rights registered in one member country are valid for 
other member states. Patents are valid for ten years, with the 
possibility of two five-year extensions. Trademarks are valid for 
ten years and are renewable indefinitely. Copyrights are valid for 
50 years. 
 
In 2001, Ivorian experts drafted a new law in an effort to bring 
Cote d'Ivoire into conformity with TRIPS. The new law adds specific 
protection for computer programs, databases, and extension of 
copyrights with regard to rented films and videos. However, the 
National Assembly has not yet approved this legislation, and the 
legislation will not be approved until a new National Assembly is 
convened.  Cote d'Ivoire has not signed the WIPO internet treaties. 
 
The government's Office of Industrial Property (OIPI) is charged 
with ensuring the protection of patents, trademarks, industrial 
designs, and commercial names. The office faces many challenges, 
including insufficient resources, a lack of political will, and the 
distraction of the ongoing political crisis. As a result, 
enforcement of IPR is largely ineffective. Foreign companies, 
especially from East and South Asia, flood the Ivorian market with 
all types of counterfeit goods. Despite enforcement difficulties, 
the government is working to strengthen IPR protection. In 2007, 
the Ministry of Industry, through the OIPI, issued a draft bill on 
protection of IPR at the border to provide legal provisions for 
addressing counterfeiting. The new bill would prohibit the entry 
and exit of goods infringing IPR by Customs. This will allow 
customs to detain the shipment of goods suspected of infringement, 
to investigate the status of infringement of goods etc. Further, 
Cote d'Ivoire's law on mandatory registration of commercial names 
came into effect in February 2006. 
 
The Ivoirian Copyright Office (BURIDA) put into effect a new 
sticker system in January 2004 to prevent counterfeiting and 
protect audio, video, literary and artistic property rights in 
music and computer programs. BURIDA's operations remain hampered by 
 
a long-running dispute between the management and the board over 
policy and leadership issues. To resolve the crisis at BURIDA, in 
March 2006 the Minister of Culture established a temporary 
administration, as well as a commission to reform BURIDA.  Since 
its establishment, the new administration has boosted its fight 
against audiovisual piracy including raids against retail outlets 
and street vendors of pirated CDs and DVDs, and instituted legal 
proceedings against persons involved in fraudulent copying of 
audiovisual materials. Additionally, in 2007 BURIDA brokered an 
accord with the Ivorian music industry to reduce prices on locally 
produced CDs by 66 percent in an innovative effort to undercut IPR 
piracy. BURIDA runs regular programs promoting IPR enforcement with 
lawyers and magistrates. In November 2008, the President signed a 
decree reforming BURIDA and changing its legal status from an 
association to a civil corporation.  This change was intended to 
give BURIDA more autonomy and a more business-like focus. On July, 
25, 2009 a new BURIDA board was elected. 
 
Transparency Of Regulatory System.  The Government has taken some 
steps toward encouraging a more transparent and competitive 
economic environment. Additionally, the IMF, World Bank, European 
Union, and other large donors have pushed the Government to make 
reforms. A centralized office of public bids in the Finance 
Ministry was designed to ensure compliance with international 
bidding practices by providing a neutral body to make bidding 
decisions in a transparent and objective fashion based on clear 
criteria. In 2005, the Ministry of Finance introduced institutional 
changes in the new public procurement code. They are: 
 
--The decentralization of operational functions to make ministerial 
departments, local governments and other government structures 
accountable for the management of public resources 
 
--The creation of consultative public procurement commissions in 
charge of examining extraordinary decisions 
 
--The reinforcement of public procurement coordination through new 
regulations, training, procedural controls and more open and 
transparent communication with the interested public 
 
--The establishment of an appeals mechanism 
 
--The reinforcement of auditing in the public procurement process 
 
In addition to the office of public bids, there is also an 
Inspector General's office and regulatory bodies for the 
liberalized electricity and telecommunications sectors. 
 
From 1999-2008, several private and public institutions with 
producer, industry, and government representation were tasked with 
controlling and regulating Cote d'Ivoire's cocoa and coffee sector. 
These groups were neither efficient nor transparent and became the 
subject of controversy regarding their fiduciary mismanagement. In 
September 2008, after several leaders of these regulatory boards 
were jailed on corruption charges, the President dissolved the 
cocoa regulating bodies to establish a management committee to 
regulate the cocoa and coffee sector. The World Bank and IMF are 
pushing the government to institute further reforms to bring 
greater transparency to the sector. 
 
On August 6, 2009, the Ivoirian government adopted a community 
framework for public procurement by incorporating WAEMU Directives 
4 and 5 on bidding process and auditing as well as regulation of 
public procurement within the Union.  The new public procurement 
code aims to harmonize public procurement policy  and  comply with 
WAEMU integration objectives 
 
The changes include the separation of auditing and regulating 
functions, the passage from the national to the community 
preference, the taking into account of procurement for intellectual 
services and the increase from 25 to 30 percent of advance payment 
for the startup of procurement of goods, works and services. 
 
Another change is the creation of the National Regulatory Authority 
for Public Procurement, which has financial autonomy and is charged 
with monitoring the application of good governance principles; it 
may sanction those who do not comply with public procurement 
regulations. 
 
The Finance Ministry has at times changed tax regimes overnight via 
ministerial decree, rather than working through the Council of 
Ministers and the National Assembly. The government sometimes 
levies large tax bills, which companies say have little basis in 
law or standard accounting practices. It then negotiates a lower 
bill with the company. 
 
In December 2008 the Ministry of Commerce unilaterally established 
a new fee on imports, in the amount of CFA 30,000 to 40,000 (USD 66 
to 88), depending on the type of import.  Many businesses reported 
that they received no receipts for paying the fee.  With strong 
resistance from the business community, which argued that the 
Ministry had no legal basis for imposing the fee, the Government 
suspended the fee. 
 
Proposed laws and regulations are not published in draft form for 
public comments. The National Assembly debates most legislation. 
The Government often holds public seminars and workshops to discuss 
proposed plans with trade and industry associations. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets And Portfolio Investment.  Cote 
d'Ivoire's commercial banking sector is generally sound. The 50 
bank branches that were closed in the former rebel zones at the 
height of the military/political crisis are reopening while new 
banks are expanding their networks.  The IMF reported in March 2009 
that two of the five banks in Cote d'Ivoire that had negative net 
worth at the end of June 2008 had formulated recapitalization plans 
approved by the Banking Commission.  One bank was under interim 
administration.  The remaining two were being taken over by the 
government through conversion of illiquid deposits into share 
capital.  The IMF also reported that high credit growth had reduced 
the nonperforming loans ratio to 17.7 percent of the total, down 
from 21.5 percent at the end of 2007. 
 
According to the Central Bank of West African States, as of 
December 31, 2006, the following Ivorian banks had USD 20 million 
or more in total assets (figures have been converted from FCFA to 
USD at an exchange rate of 500 FCFA to 1 USD): 
 
Banque Nationale d'Investissement (BNI): USD 41.0 million 
 
Banque Internationale pour le Commerce et l'Industrie de la Cote 
d'Ivoire: USD 33.3 million 
 
Societe Generale de Banques en Cote d'Ivoire: USD 31.1 million 
 
Standard Chartered Bank - Cote d'Ivoire:  USD 20.6 million 
 
Banque Internationale pour l'Afrique Occidentale: USD 20.0 million 
 
Due to the financial risk associated with long-term loans because 
of the ongoing political/economic crisis, banks have shifted their 
emphasis to lending to the public sector, to the detriment of small 
and medium size enterprises. Banks continue to offer short-term 
loans, and generally make lending and investment decisions on 
business criteria. Portfolio investment is emerging. Government and 
private bonds are available for purchase by individuals or 
companies. The Regional Council for Savings Investments regulates 
the WAEMU securities exchanges market. Government policies 
generally encourage the free flow of capital. Aside from 
restrictions previously listed, there are no private sector or 
government efforts to restrict foreign investment, participation, 
or control of local industry. Credit for business expansion is 
difficult to obtain. The government relinquished its interest in 
smaller banks and retains only a small minority share in several 
large banks and outright ownership of one medium sized bank (BNI). 
 
At the end of 2008, total assets of the 18 banks and three credit 
institutions were FCFA 2.3 trillion (about USD 5 billion), an 
increase of 6.6 percent from  2007 figures. 
 
Ivorian accounting systems are well developed and approach 
international norms. A WAEMU-wide accounting system-SYSCOA, under 
which all member countries follow the same accounting rules, is 
firmly in place. 
 
The FCFA exchange rate is pegged to the Euro at 655.957 FCFA to one 
Euro. As a consequence, the FCFA/USD rate fluctuates freely with 
the Euro/USD rate. 
 
There is no evidence of "cross shareholding" and "stable 
shareholders" to restrict foreign investment through mergers and 
acquisitions in Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
Political Violence.  Politically motivated demonstrations and 
strikes by workers' unions in the health, education, transport, and 
cocoa sectors have occurred and could continue to be potential 
sources of civil disturbance in 2010.  No protests have been 
directed against American or foreign businesses. 
 
Corruption.  Cote d'Ivoire signed the UN Anti-corruption Convention 
on December 10, 2003, but has not yet ratified it. The country is 
not a signatory to the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery. There 
 
are domestic laws and regulations to combat corruption but they are 
neither generally nor effectively enforced. Penalties can range 
from incarceration to payment of civil fines. State employees can 
be convicted of either passive or active corruption or bribery in 
the performance of their duties. The law also provides for 
punishment of state employees who benefit directly or indirectly 
from private or parastatal companies related to contracts, markets 
or financial payment under their purview. Company managers who are 
complicit in the corrupting act are treated as accomplices. 
 
Racketeering by security and defense forces is often denounced in 
the media and receives wide attention from the authorities and the 
population. Sporadic unrest in the country has led to an increase 
in the number of police, military and gendarme checkpoints on the 
roads, and consequently an increase in the solicitation of bribes 
at these checkpoints. Transport companies have been particularly 
hard hit. Trucks moving cargo from the western agricultural belt to 
Abidjan and between Abidjan and the rebel-controlled northern 
region pay a total of $100 to $400 at the various checkpoints they 
must pass through, depending on the cargo. In July 2008, the army 
chief of staff launched an anti- racketeering campaign.  The 
campaign led to a substantial reduction in police check points on 
the main country international roads; however, it has not yielded 
expected results concerning racketeering by security forces. There 
are several governmental entities in charge of fighting corruption: 
the General Secretariat in Charge of Good Governance, the Board of 
State General Inspectors, and the Finance Ministry's Inspector 
General's Office. None has been effective in stamping out this 
growing problem. Neither Transparency International, nor any 
regional or local non-governmental "watchdog" organization 
specifically related to business operates in Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
Many U.S. companies view corruption as a major obstacle to 
investment in Cote d'Ivoire. Corruption has the greatest impact on 
judicial proceedings, contract awards, customs, and tax issues. It 
is common for judges to base their decisions on financial 
influence. Corruption and the ongoing political/economic crisis 
have affected the Ivorian government's ability to attract foreign 
investment. Transparency International's 2009 "Corruption 
Perception Index" has ranked Cote d'Ivoire 154th of 180 countries. 
Businesses have reported corruption at every level of the civil 
service.  Obtaining an official stamp or copy or birth or death 
certificate, or an automobile title, requires payment of a 
supplemental "commission." If the commission is refused, the 
application is not processed. The size of the commission varies 
with the cost of the service or investment. Some U.S. investors 
have raised specific concerns about the rule of law and the 
government's ability to provide equal protection under the law. A 
poor record in enforcing the rule of law was one reason cited for 
the country's loss of eligibility for benefits under the African 
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) at the end of 2004. 
 
The country's financial intelligence unit, Cellule Nationale de 
Traitement des Informations Financieres (CENTIF), established in 
December 2007, is responsible for investigating money laundering 
and terrorist financing.  CENTIF has broad authority to investigate 
suspicious financial transactions, including those of government 
officials. 
 
A local company may not deduct a bribe to a foreign official from 
taxes. Under the Ivoirian Penal Code, a bribe by a local company to 
a foreign official is a criminal act. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements.  There are no bilateral investment 
or taxation treaties between Cote d'Ivoire and the U.S. 
 
OPIC And Other Investment Insurance Programs.  OPIC insures several 
U.S. investments in Cote d'Ivoire although the overall exposure is 
relatively small. Since 1999, OPIC has not issued any new 
investment insurance policies in Cote d'Ivoire, and in 2003, OPIC 
withdrew its underwriting agreement for Cote d'Ivoire. The African 
Project Development Facility (APDF) and the African Investment 
Program of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) may assist 
investors now that its parent, the World Bank, is reengaged in Cote 
d'Ivoire. Cote d'Ivoire is a member of the Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA). 
 
Labor.  The Constitution and the Labor Code grant all citizens, 
except members of the police and military, the right to form or 
join unions, and workers exercise these rights. Registration of a 
new union takes three months. Despite these protections, only a 
small percentage of the work force is actually organized.  Most 
laborers work in the informal sector (i.e. small farms, small 
roadside stands, and urban workshops).  Anti-union discrimination 
is prohibited. There have not been reports of anti-union 
discrimination, and consequently, no known prosecutions or 
 
convictions under this law. Unions are free to join international 
bodies, and the General Workers Union of Cote d'Ivoire (UGTCI) was 
affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade 
Unions. The Constitution additionally provides for collective 
bargaining, and the Labor Code grants all citizens, except members 
of the police and military services, the right to bargain 
collectively. Collective bargaining agreements are in effect in 
many major business enterprises and sectors of the civil service. 
In most cases in which wages were not established by direct 
negotiations between unions and employers, the Ministry of 
Employment and Civil Service establishes salaries by job 
categories. The Constitution and statutes provide for the right to 
strike, and the Government generally protects this right. However, 
the Labor Code requires a protracted series of negotiations and a 
six-day notification period before a strike may take place, making 
legal strikes difficult to organize. 
 
In February 2004, the Minister of Employment and Civil Service and 
the Minister of Economy and Finance signed a decree aimed at 
promoting national employment. This decree favors the employment of 
Ivoirians in private enterprises. The decree states that any 
position to be filled must be advertised for two months. If after 
two months no qualified Ivorian is found, the employer is allowed 
to recruit a foreigner, provided that he plans to recruit an 
Ivorian to fill the position in the next two years. The foreign 
employee must be given a labor contract. Until recently, in order 
to reside in Cote d'Ivoire for more than three months, foreigners 
were required to have a "carte de sejour" that cost the equivalent 
of a month's salary each year.  Representatives of UEMOA harshly 
criticized the requirement and claimed that it violated Article 91 
of the UEMOA Treaty, which permits the free movement of persons for 
employment within the union.  In November 2007, President Gbagbo 
signed a decree suspending the carte de sejour requirement for 
ECOWAS citizens.  It does not appear that elimination of the carte 
de sejour requirement has had a significant effect on employment 
opportunities in Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
Foreign-Trade Zones/Free Ports.  There are no free trade zones in 
Cote d'Ivoire.  In June 2008 the Export-Import Bank of India opened 
a USD 21 million line of credit for the Ivorian government to build 
a free trade zone for information technology and biotechnology in 
Grand Bassam, which is about 33 kilometers from Abidjan. The 
Ivorian government secured additional project funding from the West 
African Development Bank and the Ecowas Bank for Investment and 
Development and has begun negotiations to purchase a site for the 
zone.  Another free trade zone project, which was planned for the 
port of San Pedro, remains dormant. Bonded warehouses do exist, and 
bonded zones within factories are allowed. High port costs and 
maritime freight rates have inhibited the development of in-bond 
manufacturing or processing, and there are consequently no general 
foreign trade zones. 
 
Major Foreign Investors.  According to the United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development's World Investment Report, the 
stock of foreign direct investment in Cote d'Ivoire as of 2008 was 
an estimated USD 6 billion, the equivalent of 28.5 percent of that 
year's GDP.  In terms of FDI stock, France is Cote d'Ivoire leading 
investor, followed by other European countries and Lebanon. 
Chinese, Indian, Libyan, Singaporean, and Moroccan businesses have 
begun making significant investments in Cote d'Ivoire. 
 
U.S. firms have made major investments in oil and gas, banking, 
cocoa, and international courier services. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics: CEPICI has published the 
following figures on FDI flows to Cote d'Ivoire per sector for 
¶2009.  However, these figures do not include all FDI flows in 2009. 
The total figure presented by CEPICI is the equivalent of 0.3 of 
2009 GDP. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment inflow by Sector, 2009 (USD) 
 
Sector 
 
 
 
 
 
Investment 
 
 
 
 
 
Percentage 
 
Food 
 
81,273,337 
 
                22% 
 
Mechanic, Iron & Steel 
 
7,662,530 
 
                2% 
 
Mining Industry 
 
3,458,461 
 
           1% 
 
Health 
 
 20,711,736 
 
                6% 
 
Tourism & Hotel 
 
 1,737,745 
 
           0% 
 
Communication 
 
 30,584 
 
          0% 
 
Construction Material 
 
 208,791 
 
         0% 
 
Telecommunication 
 
161,895,036 
 
             43% 
 
Trade 
 
 3,489,627 
 
           1% 
 
Service 
 
 33,610,874 
 
           9% 
 
Training 
 
 1,124,205 
 
           0% 
 
Printing Industry 
 
 3,014,725 
 
           1% 
 
Computer 
 
 27,344 
 
          0% 
 
Wood 
 
 7,765,384 
 
            2% 
 
Transport 
 
16,837,058 
 
                 4% 
 
Drug Pharmaceutical 
 
 1,130,330 
 
             0% 
 
Oil & Gas 
 
 4,901,917 
 
             1% 
 
Plastics 
 
 6,969,231 
 
            2% 
 
Chemicals 
 
 
729,579 
 
            0% 
 
Textile 
 
 
94,784 
 
            0% 
 
Breeding 
 
 
3,616,938 
 
           1% 
 
Glass Industry 
 
8,974,283 
 
          2% 
 
Others (energy) 
 
5,297,802 
 
         1% 
 
Total 
 
374,562,303 
 
               100% 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Ivoirian Investment Promotion Authority (CEPICI). Average 
exchange rate CFAF 455 per one USD. 
 
CEPICI has published the following figures on FDI flows to Cote 
d'Ivoire by country of origin for 2009.  However, these figures 
include only a small fraction of FDI flows in 2009. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment inflow by Country of Origin, 2009 (USD) 
 
Countries 
 
Investment 
 
Percentage 
 
France 
 
5,921,703 
 
7.03% 
 
Belgium 
 
 5,819,937 
 
 
6.91% 
 
Luxembourg 
 
26,825,969 
 
 
31.85% 
 
Great Britain 
 
 6,425,004 
 
 
7.63% 
 
Germany 
 
 1,327,388 
 
 
1.57% 
 
Lebanon 
 
 4,108,351 
 
4.87% 
 
Portugal 
 
 438,284 
 
 
0.52% 
 
Denmark 
 
1,301,415 
 
1.54% 
 
Cyprus 
 
31,597,867 
 
 
37.52% 
 
Canada 
 
 439,645 
 
 
0.52% 
 
Total 
 
84,205,563 
 
100.00% 
 
Source: CEPICI. Table does not represent all the flow investments 
by origin.  Average exchange rate CFAF 455 per one USD. CEPICI does 
not include investment from resident Lebanese in FDI figures. 
 
End text. 
NESBITT