10ABIDJAN31
CARTER CENTER OBSERVATIONS ON CHALLENGES TO THE PROVISIONAL
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXRO5419
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHAB #0031 0221557
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221557Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0045
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0009UNCLAS ABIDJAN 000031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM IV
SUBJECT: CARTER CENTER OBSERVATIONS ON CHALLENGES TO THE PROVISIONAL 
ELECTORAL LIST 
 
¶1.       (U)  SUMMARY:  Observers from the Atlanta-based Carter 
Center who monitored the process of filing challenges to the 
provisional electoral list told the donor community that the 
nationwide distribution and posting of lists by the local 
independent electoral commissioners was very successful.  However, 
a lack of clear instructions from the central Independent Electoral 
Commission (CEI) led to uneven treatment of cases in some centers. 
Due to the ongoing nature of the dispute process, the Carter Center 
does not intend to make its findings public and will instead engage 
directly with key players to recommend improvements to the 
electoral process.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
 
¶2.       (U)  Six observers from the Carter Center and four 
representatives of the Electoral Institute of South Africa (EISA) 
worked together from November 27 to December 20 to observe the 
process of filing challenges to the provisional electoral list. 
The ten observers visited approximately 20% of all 415 local CEI 
coordination centers and covered 14 of Cote d'Ivoire's 19 regions. 
 
 
 
¶3.       (U)  Carter Center observers noted that, although there 
were minor delays in distributing and posting the provisional 
electoral list around the country, in general, the distribution 
calendar was respected, and the operation was highly successful. 
They attributed this success to the empowerment of local CEI 
commissioners, who were given the financial and material resources 
necessary to do their job.  For example, UNDP provided hammers, 
plywood sheets, and cash directly to local CEIs rather than relying 
on the central CEI in Abidjan for distribution.    Carter Center 
Electoral Expert Michel Paternotre said that the success of this 
operation bodes well for election day, which will also entail 
significant logistical efforts to distribute ballots, ballot boxes, 
ink, and other electoral material. 
 
 
 
¶4.       (U)  Observers were concerned, however, with "significant 
variations" in how individual centers processed challenges to the 
lists.  To cite one example, some centers accepted yellow national 
identity cards as proof of identity, while others did not, since 
there were no clear instructions from the central CEI.  [Note: 
there have been several different forms (and colors) of national 
identity cards, each corresponding to a different government 
attempt to resolve the ID issue.]    Observers noted, however, that 
nearly all variations in treatment of cases were a result of 
different interpretations of vague instructions.   Due to these 
variations, the Carter Center cited wide disparities in official 
CEI statistics on the number of processed, approved, and/or 
rejected cases.  Observers did not believe that any of the CEI 
decisions were discriminatory in nature or intended to favor one 
ethnic or political group over another. 
 
 
 
¶5.       (SBU)  COMMENT:  Although the Carter Center briefed the 
international donor community in Abidjan, it does not intend to 
release a public report.  Carter Center Representative Sabina 
Vigani explained that, because judges are still reviewing dispute 
cases, the Center was concerned that its report might be used as a 
political tool - particularly if it was released before the dispute 
process concluded. [Note: UNOCI reported on January 22 that the CEI 
has agreed to extend the electoral list dispute period until 
February 4.]  The Carter Center will instead reach out to key 
players directly to share observers' recommendations in private 
discussions. 
NESBITT