10ADDISABABA101
ETHIOPIA'S 2010 BFIF PROJECT PROPOSALS
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Addis Ababa
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDS #0101/01 0221227
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221227Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7463
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS ADDIS ABABA 000101 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EEB/CBA (DWINSTEAD), EEB/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP ECON EINV ETRD BTIO AF ET
SUBJECT: ETHIOPIA'S 2010 BFIF PROJECT PROPOSALS 
 
REF: 09 STATE 126674 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) This cable is a reftel response detailing post's  2010 
Business Facilitation Incentive Fund's (BFIF) two project proposals. 
 Post requests BFIF funding in order to implement the following two 
projects:  1) Creating an AmCham Ethiopia quarterly business 
newsletter; and   2) Promoting the formal launch of the 
Embassy-supported Women's Entrepreneur Group (WEG) as it formalizes 
itself as a member of the international group Organization for Women 
in International Trade (OWIT). 
 
PROPOSAL 1:  AMCHAM QUARTERLY NEWS LETTER 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) Justification:  The one-year old American Chamber of Commerce 
(AmCham) in Ethiopia is still in the nascent stages of development. 
AmCham currently has about 65 members, but seeks to attract 
additional membership and offer enhanced services to the U.S. and 
local business community.  AmCham does not currently have the human 
or financial resources to generate publications.  The AmCham 
Ethiopia quarterly newsletter would provide an excellent source of 
information about doing business in Ethiopia.  The newsletter would 
be distributed electronically to AmCham members, government 
officials, local chambers of commerce, local business leaders, and 
media as well as be posted on both AmCham's and the U.S. Embassy's 
website.  A newly hired research analyst would be responsible for 
the writing, editing, production, distribution and managing the 
advertisement revenues involved with the newsletter.  This research 
analyst would work under the direct supervision of the AmCham 
General Manager. 
 
¶3. (U) Expected Impact:  The launching of this newsletter would 
boost AmCham's public profile, attract additional membership, and 
provide valuable information to its members and the overall business 
community.  These outcomes clearly support Mission Ethiopia's 
Mission Strategic Plan (MSP) goal of growing a market-oriented 
economy.  The newsletter's content would include promotion of AmCham 
Ethiopia services, information regarding past and future AmCham 
activities, "how to" guides on doing business in Ethiopia, 
highlighted sector analyses, and summaries of government reforms 
affecting business.  For example, the newsletter will help explain 
Ethiopia's new and complex Public-Private Partnership bill and 
provide information on the potential impacts of Ethiopia's accession 
to the World Trade Organization (WTO). 
 
¶4. (U) Dates:  A BFIF grant would fund the first two newsletters in 
¶2010.  AmCham would send out the first newsletter in March 2010 with 
an estimated circulation of 300 recipients.  The second newsletter 
would be circulated in June 2010 with an estimated circulation of 
700 recipients.  Starting June 2010, the goal would be to have the 
publication finance itself through advertisement revenue.  AmCham 
Ethiopia would work with an advertising agency to increase the 
number of advertisers and thereby increasing recognition of the 
publication.  Planning milestones include: 
--January 2010:  interviewing and hiring a part time research 
analyst; strategic planning for the AmCham business newsletter 
--January-June 2010:  develop newsletter distribution system; 
writing, interviewing, data collection and analysis; sales of 
advertising space 
--February-March 2010:  work with the graphic designer on layout and 
style 
--March and June 2010:  editing and proofing; newsletter 
distribution 
--April 2010:  evaluation and refining newsletter 
--March and June 2010:  newsletter satisfaction survey 
--June 2010:  project completion and final report 
 
¶5. (U) Estimated Costs: 
 
Salary (6 months) for part-time 
   Research analyst                   USD 2,000 
 
Design and Production            1,500 
 
Promotion of Newsletter       1,000 
 
Miscellaneous Expenses              500 
 
Total Estimated Cost:                 USD 5,000 
 
PROPOSAL 2:  PROMOTION OF WOMEN'S ENTREPRENEUR GROUP LAUNCH 
----------- 
¶6. (U) Justification:  State-owned enterprises and ruling 
party-owned entities dominate Ethiopia's economic landscape, leaving 
little room for the private sector to develop.  Women entrepreneurs, 
who are historically disadvantaged in business experience and 
education, are forced to compete for the small slice of private 
business opportunities that do exist in the country.  In response to 
these challenges, Charge d'Affaires Vicki Huddleston founded the 
informal Women's Entrepreneur Group (WEG) of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 
in June 2006.  Ambassador Huddleston established the group as a way 
to bring together women entrepreneurs from small and medium 
growth-oriented businesses in efforts to build their capacity and 
create awareness about their products and services.  The group 
members are diverse, with backgrounds in manufacturing, services, 
and art/handcrafts, including woven and leather goods, jewelry, and 
furniture.  The WEG seeks to attain its goals through shared 
information of best practices of business management skills, high 
quality of raw materials and finished goods, and marketing and 
selling techniques. 
 
¶7. (U) As WEG sought to formalize itself as an organization, 
Ethiopia drafted and passed an onerous Civil Society Organization 
(CSO) law.  This law passed in early 2009.  Since that time, the 
Ethiopian Government has focused on re-registering all 
non-governmental organizations under this law and delayed any 
registration of new organizations.  New registrations are expected 
to be allowed in the early months of 2010.  When registration is 
allowed, the WEG plans to register itself as a part of the 
international group Organization for Women in International Trade 
(OWIT) as the Addis Ababa chapter of OWIT.  OWIT is an international 
organization which provides assistance in the form of networking, 
education and information sharing, and professional skills and 
leadership training.  The OWIT has 24 chapters worldwide.  The WEG 
currently has about 130 members, but seeks to increase its 
membership once it has a formal status.  Embassy support for groups 
such as WEG/OWIT Addis Ababa falls in line with the MSP goal of 
growing a market-oriented economy. 
 
¶8. (U) Expected Impact: Once WEG is allowed to formally launch as 
OWIT Addis Ababa, a launch ceremony will be organized.  This BFIF 
project proposal would be in support of the media promotion of this 
launch event.  The WEG plans to invite hundreds of business leaders, 
government officials, and other stakeholders to this event and seeks 
to publicize the event widely.  The proposed funding for 
invitations, promotional flyers, and advertisements would be 
essential to making this event a success.  The success of this 
launch event will allow this women's group to gain credibility, 
leverage resources, and increase the visibility of its members. 
 
¶9. (U) Dates:  This media blitz will be organized for the weeks 
leading up to the launch event.  The event date is undetermined at 
this time, but will most likely take place in mid-2010. 
 
¶10. (U) Estimated Costs: 
 
Production of promotional materials (which will include developing 
logo, graphic design of promotional materials and printing--flyer, 
letter head, envelopes, rubber stamp, banners): 
 
Graphic Design Work           USD  1,000 
Printing                           2,500 
 
Media Coverage, to popularize the event/launch of OWIT Addis Ababa 
Chapter (which will include articles in newspapers, TV, and radio 
coverage): 
 
Newspaper ad                    USD  500 
TV ad                                600 
Two radio ads                        400 
  (English/Amharic, 20 spots each) 
 
Total Estimated Cost           USD 5,000 
 
¶11. Points of contact for both proposals: 
 
Ms. Kary Hintz-Tate 
Economic/Commercial Officer 
US Embassy Addis Ababa 
Tel.: 251-11-517-4112 
Fax: 251-11-124-2405 
E-mail: Hintz-TateK@state.gov 
 
 
Mr. Fassil Yilma 
Commercial Specialist (LES) 
US Embassy Addis Ababa 
Tel.: 251-11-517-4450/51 
Fax: 251-11-124-2431 
E-mail: yilmaf@state.gov 
 
 
YATES