10ANKARA81
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1739
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0081/01 0191308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191308Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1724
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0245
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6773
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4394
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7735
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7648
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4246
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, JANUARY 19, 2010 
 
Highlights: Radical Armenians to Boycott Clinton Meeting; Editorials 
on US Policy; Turkey-Armenia 'Protocols'; Afghanistan-Pakistan 
Summit in Istanbul; Haiti Earthquake; Taliban Attacks Kabul; 'Pope's 
Gunman' Freed; Israeli Defense Minister Visits Turkey; Al-Qaeda 
Detentions; Poll on 'Public and Turkish FP'; Poll on Turkish 
Military Losing Popular Support; TV Spotlight 
 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - January 19, 2010 as 
prepared by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
"Radical Armenian Americans to Boycott Clinton Meeting" (Hurriyet 
online) 
The Armenian National Committee of America (ANCA) has said it is not 
planning to attend a meeting next month between Secretary Clinton 
and major Armenian-American organizations to discuss the 
Turkey-Armenia reconciliation process.  The ANCA, in a weekend 
statement, said its move is in protest of a State Department stance 
to decline to invite many influential Armenian-American groups, 
which oppose the normalization talks between Ankara and Yerevan. 
 
Editorial Commentary: US - Pakistan Policy and "Russia Gains 
Ground" 
In "Pakistan's Test on Nuclear Weapons" Islamist Yeni Safak's Akif 
Emre writes today: "It seems the US is determined to use terrorism 
and radical Islam as pretexts to legitimize its intervening in the 
region.  Pakistan is next on the list.  Even though the Pakistani 
army does its best to stand against any US intervention, eventually 
the country's territorial integrity might be at stake.  The US is 
trying to punish Pakistan just like Iran because of nuclear weapons. 
 In reality, the US wants to enhance its military presence in a 
region with nuclear powers and energy routes.  Islamic terror and 
nuclear threats serve as good public opinion tools in this big power 
game." 
 
In the "US Makes Mistakes While Russia Gains Ground" columnist Murat 
Yetkin of liberal daily Radikal (1/17) observed some policy mistakes 
of Washington especially in Pakistan and the region: "Indeed, a day 
after the Russian minister's statement that they could join the 
Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline project, the US, with an 
unprecedentedly strong statement, asked Pakistan to withdraw from 
that project. The US makes a proposal to Pakistan, where they are 
involved in military operations and from whom they expect a lot in 
their fight against Al-Qaida and Taliban, a proposal to provide 
Tajikistan oil to Pakistan through Afghanistan, which causes 
suspicion.  It is possible to see the US pressure on Pakistan to 
stop cooperation with Iran as a politically tactical mistake because 
getting a result is uncertain, but it is certain that it will 
increase the discomfort in the Pakistani administration.  At first, 
the Obama administration declared that they aimed to withdraw from 
Iraq, and to transfer the control in Afghanistan to Afghani people 
as soon as possible, and started a spring in their relations with 
Russia by withdrawing the missile-shield project from Eastern 
Europe.  However, the Obama administration has been making mistakes 
after mistakes in the last couple of months. To give the impression 
that they opened a new front in Yemen, threatening Iran with bombing 
their facilities and considering military options in all issues 
regarding the region can be mentioned among those mistakes. 
However, as the US makes mistakes, Russia makes progress. This shift 
in the regional power axis creates both opportunities and risks for 
Turkey. It is a process that has to be followed very carefully." 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Turkey Not Happy With Yerevan's Justification of Protocols (Sabah, 
Hurriyet, Milliyet) 
Today's papers report on the MFA statement regarding the Yerevan's 
Justification of Protocols.  The statement reads "The Constitutional 
Court of the Republic of Armenia has declared its decision of 
constitutional conformity on the Protocols between Turkey and 
 
ANKARA 00000081  002 OF 004 
 
 
Armenia signed on 10 October 2009 with a short statement on 12 
January 2010. The Constitutional Court has recently published its 
grounds of decision. It has been observed that this decision 
contains preconditions and restrictive provisions which impair the 
letter and spirit of the Protocols.  The said decision undermines 
the very reason for negotiating these Protocols as well as their 
fundamental objective. This approach cannot be accepted on our part. 
 Turkey, in line with its accustomed allegiance to its international 
commitments, maintains its adherence to the primary provisions of 
these Protocols. We expect the same allegiance from the Armenian 
Government." 
 
Pakistan-Afghanistan.  "Asian Summit in Istanbul" (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reports that on January 25, President Gul will 
bring together the leaders of Afghanistan and Pakistan, at the 
'Afghanistan's Neighbors' summit in Istanbul.  On January 26th, 
representatives of Afghanistan's neighbors will gather in Turkey. 
This meeting will be followed by an international conference on 
Afghanistan to be held in London on January 28.  Confidence building 
measures and education issues will be on the agenda of 
Turkey-Pakistan-Afghanistan trilateral summit.  Within this 
framework, education ministers of Afghanistan and Pakistan will be 
coming to Turkey in the upcoming days.  Tajikistan's president 
Imamali Rahman is expected to join the meeting on January 26 while 
Iran, Turkmenistan and China will be represented at the ministerial 
level.  Countries like Saudi Arabia, the US and the UK which 
contributed to the re-construction of Afghanistan, will also attend 
the summit in Istanbul.  The meeting will bring together the 
representatives of Iran and the US, as well.  The summit's agenda 
will be increasing contributions for  Afghanistan's re-construction. 
 
 
Haiti Rescue Efforts.  "Humanity Under Rubble" (Milliyet) 
Media outlets focus on the dire situation and Turkish relief efforts 
in Haiti after the devastating earthquake, with a couple papers 
questioning whether the US is occupying the Caribbean country in the 
name of aid.  Liberal Radikal in a front page banner headline, "Zero 
Point of Humanity," expresses concern over growing chaos in Haiti as 
"people fight for their lives after the quake."  In "Second Turkish 
Miracle," mainstream Milliyet highlights, "members of Turkish rescue 
team are hailed as heroes in Haiti after they rescue two survivors 
from the rubbles of a shopping mall abandoned by other rescue 
teams."  Meanwhile, mainstream Hurriyet headline reads, "Have US 
Troops Come to Occupy?" and says, "US taking control of the 
country's airport and giving priority to the US planes made other 
countries furious after their planes carrying aid are turned back 
and this fuels new tensions over a 'US occupation' of the quake-hit 
island." In "US Stacks Troops to Haiti," leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet  highlights Venezuelan and French accusations that US is 
occupying Haiti.  Cumhuriyet reports France called on the UN to 
"clarify the US role and start an investigation," while Venezuelan 
President Chavez said the "US uses the earthquake to occupy Haiti." 
 
 
Afghanistan.  "Taliban Attack On Kabul While Karzai Was Swearing-in" 
(Hurriyet) "9/11 in Kabul" (Yeni Safak) 
The Taliban attack in Kabul is a prominent international story.  All 
major papers cover the Kabul attacks and highlight the gravity. 
Mainstream Hurriyet notes the attacks were coordinated while 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak observes "the largest and the most 
chaotic Taliban attack in one year" and carries details of the 
"4-hours long hot clashes."  According to Yeni Safak, due to Taliban 
attacks, Turkish Defense Minister Gonul decided on a last minute 
cancellation of his upcoming Afghanistan trip.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet depicts the situation as "Afghan capital turned to a war 
zone" and Islamist Zaman reports "clashes at the hearth of Kabul" 
while stating the gravity of coordinated series of attacks in the 
capital city.  Columnist Ibrahim Karagul of Islamist Yeni Safak 
considers the gravity of Taliban attacks a clear indication of the 
"demise of the US project and the NATO presence in Afghanistan." In 
"What Really happened in Kabul" he comments: "All of these attacks 
 
ANKARA 00000081  003 OF 004 
 
 
indicate that the Taliban is capable of undermining the protected 
Kabul regime as well as reinforced foreign occupation.  Calling it 
terror does not explain the whole thing.  In fact, the attacks in 
Kabul were hitting the US, NATO as well as everything represented by 
international forces.  That is the demise of Obama's Afghanistan 
project." 
 
Pope's Gunman Agca Freed: "The Killer Among Us" (Sabah) 
All media outlets give extensive coverage to the release of Mehmet 
Ali Agca, the hitman who tried to kill Pope Jean Paul II in 1981 and 
killed daily Milliyet's chief editor Abdi Ipekci in 1979, after 
spending 29 years in jail.  After leaving his prison cell, Agca went 
to a luxury five-star hotel in Ankara.  "I proclaim the end of the 
world will come in this century," Agca wrote in a note to the media, 
which he signed as "Messiah."  Agca also said he would write a "new 
and perfect Gospel."  Instead of revealing his secrets, Agca started 
to teach Christianity, say the papers, and claim that he will 
continue his "show" to make money.  Agca will reportedly hold a 
press conference tomorrow about the "assassination plot" against 
late Pope Jean Paul II. 
 
Minister Gonul: We Will Continue to Work with Israel 
Media outlets reported over the weekend that speaking to reporters 
in Ankara after a one-on-one meeting with visiting Israeli Defense 
Minister Ehud Barak, Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul said, "As long as 
we have identical interests, we will continue to work with Israel." 
In response to a question on the drones that Turkey would procure 
from Israel, Gonul said Israel would deliver 10 unmanned planes to 
Turkey within 2010.  Barak said during a news conference with Gonul 
that Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon's ill-treatment of 
Turkish Ambassador in Tel Aviv was a "mistake."  PM Erdogan said 
Sunday, "We consider Barak's statements as satisfactory.  We will 
not bring the issue further." 
 
Al-Qaeda's Turkey Representative Detained in Adana (Zaman) 
Intellectual/Islamist-oriented Zaman and mainstream Sabah report 
that security forces launched operations against Al-Qaeda in 25 
different addresses in Adana and detained 20 people.  It was learned 
that the organization's Turkey Representative Abu Zer was among the 
detained people.  Sabah notes that these operations were the 
follow-up operations of the one initiated in Ankara on January 15 
where 10 people were detained. 
 
Poll: Turks Warm to Opening Borders with Armenia If... (Cumhuriyet) 
Papers carry a survey, "Public Opinion and Turkish Foreign Policy," 
by Ankara University's European Union Research Center (ATAUM), 
conducted in nine Turkish provinces with 1032 respondents from 
October 31-December 31 last year.  The poll shows 42.2 percent of 
those surveyed want Turkey to take an "active intermediation role" 
in the Arab-Israel question.  Asked whether Turkey should mediate 
between Iran and the US, 43.4 percent said "Yes" whereas 43.4 
percent said "No."  Regarding the Arab-Israel problem, 33.5 percent 
think Turkey should be "neutral" while 9.7 percent say Turkey should 
support Arab policies, and 2.7 percent say Turkey should support 
Israel.  On Armenia, 69.7 percent think Turkey should open its 
borders with Armenia if Yerevan withdraws from Azerbaijani 
territories, and also drops "genocide" claims.  An independent 
Kurdish state in Iraq is opposed by 69.1 percent.  The US was seen 
as the leading "enemy country" with 37.5 percent, to be followed by 
Armenia (10.9), Israel (10.6), Greece (6.1), and France (5.1).  27.4 
percent of the respondents see the US as an "unreliable country" and 
26.5 percent as a "colonial country" but 25.5 percent regard it as 
"strategic partner." 
 
Poll: Turkish Military Losing Popular Support in Recent Years 
(Vatan) 
Mainstream Vatan carries the results of a poll entitled "2010 Guide 
for Understanding Turkey," which was conducted by Ipsos KMG 
International Marketing and Public Poll Company on the Kurdish 
"democratic overture" and the debates on the Turkish military.  The 
data of the past six years shows that the army, which had always 
 
ANKARA 00000081  004 OF 004 
 
 
taken the first place among the institutions the society views as 
"the most trustworthy," is losing popular support.  The drop began 
in 2007 and  when 85-90 percent of the population called "the army 
is the most trustworthy institution" to the current rate of 73 
percent in 2009, especially in the southeastern and eastern parts of 
the country. 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
On Tuesday, the Israeli Foreign Ministry Director-General Yossi Gal 
will visit Ankara for routine "political consultations." 
 
Doctors and health workers will go on strike on Tuesday to protest a 
new law banning them from working both in state hospitals and in 
their private offices. 
 
Around 10,000 people have applied for 108 job openings in Sanliurfa, 
and 2,400 applied for 84 jobs in Edirne. 
 
In 2010, Turkey expects a 20 percent increase in energy investments. 
 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan met Greek President Papoulias on the 
sidelines of the World Future Energy Summit in the UAE.  Papoulias 
raised the reopening of Halki Seminary, while Erdogan drew attention 
to the problems of Turks in Western Thrace. 
 
Former British PM, Tony Blair, will appear before the Iraq inquiry 
commission on January 29 to answer questions about his controversial 
decision to support the Iraq invasion. 
 
JEFFREY