10ANKARA56
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6932
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0056/01 0131433
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131433Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1675
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0234
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6749
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4379
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7725
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7637
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4235
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 13, 2010 
 
Highlights: Israeli Apology Reported; US Implicated in Nuke 
Scientist Death; Turkey Scores with Freedom House; US Science Envoy 
Visits; Israel-Turkey 'Diplomatic Crisis' Rages; MFA Statement; 
Barak Visit in Limbo; Turkish Pundits on Breach; CHP, MHP Reaction 
to Israel; Armenian Court Approves Protocols with Turkey; Saudi 
Soldiers Killed on Yemeni Border; TV Spotlight 
 
 
Breaking News: Mainstream Hurriyet website reported Israel has 
"officially apologized" from Turkey over the mistreatment of 
Turkey's Ambasador in Tel Aviv.  "PM Netanyahu 'intervened' when 
Ankara did not find sufficient the explanations of Ayalon, and now 
Turkey's MFA is looking into the statement from the Israeli PM that 
carries a disapproving tone of Avalon's attitude and expresses 
regret" says Zeynep Gurganli on Hurriyet OnLine. 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
Iran - US Implicated Nuclear Scientist's Death: "Fourth One in 
Nuclear Mystery" (Hurriyet) 
Turkish media give prominent play to the killing of an Iranian 
nuclear scientist, calling it "mysterious" and linking it to US 
plans in Iran.  "Mysterious Assassination" headlined liberal 
Radikal, which also spotlighted State Department spokesman Mark 
Toner's remarks regarding the "absurd accusations" from the Iranian 
regime.  "Assassination Against Nuclear Professor in Tehran" 
announces leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet and notes "it was mind 
blowing that the killing happened two days after General Petreaus 
remarks on the US readiness plans for a strike against Iran,"  and 
notes the upcoming UNSC debates on sanctions against Iran.  Islamist 
Yeni Safak's front page story says "Lots of Secrets About the 
Killing of Nuclear Physicist" noting he supported the opposition 
candidate during the recent presidential elections. 
 
Washington Cautious on Turkish-Israeli Tension:  Tension between 
Turkey and Israel continues to be a dominating story in television, 
web sites as well as in wire services.  Turkey's ATV channel 
Washington reported that an official at the State Department 
commented: "what happens diplomatically in Turkish-Israeli relations 
is a matter between the two countries."   The station's reporter 
interpreted this as "Washington closely watches the issue but 
remains cautious. 
 
Turkey's Scores in Freedom House Report (Hurriyet) 
Turkey scored a "three" in political and civilian rights in this 
year's Freedom House human rights report.  Responding to Anatolia 
News Agency, the organization's research director Puddington said 
"We think that the Turkish government's democratic opening 
initiative to integrate Kurds into the Turkish public is very 
important.  However, we were disappointed to see the closure of DTP 
by the Constitutional Court.  We think that PM Erdogan is acting 
within democratic rules, but we are not happy about the tax fine 
case initiated against Dogan Media Group.  The company was fined to 
pay for more than its value.  We are following this case closely, 
because we consider this case as a way to threaten opposition 
media." 
 
US "Science Envoy" Dr. Zewail Visits Turkey 
Hurriyet, Sabah and CNNTurk report that Dr. Ahmed Zewail, one of 
three "science envoys" appointed by Secretary Clinton, is visiting 
Turkey this week.  "A statement from the US Ankara Embassy said 
Zewail would visit Turkey under a regional tour which covers Egypt, 
Lebanon and Jordan, and that he would visit Middle East Technical 
University, Bilkent University and Scientific and Technical Research 
Organization TUBITAK," reported Hurriyet. 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Turkey-Israel Tensions Rage: "Ties with Israel Breaking" 
(Cumhuriyet) 
All media outlets give extensive and very angry front-page coverage 
 
ANKARA 00000056  002 OF 003 
 
 
to the Israeli snub of Turkey's Ambassador Oguz Celikkol over 
Ankara's persistent criticism of the Jewish state, focusing on 
Deputy FM Danny Ayalon refusal to shake Celikkol's hand and making 
him sit on a lower seat at a meeting after waiting in the hallway. 
"One Minute Mr Ayalon" reads a banner headline in mainstream 
Hurriyet, which lashes out at the Israeli Deputy FM for 
"disregarding all protocol rules." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
warns in a banner headline "Ties with Israel Breaking," and quotes 
FM Davutoglu as saying "under such conditions, there will be no 
dialogue with Israel."  Mainstream Milliyet headlines "Silliness" 
and points out that Israeli Deputy FM "actually ridiculed himself" 
while trying to shame Celikkol.  Liberal Radikal says the snubbing 
of Celikkol amounts to a "Middle Ages Style Reaction." Tabloid Aksam 
headlines "The Israeli Trap" and claims Israel was still in "shock" 
over PM Erdogan's "One Minute!" outburst in Davos last year.  "Shall 
We Swallow This Humiliation?" screams nationalist-conservative 
Tercuman, while Leftist Taraf says Ayalon is "the Bumpkin of Tel 
Aviv" and adds that the Israeli Deputy FM who humiliated Turkey's 
ambassador is the "laughingstock of the world."  Mainstream 
Haberturk says "rascal" Ayalon should apologize or Turkey's 
ambassador should be withdrawn from Israel.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
says the Turkish MFA issued a stern warning to Israel: "Know Your 
Limits."  Meanwhile, "Vile and Vicious" reads the headline in 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak, which reports PM Erdogan said Israel's 
"wrong attitudes" against Turkey would always be "reciprocated." 
 
MFA Statement: All papers report the MFA said in a statement, 
"Turkey denounces the treatment and waits for an apology from 
Israel."  The Turkish MFA summoned the Israeli ambassador Gaby Levy, 
and warned him that "everyone should know his limits."  MFA U/S 
Feridun Sinirlioglu was quoted extensively that "the treatment of 
Turkey's ambassador was extremely impolite.  Mainstream Haberturk 
reports Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon said he was not 
planning to apologize, and that the Turks had to apologize for the 
worlds of Erdogan and the controversial TV serial "The Valley of the 
Wolves."  Papers also carry the Israeli Industry Minister Ben 
Eliezer's comments to Israeli Radio: "I am not happy about what's 
happening with Turkey.  Israel will not benefit from pushing Turkey 
into the anti-Israeli camp." 
 
Barak Jan. 17-18 Visit in Limbo: Several papers, basing their 
comments on a Ha'aretz report, claim the scene was "planned" by 
Israeli FM Lieberman, who is plotting to block the forthcoming 
official Turkey visit of the Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak. 
Zaman and others report Benjamin Netanyahu supported Lieberman in 
the controversy, and that the Israeli PM also said he was concerned 
of the developing Turkish ties with Iran and Syria.  Papers and 
televisions report PM Erdogan as saying he would not meet with 
Barak.  Papers report Barak's office said a meeting with PM Erdogan 
was not on the schedule of the Israeli Defense Minister while in 
Turkey on January 17-18.  All-news channel NTV speculated Celikkol 
would come to Ankara for consultations before Barak arrives, and 
that the Ambassador's stay in Turkey might be "extended." 
 
Commentary: "Diplomatic Crisis" with Israel 
Pundits across the board call Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister's 
attitude toward the Turkish Ambassador as "undiplomatic and 
unacceptable."  Noting the internal fight within Israeli's coalition 
government, columnist Cengiz Candar in liberal Radikal says: "A 
faction in Israeli government is trying to defame Turkey especially 
after Ankara's regional accomplishments."  Radikal's Murat Yetkin 
agrees: "Foreign Minister Lieberman represents a radical wing and he 
seemed to have a deliberate act for sabotaging the upcoming Israeli 
Defense Minister visit to Turkey."  Mainstream Milliyet's Asli 
Aydintasbas joins the choir by saying "The brutal style of Israeli 
Foreign Ministry significantly damaged bilateral ties and also 
undermined already the upcoming visit of Ehud Barak."  Islamist Yeni 
Safak writers Ibrahim Karagul as well as Fehmi Koru consider the 
recent tension "because of Israel's growing uneasiness about 
Turkey's diplomacy successes in the entire region."  Mainstream 
Sabah's Mehmet Barlas draws attention to Turkey's close friendship 
 
ANKARA 00000056  003 OF 003 
 
 
with the Middle East world while Israel's growing isolation in the 
region.  Leftist nationalist Cumhuriyet's senior editor Orhan Birgit 
has a different approach: "PM Erdogan is in a deliberate act by 
constantly making tension-building statements against Israel.  These 
messages are aiming at the fundamental party root of AKP which is 
well known anti-Jewish."  The writer says "this might be a public 
relations effort on the eve of a possible early election." 
 
CHP, MHP Reactions to Snub of Turkish Ambassador 
Mainstream Aksam reports opposition CHP deputy chairman Onur Oymen 
said the term "diplomatic scandal" was not enough to describe the 
incident, and stressed no one around the world could give 
"second-class treatment" to a Turkish envoy.  MHP lawmaker Deniz 
Bolukbasi, a former diplomat at MFA, said Ankara should withdraw 
Ambassador Celikkol, suspend military ties with Israel and also 
cancel the visit of Ehud Barak. 
 
Armenian Constitutional Court "Presses the Button" for the Border 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that the Armenian Constitutional Court 
validated the protocols signed between Turkey and Armenia in 
October.  The protocols will be sent to the Foreign Relations 
Committee in Armenian Parliament.   Hurriyet notes that "Armenia in 
recent weeks has expressed growing frustration over the Turkish 
Parliament's failure to ratify the protocols although the Armenian 
parliament has also yet to ratify the accord."  Mainstream Sabah 
headline reads "Yerevan: "Protocols abide With the Constitution." 
 
Saudi Soldiers were Killed at Yemeni Border (Sabah) 
Media reported that four Saudi soldiers were among the dead 
following a Saudi Arabia force clash with Shiite militants at the 
Yemeni border. Saudi Deputy Defense Minister Halid Bin Sultan said 
that the total death toll reached 82.  According to Sabah, Minister 
Sultan stressed that the militants were given 48 hours to evacuate 
the village, however, they did not abide with the ultimatum, and 
"that is why all of them been exterminated." 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
Diyarbakir Mayor Osman Baydemir was interrogated Tuesday by the 
prosecutor for five hours in connection with an investigation 
against the PKK arm KCK. 
 
Two lawmakers -- Harun Ozturk (Izmir) and Huseyin Pazarci 
(Balikesir) -- have resigned from their party DSP. 
 
Labor union Turk-Is will stage a protest rally in Ankara on January 
¶16. 
 
Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul said the problems related to the 
delivery of Israeli drones were resolved, and that a Turkish 
delegation went to Israel on Monday to check the technical 
characteristics of each plane. 
 
Saudi television reported a clash with Shiite militants at Yemeni 
border and announced that 82 Saudi soldiers were killed. 
 
French Industry Minister Christian Estrosi says his he government 
won't let Renault shift production of its Clio city car to Turkey. 
 
 
A lawmaker from President Sarkozy's conservative party has filed 
legislation to bar Muslim women in France from appearing in public 
wearing veils. 
 
SILLIMAN