10ANKARA176
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5138
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0176/01 0341254
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031254Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1986
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0284
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6902
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4468
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7771
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7686
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4287
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000176 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - February 3, as prepared 
by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
US Ambassador: "Turkey Does Not Distance Itself From the West" 
Mainstream Sabah dedicates its front page lead story, as well as a 
two page spread inside, to a comprehensive interview with US 
Ambassador James Jeffrey by Sabah columnist Nur Batur. In "Turkey is 
Not Breaking from the West," Jeffrey stresses that Turkey is an 
integral part of the Western alliance.   He adds that Turkish ties 
with the Arab world should not be viewed as an alternative as "the 
majority of the Arab countries are allies of the West."  Ambassador 
Jeffrey describes PM Erdogan as a "smart politician," and adds that 
TGS General Basbug was committed to democracy.  He observed that the 
need for army supervision in foreign politics has declined. 
 
General Odierno:  Arrives in Ankara for Talks 
All media report General Ray Odierno arrived Feb 2 for a three-party 
meeting with Turkish and Iraqi officials and will also hold talks 
with TGS General Basbug, Interior Minister Atalay and FM Davutoglu. 
 In a message released upon his arrival that was widely replayed in 
all major Turkish media, Odierno condemned PKK activities, 
emphasizing that Turkey is a strong ally of the US.  He said that 
the US was supporting Turkey in fighting terror and protecting 
Turkish citizens.  Several media play up the Turkish slang term 
"cuvalci" or "sackman;" mainstream Sabah headlines "Hood Incident 
General in Ankara" and mainstream Haberturk observes that "the 
general, who once placed bags on the heads of detained Turkish 
special forces, now denounces PKK activities."   According to 
Cumhuriyet, Odierno's Ankara talks will focus on developments 
related to the closure of Makhmur refugee camp in Northern Iraq. 
Aksam adds that the liquidation of PKK also will be taken up in 
discussions.  Hurriyet Daily News notes that Gen. Odierno said in 
his written statement that "in 2008 the three countries, Turkey, US, 
and Iraq, set up a three-way committee to enact measures against the 
PKK, listed as a terrorist group by Turkey, the United States and 
much of the international community.  Within this trilateral 
framework, the United States is working with the government of 
Turkey and the government of Iraq ... to ensure cross-border 
security and an end to PKK terrorism." 
 
US Defense Secretary Comes to Turkey 
Cumhuriyet reports that US Defense Secretary Robert Gates  arrives 
in Turkey this week to join informal NATO meetings in Istanbul 
before heading to Ankara for bilateral talks on regional and global 
issues including Afghanistan, the exit of US troops from Iraq and 
Iran's nuclear program.  Aksam says that in Ankara Gates is expected 
to hold meetings with Defense Minister Vecdi Gn|l and Foreign 
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and will discuss  the liquidation of PKK 
and the evacuation of refugees from Makhmur camp in Northern Iraq. 
 
US to Turkey-Armenia: Ratify the Protocols (NTVMSNBC online) 
Several papers and dailies' web pages report that Assistant 
Secretary Philip Gordon, who gathered with reporters at Foreign 
Press Center in Washington, called on Turkey and Armenia to ratify 
the "normalization protocols" and continue the process independent 
of other issues.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Gordon also 
said the missile defense system would be set up in the northern and 
southern parts of Europe in a way that will cover all NATO allies. 
Gordon added talks with different countries continued as to where 
the system will be deployed. 
 
In "US Fails to Hit Iranian Missile," mainstream Hurriyet says, it 
was the first time that the US had tested its air defense against a 
simulated attack from Iran and the attempt to shoot down a ballistic 
missile mimicking an attack from Iran failed because of radar 
problems.  The Missile Defense Agency said that a missile was fired 
from Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands and an anti-aircraft missile 
 
ANKARA 00000176  002 OF 004 
 
 
from Vandenberg Air Force base in California.  The missile 
represented "the type of technology Iran might have." 
 
Obama Passes Bush with Defense-Oriented Budget (Yeni Safak) 
Media outlets report President Obama has asked for a record defense 
spending budget for the 2011 fiscal year including USD 159 billion 
for the "missions in Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlined  "Obama Opens the Wallet" 
and "Plenty of Money for War." 
 
A First from Obama: Press Conference on YouTube (Hurriyet online) 
Mainstreams Hurriyet and Milliyet report Barack Obama became the 
first US President to hold a press conference on YouTube when he 
answered questions submitted via a YouTube moderator. 
 
American May Day Convict (NTVMSNBC online) 
Media outlets report one American and three Turkish citizens have 
been indicted on charges of property damage and resisting arrest for 
their actions during the May 1 demonstrations in Istanbul, with the 
prosecutors requesting up to 55 years of imprisonment for all.  An 
arrest warrant had been issued for the American national Christopher 
¶W. S., a student at the Middle East Technical University (METU) in 
Ankara, who is in the US, says NTVMSNBC online. 
 
In the Headlines 
 
First Consultation Following Protocol Crisis With Armenia 
(Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that Ankara is initiating a diplomatic 
attack after the Armenian Constitutional Court decision regarding 
the protocols signed between Turkey and Armenia.  Foreign Ministry 
Counselor Feridun Sinirlioglu will travel to Switzerland tomorrow to 
explain the contradictions between the protocols and the Armenian 
court decision to his Swiss counterpart.  He'll also stress that if 
Yerevan doesn't give guarantees that they will abide by the 
protocols, then it will become impossible for Turkey to pursue this 
process.  It was learned that Turkey is planning to meet with the 
Minsk Group as well, after the meetings with the officials in 
Switzerland. 
 
Israeli Press Claim Ambassador Celikkol is Leaving Israel 
(Hurriyet) 
Israeli daily Yedioth Ahronoth claimed that the Turkish Ambassador 
to Tel-Aviv wants to leave his post following the recent crisis 
between Turkey and Israel.  Gelikkol was the subject of much 
attention after being treated with deliberate disrespect by Israeli 
Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon.  Even though Ankara denies the 
allegations, the paper cited a telegram sent by the Israel Embassy 
in Ankara to the Israeli Foreign Ministry, as a source.  Moreover, a 
senior official at the foreign ministry confirmed Tuesday that 
Gelikkol put in a request with the Turkish Foreign Ministry to leave 
his current post. Jerusalem believes that the ambassador's reasons 
for leaving are personal.  The same paper also reported that sources 
at the Israeli foreign Ministry predicted that Gelikkol would assume 
a post as ambassador in one of the European countries. 
 
Public Servants, Workers to Go on General Strike 
Media outlets report that on Thursday around two million public 
servants and workers are expected to go on a nationwide strike in 
support of the "Tekel" workers on a hunger strike to protest the 
reluctance of the government to compromise.  Prime Minister Erdogan 
said the protests have turned into a campaign against the 
government.  Erdogan warned the workers to end their illegal 
protests by the end of the month, or the government would take legal 
action. 
 
Op-Eds on London Conference, Iranian FM in Turkey, UNSYG in Cyprus 
London Conference.  In pro-government/mainstream Sabah, Bulent Aras 
expresses contentment about the outcome of the London conference 
which he sees as a demonstration of Turkey's growing influence: 
"The London summit marked the end of a solely military approach, 
 
ANKARA 00000176  003 OF 004 
 
 
which was a dominating approach during Bush era.  The Obama 
administration's priority on Afghanistan problem includes 
flexibility and rationality.  Turkey showed a strong political 
determination and influence both on the eve of and during the 
conference.  There is a need for domestic reconciliation in 
Afghanistan and given its influence as well as its close dialogue 
with everybody, Turkey can achieve this goal." 
 
Iranian FM in Turkey.  Yilmaz Oztuna of conservative and 
pro-government Turkiye daily sees a timely reason for the Iranian 
FM's visit: "The Us continues to provide high-tech weapons  to the 
Gulf monarchies which Tehran considers a major potential threat 
against itself.  Muttaki most likely came to express these concerns. 
 Ankara continues to advocate solutions through diplomacy and 
peaceful methods.  If we gave this advice to Muttaki, we will 
certainly do the same to the US.  However Iran and the US do not 
seem to be giving up on 'accusing each other' diplomacy." 
 
UNSG in Cyprus.  Columnist Sami Kohen of mainstream Milliyet 
considers the visit of the UN Secretary General a positive step for 
a solution for Cyprus: "Ban Ki-Mon was careful and sensitive enough 
to treat both sides equally and understand both sides.  His positive 
attitude provided ground for a good potential to move forward toward 
a comprehensive solution in the island.  At least this is the case 
as far as Turkish Cypriots are concerned." 
 
Turkey Will Open Its Arms to 700 Haitian Children (Hurriyet, NTV) 
Mainstream Hurriyet and all-news broadcaster NTV report that with 
the intermediation of Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA), and the 
approval of the State Ministry for Women and Family, Turkey has 
decided to take care of 700 Haitian children orphaned in a recent 
devastating earthquake.  The children will be settled in "warm" 
cities such as Antalya and will be educated in English. 
 
Turkey Becomes Refuge for Fleeing Iranians (Hurriyet online) 
Mainstream Hurriyet's website reports Iranians fleeing the Tehran 
government's crackdown on its opponents are increasingly seeking 
refuge in Turkey, in an article citing the Sofia Echo Website. 
"Analysts say the growing number of Iranians seeking refuge in 
Turkey is an embarrassment to Turkish leaders who have been courting 
the Iranian leadership.  But, analysts point out there are other 
pressures, including the fact that Ankara wants closer ties and 
eventual membership in the European Union which will be watching 
Turkey's treatment of Iranians who flee repression at home," reports 
Hurriyet. 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
Turkish Parliament extended Tuesday a mandate for another year for 
the naval forces to take part in an international effort to 
fight-off piracy in the Gulf of Aden. 
 
A human rights delegation from the Council of Europe visited the PKK 
leader Abdullah Ocalan on Imrali prison island to examine the 
conditions of his detention. 
 
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, in Ankara on an official visit, met 
Tuesday President Gul. 
 
President Gul will host Wednesday a luncheon for university rectors 
and the members of the Higher Education Board (YOK). 
 
Sakir Ercan Gul is named the head of TMSF state banking fund after 
the end of the mandate of his predecessor Ahmet Erturk. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will receive Wednesday a delegation of the 
representatives of the Turkish minority in Western Thrace. 
 
According to a new government arrangement, shopping malls will be 
opened on Sunday, but will have to close two hours earlier. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000176  004 OF 004 
 
 
The Chinese Foreign Ministry has repeated its protest of US arms 
sales to Taiwan, saying it "seriously damages China's core 
interests, as well as China-US relations." 
 
President Obama will meet the Dalai Lama, despite warnings from 
China. 
 
Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi says Israel's future belongs in 
the European Union. 
 
JEFFREY