10ANKARA122
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7928
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0122/01 0261115
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261115Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1838
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0264
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6829
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4428
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7752
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7667
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4265
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000122 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, JANUARY 26, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - January 26, 2010 as 
prepared by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
Haiti: "Pain Not Easing At All" (Radikal) 
Media outlets express continuing concern about the humanitarian 
crisis in Haiti and highlight the international conference held in 
Montreal to discuss Haiti's economic reconstruction.  Mainstream 
Sabah's headline reads, "Death Toll in Haiti Exceeds Toll in 
Hiroshima," and says "the estimated death toll in Haiti of 450,000 
is worse than Hiroshima which was 200,000."  NTV alerts its audience 
that "as efforts to save more lives continue in Haiti, the country 
needs one million tents before the rainy season starts." Meanwhile 
mainstream Milliyet online writes, "Haiti Aid Conference Starts in 
Canada," noting "major donor nations, along with regional and 
multilateral organizations, opened a meeting in Montreal on 
rebuilding efforts for earthquake-ravaged Haiti."  Liberal Radikal 
in "Search Ends, Time to Rescue!" highlights that "the British aid 
and relief organization Oxfam said the attending countries at the 
Montreal conference agreed to cancel Haiti's $890 million 
international debt in the wake of the devastating earthquake." 
 
Columnist Sami Kohen writing in mainstream Milliyet observes a deep 
contrast between Haiti and its neighbor Dominican Republic.  He 
believes that "the Western world has a major role in this poverty" 
and suggests that the "social and economic poverty in Haiti is more 
obvious after the earthquake disaster.  When comparing it to 
neighboring Dominican Republic, it just breaks one's heart to see 
the deep contrast despite Haiti's economic resources."  Kohen 
concludes that "when French colonial rule ended in Haiti there were 
huge debts to pay which forced the country to become dependent on US 
banks.  Along with the US invasion between 1915-1934, Haiti always 
became a sufferer economically and socially. "  Finally, Kohen  says 
that the "debate in Western media, particularly French and American, 
is a considerable sign of efforts for cleaning up their conscience." 
 
 
Newspaper Bloggers: 
In its print and online version, Hurriyet carries a statement from 
Guido Bertolasa, Italian Prime Ministry Undersecretary for Civilian 
Defense who accused the US for "setting up a media show" by using 
its aid to Haiti.  Reacting to this story, several bloggers give 
their input: 
 
Cemil Algan: "There was a debate about US aid to Haiti in CNN but 
the nature of talks centered on how it will negatively affect 
American taxpayers.  The visuals carried more footage on American 
soldiers than shots from devastating earthquake." 
 
Tulay Bilgin: "It comes as no surprise because wherever the US 
enters to a country under pretexts, like 'to bring freedom' there 
comes bloodshed.  The US is more concerned about using a country's 
natural resources than helping out suffering people." 
 
Selim Saglam: "This is a stupid statement.  The US started the aid 
with 2 billion dollars and sent thousands of people out there.  At 
the same time China was sending only 5 million dollars.  Although 
some call big devil, in reality, it was the devil(!) which sent its 
aircraft carriers to help people.  Have Italians, Iranians and 
Europeans done anything?  None." 
 
In the Headlines 
 
First Science Envoy of the US: "Invest in the Youth" 
Leyla Tavsanoglu of leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet did an interview 
with Ahmad Zewail, White House Science Envoy reported in today's 
paper.  The interview carries excerpts from Zewail's biography and 
highlights his Nobel-winning study on molecular chemistry.  The 
following points are emphasized in the interview:  "Dr. Zewail talks 
 
ANKARA 00000122  002 OF 003 
 
 
about President Obama's interest in strong cooperation on science 
and technology with other countries. The better the cooperation in 
this field is, the more development will be achieved.  Advising 
Turkey to invest in its youth, Dr. Zewail points to vision and 
determination as key to success.  He also believes that science can 
be a good tool to solve problems." 
 
Basbug: In Democracies, Power Changes Hands through Elections 
Media outlets report the Chief of Turkish General Staff (TGS), 
General Ilker Basbug, addressing a seminar on Monday, responded to 
allegations about a military takeover plan dubbed "Balyoz" 
(Sledgehammer) which allegedly included a bomb attack against a 
mosque in Istanbul.  "How can the military think of throwing a bomb 
at the house of God?  This is remorseless," said Basbug.  Daily 
Taraf recently reported plans, such as military plans to bomb 
mosques, to provoke an uprising which would create a suitable 
environment for the army to take over the country's administration. 
Basbug noted the military felt uneasy about the allegations, and 
stressed the military's commitment to democracy and the rule of law, 
adding that "in democracies, power changes hands through elections." 
 The top general acknowledged that Turkey had experienced some 
military interventions since the 1960s, and said: "Those days are 
left behind.  We think that everyone has taken his own lessons from 
this process."  Basbug also said on the issue of the "leakage" of 
some top-secret documents from the military, that nine officers had 
been taken to military court, one officer was found guilty and 
sentenced to three years, and ten officers of different ranks were 
arrested. 
 
An Olive-Branch for the Taliban (Milliyet) 
All papers today give extensive coverage to the fourth trilateral 
summit held between the presidents of Turkey, Afghanistan and 
Pakistan, in Istanbul.  Mainstream Hurriyet says, at the press 
conference following the trilateral summit, Afghan President Karzai 
said "those Taliban members who are not part of Al-Qaeda or other 
terrorist groups are welcome to come back to their country after 
laying down weapons, and enjoy privileges, rights and guarantees 
given by the Afghan constitution."  Mainstream Milliyet covers the 
same news under the headline "An Olive-Branch for Taliban"  and says 
that security and education issues were on the top of the trilateral 
summit's agenda.  Milliyet and Islamist-oriented Zaman report that, 
at the joint press conference, President Gul said "It is not 
possible to overcome the problems facing Afghanistan through 
military instruments only.  We believe efforts are needed to win the 
hearts and minds of the Afghan people."  Zaman reports that, when 
asked whether Turkey could hold talks with the Taliban, President 
Gul said "isolating the supporters of terror and dividing them into 
small groups is important to combat terror.  We are ready to make 
any contributions if it is possible for Turkey to help within the 
framework of this perspective." 
 
In a related story, mainstream Sabah cites the British The Times 
interview with General Petraeus at the Tampa Headquarters, and says 
that General Petraeus confessed that ending the insurgency in 
Afghanistan will be more difficult and will take longer time than 
Iraq. "It is necessary to be open for dialog with Taliban and 
Pakistani officials," Petraeus added according to the Times. 
Meanwhile, NATO forces Commander in Afghanistan, General Mc Chrystal 
told the Financial Times that "there had been enough fighting.  As 
happens in every war, a political solution is unavoidable in the war 
in Afghanistan as well." 
 
Ambassador Reddaway: Turkey Plays a Leading Role in Afghanistan 
(Hurriyet) 
In an op-ed written for Hurriyet daily on the occasion of the 
Afghanistan conference held in Istanbul, British Ambassador David 
Reddaway, a former special envoy to Afghanistan, stressed that 
Turkey played a "critical and leading role" in Afghanistan.  "The 
people of Afghanistan need our help; they deserve our help," said 
Reddaway, and added Turkey, having deep and long-standing ties with 
Afghanistan, could do a lot in this regard.  He stressed that the 
 
ANKARA 00000122  003 OF 003 
 
 
"Afghanistan conferences" to be held this month in Istanbul and 
London would give the Afghan people a strong message of 
international determination on supporting their future.  Reddaway 
underscored that terror, which has grown out of the instability 
prevailing along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, has harmed other 
countries including Britain.  "We are determined to continue our 
presence in Afghanistan until Afghanistan is safe and Afghan forces 
are ready to fully take over security.  We hope that day will come 
soon," emphasized Reddaway. 
 
Diyanet to be Given 'Undersecretariat' Status 
Papers report the status of the Religious Affairs Directorate 
(Diyanet) will be elevated to that of an "Undersecretariat" 
comprising of six general directorates.  A desk for Alevis will also 
be set up under the Undersecretariat, and Diyanet will launch a 
radio and a television station.  The Diyanet chief will serve in 
office for five years, for maximum two terms, according to reports. 
 
 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
On Tuesday, Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi will pay an 
official visit to Turkey as the guest of Foreign Minister Davutoglu. 
 
 
Jurgen Klute, a member of the European Parliament, expressed support 
for the workers of Turkey's former state-run tobacco and alcoholic 
beverages company Tekel in their strike in Ankara. 
 
The scaffold constructed as part of various renovation projects at 
Istanbul's Hagia Sophia over the past 17 years has now been removed. 
 
 
Turkish Statistics Institute say Turkey's population has increased 
to 72.5 million at the end of 2009. 
 
Credit card spending in Turkey for 2009 totals 205 billion lira. 
 
An Ethiopian Airlines plane with 90 people on board has crashed into 
the Mediterranean Sea shortly after taking off from Beirut. 
 
Ali Hassan al-Majid, "Chemical Ali," has been executed by hanging on 
Monday.  Majid was sentenced to death for ordering the gassing of 
Kurds in the northeastern town of Halabja, killing an estimated 
5,000 people. 
 
Four car bombs targeting hotels killed 36 people in Baghdad. 
 
The Guardian reports Turkish Cypriots say Cyprus could split like 
Czechoslovakia. 
 
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu said several Jewish settlement 
blocs in the West Bank would always remain part of Israel. 
 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has rejected as "irresponsible" 
allegations that swine flu is a fake pandemic. 
 
 
JEFFREY