10ANKARA135
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9416
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0135/01 0271427
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271427Z JAN 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1861
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0268
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6843
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4431
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7755
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7670
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4268
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 000135 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 27, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - January 27, 2010 as 
prepared by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Taliban Opening From Karzai (Yeni Safak) 
On the eve of the London conference, Turkish media focus in on 
remarks of President Gul and Afghan President Karzai at a joint 
press conference held 1/26 after the Istanbul Summit for 
Afghanistan's Neighbors.   Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines 
"Taliban Opening from Karzai," and, like all Turkish media, gives 
prominent play to President Karzai's remarks on reintegration: 
"Taliban who are not part of terrorist networks or Al-Qaeda are the 
sons of the Afghan soil and they all should be reintegrated."   In 
"The Economy is the Priority," intellectual Islamist Zaman noted 
Turkey's $200 million pledge for reconstruction in Afghanistan and 
highlights President Gul's remarks saying that "It is necessary to 
give Afghanistan economic support and strong support for their 
development approach."  President Gul reiterated his comments on 
Afghanistan issue by saying "It is not possible to resolve the 
issues by only military means.  It is necessary to gain the hearts 
of  Afghan people."  Mainstream Hurriyet headlines "Combat Troop 
Message from Gul to Obama" and quotes the Turkish president as: 
"Military measures are not sufficient to establish peace and 
stability in Afghanistan.  President Karzai doesn't want the 
children of the other countries to die for Afghanistan."  Media also 
play up Karzai's remarks, in response to a reporter's question, 
regarding US Ambassador to Afghanistan's comment that the Karzai 
Administration is an "insufficient strategic partner."  In "Karzai 
Upset with Washington," mainstream Milliyet says Karzai responded by 
saying "if the partnership defined here is as bowing to US will, 
then, he is right, we will never be a sufficient partner for the US. 
 The US is the richest country; we are the poorest country.  A 
strategic partnership, however, is a cooperation mechanism between 
two sovereign countries."  A statement released after the meeting by 
the participants emphasized: "We support the Afghan national process 
of reconciliation and reintegration in accordance with the 
Constitution of Afghanistan in a way that is Afghan-led and 
-driven."   Turkish media report that the regional summit was 
attended by Afghan President Karzai, his counterparts from Pakistan 
and Turkey and senior officials from Iran, China, Tajikistan, 
Russia, Krygystan, the UAE and the UK. 
 
In "Taliban Opening" Milliyet columnist Sami Kohen observes a 
general consensus over "finding a political solution to the 
Afghanistan problem."  He notes that Turkey thinks the same, and he 
concludes: "Karzai's plan requires both internal efforts and strong 
international contribution to end the war in Afghanistan through 
social and political measures.  If this strategy becomes successful, 
it will also set a model in finding methods to terminate terrorism 
problem." 
 
Asli Aydintasbas of Milliyet carried excerpts from her interview 
with British Foreign Secretary David Miliband who is in Istanbul for 
the Afghan conference.  Commenting on current political debates in 
Turkey about alleged coup plans, Miliband praised Turkey's strong 
commitment to democracy.  Regarding Afghanistan, Miliband emphasized 
the importance of efforts to find a political solution "by gaining 
rebels and put them back into the societal life."  According to 
Milliyet, Miliband said the following: "On this issue, the purpose 
is not to establish another Taliban government.  The purpose is to 
regain the rebels in a comprehensive integration process based on 
the Afghan constitution.  We want to see a strong Afghanistan, 
strong enough to be able to defend itself.  Rebels should be able to 
express their problems through political system and there has to a 
separation between them and supporters of Al Qaeda." 
 
Reacting to a report about "Karzai being upset with Washington," a 
blogger commented in mainstream Milliyet's website: "What kind of 
 
ANKARA 00000135  002 OF 005 
 
 
leadership is this?  A genuine leader will never allow a foreign 
troop in his country and will not facilitate the killing of people 
in the first place.  Can Berk." 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
Praise for US in Haiti:  In "Another Miracle in Haiti," NTV praises 
US soldiers rescuing a man who had been buried in rubble for two 
weeks.  Mainstream Hurriyet calls it "14th Day, A Miracle Again," 
and highlights "Rico Dibrivell, 35, had been trapped since the Jan. 
12 earthquake, he was pulled from the rubble by the US soldiers." 
Meanwhile mainstream Sabah in "UN, EU Calls for Caution," expresses 
UN and EU concern over "the safety of thousands of orphans after 
Western nations began speeding up adoption procedures in the wake of 
the Haiti earthquake. " Sabah emphasizes "Haitian orphans are at 
risk of child traffickers. During chaotic times with many 
international groups, planes, supplies moving in and out of the 
airport and borders, there is a greater opportunity for human 
trafficking."  Mainstream Milliyet headlines "They Kidnap Haitian 
Orphans and Make Them Slaves," and believes that "Haitian orphans 
are being trafficked out of the country to be used as slaves, 
beggars and prostitutes."  Liberal Radikal gives the same message 
with the headline "Children's Lives Should Be Saved, Not Darkened." 
 
Ambassador Jeffrey: Turkey - the US Can Raise Trade Three-Fold 
Wire agencies and dailies' websites report that in Istanbul 
yesterday evening, Ambassador Jeffrey joined a dinner held on the 
occasion of the sixth anniversary of the establishment of the 
American Business Forum in Turkey (ABFT).  Ambassador Jeffrey said 
Turkey was a "great market for the US," and noted the two countries 
had around USD 15 billion of trade volume.  "This figure could be 
raised by three-fold in a few years," the Ambassador reportedly 
said. 
 
Crowley: Armenian Court Decision a Forward Step 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports State Department Spokesman Philip 
Crowley issued a statement which said the Armenian Constitutional 
Court decision was a "forward step" in the process for the 
ratification of the normalization protocols signed between Turkey 
and Armenia.  The English-language daily Today's Zaman comments, 
"Following the Armenian Constitutional Court's January 12 decision 
which found the protocols in conformity with the Armenian 
Constitution, the Turkish side has been uneasy over the court's 
detailed reasoning for the decision." 
 
The US Interpretation of Armenian Court Decision Surprises Ankara 
(Cumhuriyet) 
In a news commentary, leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports 
Assistant Secretary Philip Gordon's remarks earlier this week, which 
interpreted the Armenian Constitutional Court decision on 
"normalization protocols" with Turkey as a "positive step" in the 
ratification process, made Ankara adopt a "wait-and-see" policy on 
the matter.  In "The US Interpretation of Armenian Court Decision 
Surprises Ankara," Cumhuriyet says FM Davutoglu would meet Secretary 
Clinton at the Afghanistan conference in London today and ask the US 
to intervene on the Armenian decision.  Ankara is also in contact 
with Switzerland over the issue according to Cumhuriyet.  Mainstream 
Haberturk says Ankara is now waiting to see to what extent the 
Armenian court decision would "bind" the protocols and whether this 
decision would be "annexed" to the protocols during the voting in 
the Armenian Parliament.  Haberturk also says Ankara is preparing a 
letter to send to the related countries which would stress that the 
Armenian court's decision risks the protocols not being enacted. 
 
"Old Armenian Map" Crisis at Washington Seminar 
Papers report a "historical" map of Armenia drew the reaction of 
Turks during a seminar held by George Washington University Law 
School, on "Turkey-Armenia: Protocols, Realities and Myths."  An 
official from Turkey's Washington Embassy objected to an "old" map 
of Armenia used in the power point representation, which reportedly 
showed parts of Turkish land as Armenian land.  Conference 
 
ANKARA 00000135  003 OF 005 
 
 
organizers apologized, saying they found the map on Google, says 
Cumhuriyet. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia-the US 
Soli Ozel in mainstream HaberTurk reported comments from a high 
level Turkish Foreign Ministry official who expressed concern over 
the Armenian court's ruling and underlined Ankara's expectation to 
see a clarification from Washington:  "Despite Washington's 
statement on the court ruling, the MFA official still believes that 
Armenia is trying to put its internal legal interpretation above an 
international agreement.  Turkey at this point waits for a written 
statement both from the US and from Switzerland which has to 
guarantee that protocol provisions will not be affected by the 
Armenian Court's ruling."  On the other hand, the columnist thinks 
that Turkey can be left alone regarding its created linkage between 
the protocols and the Karabakh solution process. 
 
Obama Will Meet 150 Muslim Entrepreneurs, Five From Turkey 
(Hurriyet) 
Hurriyet reports that a global initiative launched by President 
Obama in Cairo on June 2009, will get underway in Washington on 
April 26-27.  The paper reports that five Turkish entrepreneurs 
reflecting diverse businesses from food delivery to high tech have 
been selected to participate in the US Presidential Summit on 
Entrepreneurship. 
 
Other Stories: 
 
Appathurai: No NATO member Can Play Turkey's Role in Afghanistan 
(Cumhuriyet) 
NATO spokesman James Appathurai has announced that the main topics 
of discussion at an upcoming informal gathering of defense ministers 
will be solution proposals for the situation in Afghanistan and an 
increase in NATO financial resources.  Speaking at a press 
conference on Monday, he said the meeting will take place on Feb. 
4-5 in Istanbul. He also stressed the significant role Turkey is 
playing in Afghanistan in both the political and military fields. 
"No NATO member can play the role Turkey has in Afghanistan -- 
especially not its political role," he said. Discussing the purpose 
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) presence in 
Afghanistan, he said the ISAF's aim is not to find al-Qaeda leader 
Osama bin Laden but to ensure the security of NATO members by 
helping Afghans provide their own security. Unlike American forces 
in the country, NATO has never taken any direct steps to capture the 
leader of al-Qaeda because NATO's goal is to provide security and 
reconstruct Afghanistan to ensure the security of NATO members, he 
noted. 
 
FM Davutoglu: "Criticizing Israel is not Anti-Semitism" (Vatan, 
Sabah) 
Mainstream Vatan and Sabah report that responding to Israeli Foreign 
Ministry report accusing PM Erdogan of fueling anti-Semitism with 
his criticism of Israel, FM Davutoglu said "There was never ever 
anti-Semitism in Turkey's history, and will never be.  We can never 
tolerate any kind of anti-Semitism or racism.  Criticizing Israel is 
not anti-Semitism."  Meanwhile, a Foreign Ministry statement 
referred to the UN recognition of January 27 as the Commemoration of 
the Jewish Genocide Victims, and said " we remember our diplomats 
with respect and honor, who sacrificed their own security and lives 
in order to protect the Jews from the Nazis during the second world 
war." 
 
TRT to Launch Arabic Broadcasts in February 
Mainstream Aksam reports Turkey's state-run broadcaster TRT will 
launch in February TRT Seba (Sheba), a new television channel in 
Arabic.  Arab heads of state were invited to the opening.  TRT has 
transferred 20 Arabic-speaking personnel from Egypt, Palestine, 
Tunisia and Algeria for the satellite broadcasts to cover the Middle 
East and the Arabian Peninsula.  TRT Seba will reportedly be a 
"family channel" with music, news, movies, children's programs and 
documentaries. 
 
ANKARA 00000135  004 OF 005 
 
 
 
Newspaper Bloggers on Turkey-Israel Ties 
 
Guest - hornblower (2010-01-26 20:47:09) : 
I have many Jewish friends having grown up in New Jersey. 
Nonetheless I find Israel's actions at times alarming. I have many 
Iranians friends having visited Iran twice. Nonetheless I find the 
actions of Iran at times alarming. The point is clear, we need to 
remind ourselves and the people around us that our reactions and 
feeling to the actions of a state are not to be transferred to 
individuals. I don't see Erdogan hating Jews but rather questioning 
the actions of a Jewish state. Maybe I'm wrong. Love your neighbor 
as yourself. Love your enemies and bless those who persecute you. 
 
Guest - wolf (2010-01-26 17:57:55) : 
I do not see it as a problem that Erdogan is critizising Israel for 
the Gaza issue. Any country should condemn violence. But the problem 
occurs that Erdogan is very inconsistently ONLY CONDEMNS ISRAEL. If 
Erdogan wants to condemns violence, how can he then at the same time 
invite genociders? And how can he be best buddy with Iran, a 
notorious human rights and democracy violator? Or Syria? And how 
about Hamaz (labeled a terror organization)? Or the Talibans or Al 
Quaida, why are they not condemned? Why is he not condemning those 
cases which are far worse? That is the problem and to which we can 
see no justifiable answer. 
 
Guest - Rich (2010-01-26 15:23:19) : 
It doesn't take an Israeli Government report to tell us what we all 
believe. Whether or not PM Erdogan is a anti-Semite or not- he has 
created the environment which has unleashed anti-Semitism in Turkey. 
If all someone can talk about is Israeli actions in Gaza- in the 
face of a world full of violence- one has to question the motive of 
the speaker. It is not a conclusion Jews or Israelis or Westerners 
are happy to reach. It is however obvious. We are all convinced ties 
will not improve while PM Erdogan is in power and so we must 
patiently wait for Turkish democracy to create a better environment. 
One should also consider Erdogan's fan club- so many who come from 
the Jew hating world- Iran, Hamas, Hezbollah, Al Qaida, Sudan, etc. 
 
 
Guest - Murat (2010-01-26 15:02:49) : 
Since PM has been careful to focus his comments solely on Israel's 
policy in Gaza, then it is fair to say that Israel's own policies in 
the region are fueling anti-semitisim. Now that is a credible claim. 
Erdogan's statements are in effect no different than what UN or EU 
have said on the same topic. Problem is not Erdogan or AKP but it is 
Gaza. 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
Ambassador Huseyin Dirioz, currently a presidential foreign policy 
adviser, is likely to be given the post of NATO Deputy Secretary 
General. 
 
Kurdish BDP group chief Nuri Akman accused the government of seeking 
revenge by arresting the mayors of cities where the AK Party 
suffered defeat in the municipality elections. 
 
On January 28, Prime Minister Erdogan will hold a meeting with the 
"Tekel" workers on strike. 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal likens the allegations for 
military coup to a "soap opera." 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan said Greek PM Papandreou's response to his 
letter "inspired hopes" for the settlement of problems in the 
Aegean. 
 
A delegation from the European Committee for the Prevention of 
Torture has paid a visit to Imrali Island to examine the prison 
conditions of the PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
ANKARA 00000135  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
The residents of Aleppo celebrate the execution of Ali Hassan 
al-Majid, known as Chemical Ali, who was sentenced to death for 
ordering the gassing of 5,000 Kurds in 1988. 
 
French lawmakers recommend a partial ban on any veils including the 
burqa that cover the face. 
 
Israeli Information and Diaspora Minister Yuli Edelstein said Israel 
told the UN chief it will not conduct an independent probe of the 
Gaza war as demanded by a UN report. 
 
German magazine Der Spiegel says Iran is serious about developing a 
nuclear bomb and has the ability to produce a primitive version of 
the bomb this year. 
 
JEFFREY