10BERLIN97
MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ, HAITI, MIDEAST, U.S,
Mon Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO7064
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0097/01 0251502
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251502Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6355
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1947
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0669
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1188
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2689
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1708
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0871
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUZEADH/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 BERLIN 000097 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR AF IQ HA XF US ECON
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ, HAITI, MIDEAST, U.S, 
ECONOMIC;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Run-Up to London Conference 
¶3.   (Iraq)   Biden Visit 
¶4.   (Haiti)   Reconstruction Efforts 
¶5.   (Mideast)   Peace Process, U.S. Role 
¶6.   (U.S.)   Obama Administration 
¶7.   (Economic)   Banking Regulation 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
The majority of newspapers dealt with Left Party leader Oskar 
Lafontaine's decision to step down from the party leadership. 
Frankfurter Allgemeine carried an interview wit Defense Minister zu 
 
Guttenberg, while Sueddeutsche Zeitung reported that Germans have to 
 
expect an increase in contributions to the statutory health care 
system.  Editorials focused on Oskar Lafontaine's stepping down from 
 
the Left Party's leadership and Foreign Minister Westerwelle's 
proposal to help Taliban supporters cut their links to the group. 
Other editorials dealt with proposals to reform the banking system. 
 
ZDF-TV's early evening newscast heute opened with a report from 
Haiti 
and ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened with a story 
on 
Oskar Lafontaine. 
 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Run-Up to London Conference 
 
All papers reported that the German government will change its 
strategy when it comes to the training of Afghan security and police 
 
forces and offer this training not only in camps and bases but will 
 
also go to the countryside and train Afghans security forces in the 
 
field.  In addition, the government is obviously thinking of 
increasing the Bundeswehr forces by 500 soldiers, even though this 
figure has not yet been confirmed.  In addition, Foreign Minister 
Westerwelle has suggested an exit program for Taliban supporters. 
 
Weekly Der Spiegel's cover story (three pages) also deals with the 
events in Afghanistan and it reported that "The Americans have 
approved on a new strategy against the Taliban shortly before the 
beginning of the London conference.  The German government can only 
 
follow or continue to make a fool of itself.  But if it backs the 
[U.S.] strategy, the number of German victims is likely to follow." 
 
In its report, Der Spiegel noted that "the London Afghanistan 
conference was considered a focal point of Germany's policy towards 
 
Afghanistan, but now the German government is faced with a similar 
rank such as at the climate summit in Copenhagen.  It is allowed to 
 
present its views here and there but it will hardly have any 
influence 
on the great questions.  The term 'middle power' on which German 
politicians got high on for a while only sounds absurd.  Such as 
China 
determined the climate summit, the United States dominates the 
policy 
on Afghanistan.  The weeks before the conference turned into an 
embarrassment for the Germans, not only because of the arrogance of 
a 
 
BERLIN 00000097  002 OF 007 
 
 
Richard Holbrooke.  The Americans decided to send 2,500 soldiers to 
 
Northern Afghanistan.  This is a clear vote of no-confidence against 
 
the Germans who are responsible for the North." 
 
Tagesspiegel carried a front-page report under the headline: 
"Bundeswehr to leave its Camps more often - new Strategy for the 
Afghanistan Mission."  Die Welt carried a front-page report under 
the 
headline: "Westerwelle Wants to Pacify Taliban with Money," while 
Financial Times Deutschland headlined: "Additional Trainers for 
Police 
and Armed forces - Today Decision on New Strategy - Opting-out Fund 
 
for Taliban," and reported that "The German government wants to 
extend 
its engagement in Afghanistan primarily for the civilian 
reconstruction and when it comes to the training of security forces. 
 
Today, the four Ministries involved in the talks will meet with 
Chancellor Merkel to coordinate the final details."  In another 
report, FT Deutschland headlined: "The West Wants to Defeat Taliban 
 
with Money," and wrote: "The international community has a new peace 
 
plan for Afghanistan.  After years of futile attempts to defeat the 
 
Taliban militarily, the Afghanistan conference in London this 
Thursday 
is to approve a fund that is to help reintegrate the insurgents. 
This 
fund in which the U.S. the UK, Germany and other states are involved 
 
is to be a first step for a long-term peace process."  Sueddeutsche 
 
Zeitung headlined: "Taliban Who Want to Take Part in Exit Program 
Urgently Wanted," while Berliner Zeitung reported that "[Defense 
Minister] zu Guttenberg Offers more Soldiers for Afghanistan." 
 
Deutschlandfunk commented: "Foreign Minister Westerwelle announced 
intensified German efforts for the civilian reconstruction of the 
country and an exit program for the Taliban, which, according to 
Westerwelle, have joined the group not out of a fanatic conviction 
but 
out of economic reasons.  With this proposal the German government 
is 
backing the views of mockers saying that it would be better to pay 
all 
Afghans a monthly salary, which would be cheaper and result in fewer 
 
casualties than sticking to an expensive international military 
mission that causes many losses.  This war cannot be won militarily. 
 
ISAF and NATO cannot avoid learning the same lesson in Afghanistan 
which forced the Soviets and the British to withdraw their forces 
after heavy losses and without anything profoundly changing in the 
country.  To have the political power in Afghanistan as a whole has 
 
always meant to be dependent on the support of the powerful tribal 
leaders or war lords whose loyalty can be bought.  In so far, 
Westerwelle's exit program is not unrealistic...but with respect to 
 
Germany, only one concept could be implemented in a realistic way: 
 
the one on the withdrawal of the Bundeswehr." 
 
In an editorial Frankfurter Allgemeine judged:   "If the Bundeswehr 
 
BERLIN 00000097  003 OF 007 
 
 
is 
taking its mission seriously and creates security in its operational 
 
area, wants to make possible reconstruction and development, and if 
it 
also wants to protect the Afghan population form Taliban 
attacks...then, 
according to military experts, the current forces are not enough. 
More trainers are also necessary for the training of the Afghan 
armed 
forces.  Those who are speaking of 'a perspective for a withdrawal,' 
 
but ignore the decisions that must be made now, are fooling 
themselves 
and the public." 
 
Leipziger Volkszeitung deals with the exit program for Taliban 
supporters that Foreign Minister Westerwelle has suggested and 
opined: 
"It is Westerwelle's secret of how such a program should work in a 
mountain village in the Hindu Kush.  The Bundeswehr had to hear from 
 
its U.S. ally that it has not shown presence 'in the field.'  Now 
the 
federal government has no scruples using its checkbook and 
categorizing who is to be considered a radical and a moderate among 
 
the Taliban. This is not only a sign of hubris but is also a play 
with 
fire." 
 
Regional daily MQrkische Oderzeitung of Frankfurt on the Oder 
judged: 
"Foreign Minister Westerwelle considered it a good idea to offer 
money 
to Afghans who fight with the Taliban.  In return, they should no 
longer use violence.  This is an expensive idea and only reveals the 
 
West's helplessness concerning the situation in Afghanistan. 
Indeed, 
a small part of the Taliban supports [the terrorist group] out of 
misery.  But this does not mean that they would leave the 
organization 
for money.  On the one hand, they are ideologically trained to hate 
 
the state that is supported by the West, and, on the other hand, as 
 
'traitor' of Islam they are threatened with death or they could be 
ostracized.  And with them, a large scale family would also be 
threatened and such a structure is the rule in Afghanistan." 
 
¶3.   (Iraq)   Biden Visit 
 
Several papers carried factual news reports on Vice President 
Biden's 
visit to Baghdad.  Frankfurter Allgemeine headlined: "Biden Failed 
in 
Baghdad," and reported: "Prime Minister Maliki keeps insisting on 
the 
exclusion of many Sunnis from the elections.  When looking of the 
list 
of candidates, who were excluded from the elections, then this were 
 
overwhelmingly only Sunnis.  While President Talabani criticized the 
 
measure against alleged collaborators, Prime Minister Maliki even 
defended his views in talks with Biden.  A spokesman for Maliki said 
 
 
BERLIN 00000097  004 OF 007 
 
 
that Biden had not come to Baghdad 'to interfere in domestic affairs 
 
but to discuss the strategic relations between the United States and 
 
Iraq.'  Following his talks in Baghdad, Biden expressed his optimism 
 
that the Iraqi leadership would continue to 'work for a 
comprehensive 
and fair solution.'"  Tagesspiegel reported under the headline: 
"Candidates Remain Excluded," and said: "Vice President Biden's 
visit 
to Baghdad fell on deaf ears.  He was unable to assert his criticism 
 
of the exclusion of more than 500 politicians in the elections." 
 
Under the headline: "Cold Shoulder," Frankfurter Allgemeine 
editorialized: "U.S. Vice President Joe Biden has now tried in vain 
to 
prompt the electoral commission in Baghdad to review the exclusion 
of 
secular candidates who have thus far proven to be loyal and capable. 
 
Washington is afraid that the election could not be considered 
legitimate.  The Sunnis in particuar are faced with serious 
disadvantages.  America that toppled Saddam Hussein has withdrawn 
its 
forces and deployed them in camps and bases and is now internally 
preparing for a troop withdrawal.  But this will automatically also 
 
diminish its political influence on Baghdad." 
 
¶4.   (Haiti)   Reconstruction Efforts 
 
In a front-page editorial, Frankfurter Allgemeine remarked: "Given 
that the Pentagon is deploying an increasing number of soldiers in 
the 
region devastated by the quake, some people get a funny feeling. 
Although more aid would have been stuck in the air over 
Port-au-Prince 
without the effective American leadership, many in the region would 
 
like to hear more about Obama's plans: for how long will the 
Americans 
stay?  This question is justified, however not because the bigmouths 
 
of Caracas and Managua are right....  Haiti now needs two who have 
been 
mistrusting each other for a long time.  It is true what Kofi Annan 
 
said in his last speech as UN secretary general: history shows that 
 
the UN system works badly when the U.S. stands aside.  However, it 
can 
work very well when America has a farsighted leadership." 
 
Sddeutsche editorialized: "Aid, particularly food, often proves to 
be 
a sweet poison that carries the germ for the next greater 
catastrophe. 
There are two kinds of assistance: the good and sustainable one is 
focusing on stimulating the people to help themselves.  It sets the 
 
foundation for the people to get on their feet as soon as possible 
and 
to get their lives under control again.  The bad one creates 
dependencies and leads to a mentality of petitioners who do not 
trust 
themselves anymore but give in to their situations.  Let's hope 
 
BERLIN 00000097  005 OF 007 
 
 
Haitians will find self-respect.  One way to achieve this would be 
to 
establish a functioning agriculture that grows enough rice to feed 
the 
whole country.   The land and the farmers are there, but because 
Haiti 
is only the hinterland of a large power, it had to open up its 
markets 
in the times of globalization for cheaper American rice.  This soon 
 
brought an end to Haitian rice production....  The domestic 
production 
in ruins, hunger imported: this was a very bad path.  It would help 
 
the country and the dignity of its people to correct this now.  The 
 
opportunity is there: never before has this forgotten part of the 
island received so much sympathy and-which is at least as 
important- 
many countries around the world are unexpectedly providing large 
sums 
of money.  With it, Haiti could be turned into a self-sufficient 
country....  Given its current situation, Haiti will accept the 
assistance it gets.  It looks as if it does not get what it needs: 
the 
aid to help itself.  The WFP will continue to distribute the 
surpluses 
of the rich countries." 
 
¶5.   (Mideast)   Peace Process, U.S. Role 
 
Under the headline "Zigzag course," Sddeutsche editorialized that 
"Obama has gambled away rapprochement between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians by his shocking naivety....  A withdrawal would 
certainly 
by tempting for Washington.  The rivals are stubborn, the situation 
is 
deadlocked and Barack Obama has just admitted in an interview that 
his 
ambitious Mideast plans have failed.  The President said he has 
underestimated a few problems and had therefore too many 
expectations. 
This analysis is right.  However, apart from this remarkable 
honesty, 
Obama also reveals shocking naivety.  This naivety is to blame for a 
 
part of today's problems.  The Nobel Peace Price laureate did not 
just 
promise more than he could keep, his zigzag policy also pushed the 
rivals into positions that made negotiations more difficult...  It 
does 
not make sense to send Mitchell again and again as a petitioner with 
 
the increasingly bizarre task of negotiating whether negotiations 
could be possible." 
 
¶6.   (U.S.)   Obama Administration 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine commented: "Either President Obama has lost 
his 
composure, or, what is more likely, his angry complaints about 
judges 
suggested the style that should lead him out of his defensive.... 
Two 
days earlier, he already attacked the country's large banks and said 
 
he would keep a tighter rein on them.  There is no question about 
this: After the electoral defeat in Massachusetts, the President has 
 
BERLIN 00000097  006 OF 007 
 
 
 
chosen a more aggressive line."  In a separate report, Frankfurter 
Allgemeine headlined "Back in the election campaign," and added that 
 
"Obama is taking flight in left-wing rhetoric." 
 
Die Welt highlighted: "U.S. President pretends to be close to the 
people again and is more aggressive: open battle with the U.S. 
supreme 
court-major speech awaited on Wednesday....  With populist furor, 
President Obama tries to respond to the crisis of his presidency and 
 
that of the Democratic Party." 
 
In an editorial under the headline "A week of Defeats for Barack 
Obama 
- the President under Pressure," Die Welt (1/23) noted: "The 
President 
is fighting again.  Not for his agenda, but his office.  At the 
beginning of his second year in office, Barack Obama stands with his 
 
back to the wall.  Liberal Massachusetts dealt him a personal 
defeat... 
He is now obviously trying to appeal to Main Street again and to 
tackle to continuing job crisis.  And he hits Wall Street with 
populism.  It remains to be seen whether this dual strategy will 
work. 
However, he does not have many alternatives." 
 
¶7.   (Economic)   Banking Regulation 
 
Handelsblatt judged in an editorial: "President Obama's proposals on 
 
the disintegration of big banks nave not only shook up the 
international banking landscape like an earthquake.  With his 
politically motivated move, Obama also has shaken up the previous 
plan 
of an internationally coordinated financial reform.  Those who 
insist 
that the big banks must pay for their mistakes in the market 
economy, 
must develop rules that will not result in a danger for the 
financial 
system once they go bankrupt.  Higher capital requirements can slow 
 
down growth, but not remove risks stemming from large banks. 
Despite 
all the criticism of the U.S. proposals, Obama has put the finger in 
 
the right wound.  Europe should follow him." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (1/23) argued: "Basically we must thank the 
bankers in the U.S. and Europe that they are acting the same way 
they 
did before the financial crisis.  President Obama now wants to 
prevent 
the banks from making high risk investments, restrict trade among 
themselves and, if necessary, force them to disintegrate.  It does 
not 
matter whether Obama is serious or whether he only wants to score 
points after the most recent domestic hit below the belt.  It is 
important that he acts at all because, without the United States, a 
 
global financial reform will be impossible....  But the decisive 
question has not yet been resolved: How can a bank be prevented from 
 
becoming so powerful that it can force the state to bail it out in 
case of a worst case scenario?  We also owe it to Chancellor Merkel 
 
BERLIN 00000097  007 OF 007 
 
 
 
that this question is still on the agenda....  At the global level 
Chancellor Merkel should back Obama's proposal to limit risky 
businesses of banks.  But everyone should quickly bid farewell to 
the 
proposal that governments could stay out of crisis management.  The 
 
state will always be the last resort because it is the state which 
has 
the means and the authority to prevent a conflagration.  This, too, 
is 
a lesson from the crisis." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (1/23) editorialized:  "President Obama now 
seems to take on the banks.  The loss of his popularity, the loss of 
a 
Senate seat, and the anger of the people at the fat cats at Wall 
Street are the reasons for this change of course.  But will Obama 
assert his views?  Wall Street has a powerful lobby with good 
connections to the Republicans, who, as defenders of the banks, 
hardly 
have a chance to score points among the voters.  A debate over the 
size of banks...is more appropriate than the populist call for 
punitive 
taxes or a limit on bonus payments.  A splitting up of banks cannot 
 
prevent the next crisis but could contribute to preventing states 
from 
being liable for deposits to prevent a run on banks." 
 
Under the headline "Obama's Herculean task," FT Deutschland noted: 
"President Obama must still demonstrate that he is serious about his 
 
plans to tighten the regulation of banks.  However, the Europeans 
should follow his example....  Although many details are not yet 
clear, 
the direction is right.  For his fight, the President should be 
quickly supported by all those who have to take the necessary legal 
 
steps after this crisis.  The American President is facing an 
opponent 
who knows every trick in the book." 
 
According to FAZ, "the German government does not want President 
Obama 
to leave it in the dust.  The billions of euro with which the German 
 
taxpayer had to save the banks have not been forgotten.  But 
Chancellor Merkel and Finance Minister SchQuble should do more than 
 
just making announcements.  Why should it always last a few months 
before the first proposals come to the fore?  It is right to support 
 
international coordinated efforts.  Even bankers are saying that the 
 
casino at the financial markets has reopened again.  But what 
SchQuble 
has presented thus far is nothing but white ointment.  What would be 
 
more important is to work out insolvency procedures for systemic 
banks.  They must become insolvent without plunging the financial 
system into an abyss or having a chance to blackmail the state." 
 
MURPHY