10BUDAPEST36
HUNGARY'S COMMENTS ON THE JANUARY FAC AGENDA
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Budapest
VZCZCXRO5435
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHUP #0036/01 0221602
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221602Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BUDAPEST
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4827
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BUDAPEST 000036 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/CE JAMIE MOORE AND EUR/ERA LIZ KONICK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AF BH IR PK SO HU
SUBJECT: HUNGARY'S COMMENTS ON THE JANUARY FAC AGENDA 
 
REF: KONICK JANUARY 16 EMAIL 
 
BUDAPEST 00000036  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) MFA EU External Relations and Crisis Situations 
Section Chief Andras Dekany discussed ref email topics with 
PolEconOff on January 22. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Dekany provided comments on the following topics: 
Afghanistan/Pakistan, Iran, Yemen, Somalia, and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
 
-- Afghanistan/Pakistan: The GOH shares our desire for a 
successful London Conference on January 28, which Hungarian 
Foreign Minister Peter Balazs plans to attend.  According to 
Dekany, the final version of the EU Action Plan, which was 
presented in outline form at the October GAERC, will be ready 
in time for the Conference.  Hungary would like President 
Karzai to present a detailed plan for dealing with corruption 
at the London Conference.  At the FAC, Hungary plans to 
emphasize Afghanistan's need for a trustworthy new cabinet in 
due course which can cope with the country's security 
challenges as well as the primary role that regional players 
such as Pakistan have in ensuring conditions for stability 
and lasting peace in Afghanistan.  Preparations for upcoming 
Afghan parliamentary elections should be closely linked to 
the successful creation of a new cabinet, while the timing of 
elections should be subject to further discussions with 
partners in the international community. 
 
-- Iran: The GOH concurs with the US position that the 
international community must prevent Iran from obtaining a 
military nuclear capability; this is the priority that guides 
all other steps toward engaging with Iran.  According to 
Dekany, further consultations are needed regarding a new 
UNSCR, as EU member states have not yet agreed on how best to 
proceed.  Hungary supports the early consideration of a new 
UNSCR as well as concurrent discussions on possible EU 
sanctions. 
 
-- Yemen: The GOH supports the plan for a conference on Yemen 
on the margins of the January 28 London Conference on 
Afghanistan.  Dekany noted, however, that Hungary was not 
invited to participate in the Yemen discussions.  In light of 
Yemen's deteriorating internal situation and its impact on 
regional stability and security, the GOH supports national 
reconciliation in Yemen, with priority given to domestic 
reforms that include firm counter-terrorism provisions. 
Dekany noted, however, concerns on the part of the Yemeni 
Government that internationalizing Yemen's domestic problems 
could create a perception of dependency that could provide 
political ammunition to domestic insurgents.  Moreover, 
according to Dekany, improved border controls and Yemen's 
integration into the GCC is essential to regional stability. 
 
-- Somalia: Dekany reported that Hungary plans to offer 
personnel - one staff officer and six NCO trainers - to the 
EU training mission in Uganda.  The EU approach to Somalia 
will be guided by the EU Strategy on the Horn of Africa. 
Moreover, according to Dekany, a commitment by the Somali 
government and African ownership would both be essential to 
stability and lasting peace in Somalia.  He added that the EU 
has extended the mandate for EU operations against piracy off 
the coast of Somalia through December 2010. 
 
-- Bosnia-Herzegovina: Dekany emphasized the need for 
tangible, but realistic results this year, including the 
fulfillment of requirements for visa liberalization with the 
EU as well as amendments to the constitution in accordance 
with the December ruling by the European Court of Human 
Rights.  The GOH hopes for a decision on MAP and visas before 
October, understanding that discussions within NATO are still 
needed to harmonize varying approaches among the members. 
Hungary strongly opposes secessionist rhetoric in Republika 
Srpska and favors engaging Bosnia's neighbors to promote 
stability.  Hungary also supports bold steps, similar to 
those taken previously in Serbia, to support election 
campaigns for pro-EU forces.  The GOH views the OHR as 
incompatible with EU integration and as having reached the 
limits of its usefulness under the status quo, but it 
acknowledges that its closure is not realistic at present. 
While it is necessary to consider all possibilities for a 
stronger EU presence in Bosnia, EU unity and full harmony 
with US efforts will be crucial to a successful transition. 
He noted that Bosnian political elites are likely to attempt 
to exploit any perceived divisions between Brussels and 
Washington and emphasized that decoupling the OHR and EUSR is 
a delicate matter that will require much internal discussion 
among stakeholders. 
 
-- Bosnia-Herzegovina (cont.): While numerous questions 
pertaining to future troop withdrawals remain to be answered, 
 
BUDAPEST 00000036  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Hungary plans to maintain its current level of troop 
contribution as long as necessary and will contribute to new 
training and capacity development tasks as the mission is 
reconfigured.  In any event, according to Dekany, EUFOR 
drawdowns should not be conducted on the basis of 
contributing countries' fatigue.  Hungary favors a cautious 
reconfiguration of ALTEA with due consideration given to 
upcoming Bosnian parliamentary elections and KFOR withdrawals 
and Hungary expects that ALTEA will need to retain some 
executive functions following the elections. 
KOUNALAKIS