10CAIRO366
Nonproliferation Meetings in Cairo: UNSCR 1540 Workshop and
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO2182
RR RUEHBZ
DE RUEHEG #0366/01 0551525
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241524Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0403
INFO RUEHAR/AMEMBASSY ACCRA 0001
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 0001
RUEHBZ/AMEMBASSY BRAZZAVILLE 0001
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 0001
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 0001
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 CAIRO 000366 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP UN ETRD PBTS PREL EG CF CG KE MO NI GH
UG, NO, EUN, SF 
SUBJECT: Nonproliferation Meetings in Cairo: UNSCR 1540 Workshop and 
EXBS Bilaterals with Egypt 
 
¶1.  (U)  Key Points:   --  A United Nations multilateral workshop 
for African countries on implementation of UNSCR 1540  was held 
December 7-10, 2009 in Cairo.  The workshop focused on countering 
WMD proliferation through strengthened border controls. 
 
 
 
-- U.S. -Egypt bilaterals on the margins of the workshop confirmed 
GOE interest in technical assistance related to the WMD 
non-proliferation goals of UNSCR 1540, and provided under the USG's 
Export Control and Related Border Security (EXBS) Program.   USG 
assistance offer was sent to MFA February 1, 2010. 
 
 
 
-- The UN workshop provided a platform for government 
representatives from the African continent and various 
international and regional organizations to discuss efforts and 
subject areas related to their implementation of UNSCR 1540, 
particularly the main elements of border and export and 
transshipment controls. 
 
 
 
-- Additional themes highlighted throughout the UN workshop were 
connecting potential assistance programs with the needs identified 
by participating member states, as well as enhancing cooperation 
with international or regional organizations in provision of such 
assistance.  Effective use of the 1540 Assistance Template was 
encouraged throughout the event as a means to request assistance. 
 
 
 
¶2.  (U)  Workshop Background: UNSCR 1540 obligates all UN Member 
States to develop and maintain "appropriate, effective" measures to 
improve their indigenous capabilities to counter proliferation of 
WMD against, inter alia, terrorist threats.  The resolution has 
also established a Committee responsible for implementation (the 
Committee).  In 2008, the Security Council unanimously agreed to 
UNSCR 1810, renewing the Committee for an additional three years. 
UNSCR 1810 also outlines funding mechanisms, including voluntary 
contributions such as those used in support of this workshop, which 
was organized by the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs with funding 
from the Governments of Norway, the United States, and the European 
Union.   There had been two (1540-focused workshops) already, 
though  the Cairo meeting was the first one focused on a specific 
element of 1540. 
 
 
 
--------------------- 
 
Opening Remarks 
 
---------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (U)  The Cairo workshop was well attended by representatives 
from Egypt, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana, Kenya, Morocco, 
Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, and Republic of Congo.  Charge 
Matthew Tueller provided USG opening remarks; Khaled Shamaa, Deputy 
Assistant Foreign Minister for Disarmament Affairs, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs provided opening remarks for Egypt.  Shamaa stated 
that countries that are not NPT members are a threat to 
international security.  He also stated that state actors who 
possess nuclear weapons are also a threat to international and 
regional security.  Daniel Shepherd, UNSCR 1540 Vice Chairman, 
stated that Africa is vulnerable to terrorist attacks and it is 
important that countries have necessary measures in place to 
protect material such as uranium or radiological facilities that 
exist in some countries in the region.  Annalisa Giannela, European 
Union, remarked that UNSCR 1540 reinforces the need to control WMD 
material and illicit trafficking.  She also pointed out that the 
European Union has pilot projects to assist countries (Morocco, 
United Arab Emirates) to implement export controls.  Heidi 
Johansen, First Secretary, Embassy of Norway gave opening remarks; 
 
CAIRO 00000366  002 OF 006 
 
 
she said Norway supports President Obama's vision of a world free 
of nuclear weapons. 
 
 
 
---------------- 
 
Regional Themes 
 
--------------- 
 
 
 
¶4.  (U)  Several themes emerged during the formal and informal 
sessions.  Of particular note was the repeated focus on utilizing 
regional and sub-regional organizations to establish cooperative 
efforts, strategies, and mechanisms in Africa.  The participants 
pointed out that the resolution is complex and difficult to 
implement for small countries that are poor and lack resources and 
expertise.   Also, some participants from Ghana and Republic of 
Congo said the priority for most of the countries in the region is 
poverty, disease, and clean water, not proliferation of WMD.  They 
also noted this topic is new for many of the countries, creating a 
need to make their leadership aware of the issue.  Many of the 
African countries have not submitted a report to the UNSCR 1540 
Committee, the most fundamental step to receive assistance. Mr. 
O'Neil Hamilton, UNSCR 1540 Caribbean Regional Coordinator, 
mentioned most of the country reports had information that could be 
assessed.  The Kenya delegation noted collection of revenue is the 
priority for Kenya, rather than export controls or border security. 
The Uganda delegation pointed out that in Africa there are 
artificial borders, with families divided between countries and 
effectively free movement of persons, making difficult any 
imposition of border controls.  However, all participants requested 
further discussions on engagement for export controls and border 
security and asked how their governments can request such 
engagement with USG and other assistance programs. 
 
 
 
------------------------ 
 
Country Presentations 
 
------------------------- 
 
 
 
Democratic Republic of Congo 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U)   The delegation from the Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC) described DRC's regulations on mining, nuclear energy, bio 
products, chemical materials, membership in various 
nonproliferation regimes, and the Pelindaba Treaty.  The delegation 
acknowledged the need to modernize many existing regulations.  DRC 
noted that its assistance request has gone unanswered by the UNSCR 
1540 Committee, and stated that DRC needs international support to 
develop legal infrastructure related to WMD; the DRC added that 
their enforcement agencies were underdeveloped and needed 
assistance.  DRC also stated that proliferation is not an African 
priority compared to development issues (i.e., refugees, security, 
nutrition, water) and that if awareness is not raised 
continent-wide the issue will continue to be seen as irrelevant. 
DRC representatives noted difficulty with border security given 
that it is a large nation with multiple neighbors (nine in all), 
and that post-war conflict conditions also apply.  DRC identified 
two areas requiring immediate assistance: 1) uranium mine security, 
and 2) a system of protection on the borders. 
 
 
 
Congo 
 
CAIRO 00000366  003 OF 006 
 
 
-------- 
 
 
 
¶6.  (U)  The delegation from the Republic of Congo discussed 
Congo's progress to address proliferation issues.  Congo acceded to 
the CWC, the focus of which is on prevention of CWC-related 
terrorist attacks, even though Congo does not develop or 
manufacture any chemicals.  The delegation mentioned that Congo has 
established a national committee to assess 1540 implementation and 
suggested there should be regional and sub-regional levels for 1540 
implementation to enhance cooperation and integration.  During the 
bilateral discussion, the delegation mentioned that Congo needs 
equipment to improve its border security. 
 
 
 
Egypt 
 
-------- 
 
 
 
¶7.  (U)  The Government of Egypt (GOE) presented Egypt's efforts to 
meet UNSCR 1540 obligations.  Egypt said it has 1540 implementing 
legislation and is in the process of passing new nuclear energy 
regulations that will take precedent over all other laws related to 
nuclear material, transportation, ownership and licensing and 
includes punitive measures.  The new law is expected to be passed 
in March 2010.  Egypt did not mention in the UN setting any 
challenges in implementation or any need for assistance.  Egypt 
insisted that nonproliferation must be paired with disarmament. 
 
 
 
Ghana 
 
-------- 
 
 
 
¶8.  (U)  Ghana mentioned that it has regulations for food safety. 
Ghana's enforcement agencies have the right to stop and inspect any 
arms cargo and has a border patrol unit within the Ghana 
Immigration Service (GIS) which is focused on liberalization of 
movement for people and trade.  A Terrorist Interdiction 
Program/Personal Identification, Secure Comparison & Evaluation 
System (TIP/PISCES) capability is installed at only four main ports 
of entry.  Ghana considers transit cargo its highest 
threat/vulnerability and is considering installation of additional 
scanners.  Ghana requested assistance with physical infrastructure, 
institution building, capacity building, and acquisition of 
state-of-the-art equipment and technology.  Ghana requires 
mandatory examinations for radiological sources and electronic 
goods, chemicals, food and drugs.  During bilateral discussions, 
Ghana requested workshops to be held in Ghana to better understand 
WMD issues and also requested training to identify WMD commodities 
and equipment to detect them.  Ghana is currently working with U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection on inspection techniques and 
procedures, but their equipment is inadequate and has no technical 
expertise. 
 
 
 
Kenya 
 
-------- 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U)  Kenya noted existing legislation is not specific to 
implementation of 1540 obligations.  Customs' primary function is 
revenue generation - 40% of government revenues come from Customs 
duties on imports.  Other priorities, in diminishing order, include 
trade facilitation, enforcement, compiling trade statistics, and 
finally enforcing regional and international agreements (i.e., 
1540).  Kenya does not have WMD subject matter experts, but has 
 
CAIRO 00000366  004 OF 006 
 
 
benefitted from received limited seminars through the EXBS program. 
Kenyan customs conducts limited inspections for imports and 
exports.   Kenya has scanners and cameras at the port of Mombasa, 
but scans only imports not exports.  Kenya claims to have a 
targeting center and conducts limited targeting and risk management 
and requires advanced manifests.  In 2008, Kenya began negotiations 
with the Department of Energy/Megaports program to install 
radiation portal monitors at the port of Mombasa.  Kenya has 
limited patrol boats to secure its coastline, but the delegation 
mentioned the USG has provided radiation pagers and K9 unit in 
Mombasa and Nairobi airport.  The delegation commented their focus 
is on imports for tariff collection, and recommended caution, as 
anything that interferes with exports will be opposed and/or seen 
as more of a benefit to the United States than Kenya. 
 
 
 
Morocco 
 
----------- 
 
 
 
¶10.  (U)  The Moroccan delegation highlighted the link between 
terrorism and proliferation, particularly with regards to 
transshipment.  Morocco has draft export control legislation that 
is going through an inter-ministry review.  The delegation also 
heighted its cooperation on this issue with the United States, and 
EU. 
 
 
 
Nigeria 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
¶11.  (U)  Nigeria's primary legislation addressing nonproliferation 
policy stems from adherence to the NPT, CWC, and BTWC.  Nigeria has 
a National Nuclear Security Committee comprised of several agencies 
including military, Customs, Police, Internal Security and their 
National Nuclear Regulatory Authority (NNRA).  NNRA is responsible 
for administering nuclear regulations including licensing to use, 
import, export, and transfer nuclear and related materials.  NNRA 
has collaborated with the IAEA to repatriate sources to their 
country of origin, and has received equipment training from DOE. 
The delegation stated Nigeria has one point of entry for 
radiological sources, Lagos International Airport, which also has a 
portal radiation monitor provided by the European Union.  Nigeria 
has an active BWC Advisory Committee to assist with compliance with 
OPCW and BWC and has received security service training and 
provision of equipment through the IAEA.  During the bilateral 
discussion, the delegation requested explosives detection support 
for Nigeria's police, especially using a train-the-trainer 
approach; discussed border challenges including lack of equipment 
to detect WMD or other contraband; noted inspection rates at 
airports are very low; and requested assistance in 
capacity-building for Customs. 
 
 
 
South Africa 
 
----------------- 
 
 
 
¶12.  (U)  The only participant from South Africa was a 
representative from its UN mission in New York, who noted South 
Africa is considered a developing country but has advanced 
technology and industrial sectors.  The delegate stated South 
Africa is a member of all the international and multilateral 
regimes, yet supports Non-Aligned Movement policy stances.  South 
Africa's Nonproliferation Act (Act 87) of 1993, amended in 1995 and 
1996, governs all nonproliferation policy and controls, including 
export controls.  The implementation of UNSCRs is managed by South 
 
CAIRO 00000366  005 OF 006 
 
 
Africa's constitution. 
 
 
 
Uganda 
 
---------- 
 
 
 
¶13.  (U)  Uganda borders five countries and is a major transit 
route.  There is no permit or license requirement for goods in 
transit and the country is in the process of purchasing a cargo 
tracking system to monitor the movement of transit traffic. 
Uganda's controls focus on stopping any diversion into the domestic 
market, so as to safeguard revenue collection; its controls 
therefore focus only on imports.  Export and import declarations 
are automated.  There are 34 customs stations linked together 
through a computer network.  Uganda has close customs cooperation 
with bordering nations, especially under sub-regional 
organizations, East African Community (EAC), which covers three 
bordering countries and a customs union protocol, and COMESA 
(Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa).  Uganda often 
shares advanced data and holds joint border patrols with the Kenyan 
Revenue Authority (KRA) - and described Kenya as the "gateway to 
the region" for trade.  Police and military cooperation in the EAC 
is under the Peace and Security Committee.  Uganda also has a 
national task force to stop small arms.  Uganda's challenges, as 
described, include limited cooperation with the DRC and Sudan; 
porous and artificial borders (though communities straddle the 
border with frequent cross-border movement, cooperation between 
local border communities is good); limited resources (with priority 
for resource allocation given to revenue-generating activities); 
and political instability which increases potential for illicit 
trade.   During bilateral discussions, the delegation requested 
border security assistance and more information on export control 
legislation. 
 
 
 
U.S. - Egypt Bilaterals 
 
---------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶14. (SBU)  In a U.S.-Egypt bilateral on the margins of the 
workshop, First Secretary Ahmed Shandawily of MFA's Disarmament 
Division, which reports to Khaled Samaa (para 3 above) supported 
the idea of additional export control cooperation.  Mr. Shandawily 
stated that he would brief the Minister of available training and 
provide a response to Embassy Cairo on any training or assistance 
related to USNCR 1540 that USG offers. 
 
 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  USG's UN workshop delegation head, Varvara Psaros, from 
ISN/ECC and Embassy Econoff held separate bilaterals with Egyptian 
officials, at the Egyptian Customs Authority (ECA) and MFA December 
8 and 10.  Psaros and Econoff met with Ms. Neveen El-Husseiny, 
First Secretary, in MFA's Americas Division, to brief her on the 
EXBS program and urge further engagement on export controls with 
the GOE.  Ms. El-Husseiny was familiar with UNSCR 1540 and said 
cooperation with the EXBS program would benefit Egypt.  However, 
the EXBS program would need to provide a specific assistance 
proposal for the Minister to review.  Also, Psaros and Emboff 
called separately on Egyptian Customs Authority (ECA), 
Commissioner, Ahmed Farag Seoudi, and Mr. Galal Ibrahim Abo 
El-Fotouh, Customs Advisor to the Minister of Finance and former 
ECA Commissioner.  Both welcomed USG training and equipment aimed 
at enhancing border security and reiterated the success of the 
August 2009 International Border Security Training held for ECA in 
Cairo.  ECA asked that USG route any proposed training to ECA via 
MFA before scheduling any follow-on training and procurement of 
equipment. 
 
CAIRO 00000366  006 OF 006 
 
 
¶16.  (SBU)  Subsequently, Embassy Cairo received proposed training 
menu from Department EXBS authorities (ISN) and on February 1 
passed the training menu to MFA, which confirmed receipt and 
promised to share with Egyptian Customs, Maritime Authority, and 
other GOE technical agencies as appropriate. 
 
 
 
¶17.  (SBU) A draft of this cable was cleared with the U.S. UNSCR 
1540 Coordinator Thomas Wuchte in ISN/CPI.  For further information 
and background on the EXBS program, please contact Thomas Wuchte at 
WuchteTA@state.gov. 
SCOBEY