10DAKAR80
Senegal: Wade seeks to undermine local governments
Thu Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO4261
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0080 0211642
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211642Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3652
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 000080 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL,INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM ECON SG
SUBJECT: Senegal: Wade seeks to undermine local governments 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On January 18, President Abdoulaye Wade 
characterized Senegal's decentralization process as a failure after 
which he outlined a slew of reforms among which he wants to 
eliminate the positions of Governors and create local legislative 
assemblies with clearly delineated jurisdictions.  Opposition 
leaders judge this as a ploy to undo the results of the March 2009 
local elections that gave victory to the opposition in most of the 
major cities of the country.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Ministers will replace Governors 
-------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) Senegal has 14 administrative regions each headed by a 
Governor who are appointed by the Head of State and must be top 
ranked civil servants who have spent their entire career in 
administrative affairs.  They represent the Head of State and the 
cabinet in their administrative regions and as such are the chiefs 
of all local civil servants in their areas and are responsible for 
law and order.  As civil servants, they are non partisan and enjoy a 
fair degree of independence under the law.  Wade's proposal is to 
replace governors with Resident Ministers, i.e. partisan political 
leaders.  This could have a tremendous impact on the organization of 
elections as Resident Ministers will be more inclined to choose 
partisan staff to man polling stations and bend the rules to help 
the ruling party win.  In all likelihood they would also favor their 
party in local social, economic and security decisions they might 
make. 
 
Emasculate opposition mayors 
---------------------------- 
¶3. (SBU) In addition to appointed Resident Ministers, Wade said that 
each region will also have an elected President and an elected 
assembly that will replace current regional councils he deems 
inefficient.  If passed by the National Assembly, this reform will 
represent a serious challenge for opposition mayors who will have to 
contend with multiple political decision-making centers.  A hostile 
regional assembly could also use its legislative powers to tie the 
hands of a mayor.  Limited resources available to a region, if 
shared among three local government entities, will increase their 
dependence vis-`-vis subsidies from the central government.  Mayors 
of larger and richer cities like Dakar could see their status 
decline and thus give them less to present to the electorate as 
their achievements.  This reform would also provide Wade's party 
with the opportunity to give jobs to a larger number of leaders in 
his coalition.  For the main opposition Socialist Party these 
reforms have all been concocted to, "create a legal framework to 
confiscate land and take away power from duly elected mayors." 
Opposition leaders see this project as dangerous for both political 
stability and national cohesion as it could lead to ethnic and 
regional identities becoming divisive defining factors at the 
expense of Senegal's impressive national identity. 
 
¶4. (SBU) COMMENT: By proposing these new political entities 
President Wade hopes to increase his ability to dole out patronage 
and increase competition within the opposition Benno coalition in 
the hopes of undermining their unity.  This project could also serve 
as a political offer to the Casamance without appearing to have 
capitulated before the secessionists of the Movement of Democratic 
Forces of Casamance (MFDC) whose central demand has always been more 
say in the management of the affairs of their region. 
 
BERNICAT