10FRANKFURT120
FDP "THREE KINGS DAY": CHIEF WESTERWELLE DEFENDS TAX-CUTS
Tue Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
VZCZCXRO5827
OO RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFT #0120/01 0121500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121500Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL FRANKFURT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3143
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 000120 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL GM
SUBJECT: FDP "THREE KINGS DAY": CHIEF WESTERWELLE DEFENDS TAX-CUTS 
AND CALLS FOR INTELLECTUAL AND POLITICAL CHANGE. 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: Foreign Minister and Free Democratic Party (FDP) 
national chair Guido Westerwelle defended the party's tax policy and 
downplayed problems in the national coalition at the FDP's annual 
leadership gathering in Stuttgart January 5-6, "Three Kings Day". 
The event's highlight was the Westerwelle's keynote speech in which 
he promised that the FDP would continue to honor its election 
promises and asserted that the party intended to remain in power for 
some time.  Overall, the mood of the FDP delegates during the 
conference was one of confidence and optimism.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
----------------------------------------- 
"Spiritual and Political Change" Needed 
----------------------------------------- 
¶2. (U) Westerwelle chose a call for "spiritual and political change" 
as the central theme of his speech, a take on Helmut Kohl's 1984 
famous refrain for a "spiritual and moral" change.  Westerwelle's 
depiction of "change" focused on adherence to free market principles. 
 He argued that Germany should remain a European and world leader, 
becoming more self-confident, less afraid of the future, and better 
prepared to handle competition from Asia.  He repeated his mantra of 
lifting the tax burden for Germany's "forgotten" middle class and 
said that the FDP would continue to press for even more tax cuts. He 
defended the VAT reduction for the German tourism industry, arguing 
that 22 out of 27 EU countries have a reduced VAT tax, which 
disadvantaged Germany's competitiveness. Westerwelle emphasized that 
the FDP fought for ten years in the opposition to bring this new 
sense of change to Germany and is not about to give up now. 
 
¶3. (U) Christian Lindner, the new FDP General Secretary, further 
developed Westerwelle's concepts in his own 30 minute address, 
arguing that there was a fundamental "lack of fairness" in German 
society brought on by the excessive German welfare state.  Lindner 
reasoned that the social system hindered those who would like to move 
ahead in life and that the FDP would redefine the principals of 
"social justice." Lindner said that climate change, renewable energy, 
and educational reforms would be future focal points of the FDP. 
Speaking without notes, Lindner gave a rousing speech and received a 
long standing ovation, with Westerwelle later calling Lindner's 
address "brilliant." 
 
 
------------------ 
Little Mention of Coalition Troubles 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  (U) Westerwelle, Lindner, and Birgit Homburger, the FDP's 
Bundestag caucus leader, all shied away from discussing troubles in 
the CDU/CSU/FDP coalition government. Westerwelle and Homburger 
repeated numerous times that, with regard to tax cuts, the FDP must 
stick to its campaign promises.  "This is the nicest kind of 
criticism that a government party has to face. That it stands by its 
campaign promises," Westerwelle said.  Westerwelle further 
complemented Chancellor Merkel, CDU/CSU floor leader Kauder, Finance 
Minister Schaeuble and CSU chief Seehofer for sticking to the 
coalition agreement and referred to any criticism of the tax cuts, as 
merely "minor rumbling."  Lindner specifically addressed the 
criticism that the "FDP is not yet used to being in power." "If 
getting used to governing means to defend the status quo or to 
flatter lobbyists, we don't want to get used to it," he said. 
Regarding the recent troubles with CDU member Erika Steinbach, whom 
the FDP opposes being on the board of an organization for German 
World War II expellees, Westerwelle remained silent. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) During private conversations with Consulate 
representatives, FDP delegates similarly conveyed little direct 
criticism of their coalition partners.  Jan Rittaler, chairman of the 
Baden-Wuerrtemberg FDP's economic council, said that current tensions 
in Berlin were normal at the beginning of a new political 
partnership.  Heidirose Berroth, FDP member of the Baden-Wuerrtemberg 
state parliament, found the recent troubles problematic, primarily 
because she feared that a negative image of the federal coalition 
government could affect the success of the FDP in the 2011 
Baden-Wuerttemberg state election.  Olaf Bentlage, Birgit Homburger's 
Chief of Staff, levied only minor criticism, saying that the CDU had 
yet to get used to its new partner.  He further charged that many 
"social democratic ideas" have rubbed off on the CDU over the last 
four years, which was causing part of the problem. 
 
 
------------------ 
Afghanistan and Security 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U) Security issues and privacy rights came up several times 
during the conference, specifically the issue of so-called "naked 
 
FRANKFURT 00000120  002 OF 002 
 
 
scanners" in airports.  Westerwelle himself criticized the broad 
collection of data and any infringement of civil rights. He cited the 
attempted Christmas Day attack in Detroit as an example that the 
collection of data alone will not secure the lives of innocent 
people.  "Just to know everything about a normal citizen, does not 
lead to increased security." On the first day of the conference, the 
young FDP party members set up a mock "naked scanner" in the 
building's lobby to critique its use. (Guests could take pictures of 
their shadows through it.)  Regarding Afghanistan, Westerwelle 
welcomed that the international community had agreed on a broad 
political agenda for the upcoming conference.  He stressed that only 
sending more troops was not enough, but rather that the Afghan people 
must learn to take responsibility for their own security, which will 
eventually lead to a withdrawal of troops. 
 
 
¶7. COMMENT:  (SBU) This year's "Three Kings" gathering was a 
demonstration of self-confidence.  After eleven years in opposition, 
it was the first time for the FDP to be in the national governing 
party.  The speeches of FDP delegates repeatedly emphasized their 
success nationally, on the state level in Baden-Wuerttemberg (where 
they came within 1 percentage point of the Social Democratic Party's 
returns), and even on the European level. Only through small comments 
and the intonation in some private conversations was any indication 
of stress within the national coalition government apparent. The FDP 
remains committed to their ideology and political agenda, with all 
speakers emphasizing their intention to not divert from their present 
political course.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8. (U) This cable has been coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
ALFORD