10HAVANA109
USINT HAVANA'S ANSWER TO TIP REPORT QUESTIONS THIS
Thu Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
US Interests Section Havana
VZCZCXRO3562
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHUB #0109/01 0562027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 252027Z FEB 10
FM USINT HAVANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5211
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITY
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 0118
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN PRIORITY 0038
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0056
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID PRIORITY 0179
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO PRIORITY 0001
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 0040
RHEFHLC/HQ DHS WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUCOGCA/COMNAVBASE GUANTANAMO BAY CU PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUCOWCV/CCGDSEVEN MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEKJCE/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 17 HAVANA 000109 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, G FOR LAURA PENA, INL, DRL, PRM, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
 
SUBJECT: USINT HAVANA'S ANSWER TO TIP REPORT QUESTIONS THIS 
TELEGRAM IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, PLEASE HANDLE 
ACCORDINGLY. 
 
REF: SECSTATE 02094 
 
HAVANA 00000109  001.3 OF 017 
 
 
¶1.   (SBU)Per Reftel, USINT Havana submits the following 
information for inclusion in the tenth annual Trafficking in 
Persons 
(TIP) report, Cuba section. 
 
------------------- 
REPORTING QUESTIONS 
------------------- 
 
¶25. (U) THE COUNTRY'S TIP SITUATION: 
 
-- A. What is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
human trafficking?  What plans are in place (if any) to 
undertake further documentation of human trafficking?  How 
reliable are these sources? 
 
Very little information is available about human trafficking 
in Cuba.  The Government of Cuba (GOC) does not publish 
statistics and data about trafficking-related topics. 
However, for the first time, the GOC responded to U.S. 
requests to share and discuss information on trafficking by 
providing excerpts from a diplomatic note it had previously 
submitted to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.  The 
GOC shares limited information on trafficking in persons 
(TIP) with the UN and other foreign missions (like 
information about the treatment of women and children who are 
victims of sexual abuse), although it does not share data or 
information about incidence or prevalence. 
 
The GOC restricts the ability of international and domestic 
NGOs to operate in Cuba and there are no domestic and 
international NGOs on the island that focus on trafficking. 
GOC agencies involved in anti-trafficking efforts include the 
Interior and Justice ministries and the Attorney General's 
Office.  The British Embassy reports that the UK Child 
Protection Trust works with the GOC on managing two sexual 
abuse treatment centers (a third is reportedly under 
construction and a fourth is planned in the near future.) 
However, the GOC has indicated that it now has a sufficient 
number of trained personnel to go forward without the 
continuing assistance of the Child Protection Trust. 
International journalists and the regional NGO Women's News 
Service for Latin America and the Caribbean (SEMlac) provide 
some reliable information about prostitution, violence 
against women and children, and GOC efforts to assist these 
victims. 
 
Other sources of information derive from working-level 
exchanges of information between the GOC and the US Coast 
Guard representative assigned to USINT, and from the 
investigation and prosecution of the small number of US 
citizens and foreign nationals imprisoned in Cuba on 
trafficking-related charges. 
 
All sources agree that, in spite of the lack of information, 
trafficking does not appear to be a significant problem in 
Cuba, and that the GOC generally treats the issue with 
seriousness, including investigation and prosecution of those 
involved in TIP. 
 
-- B. Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or 
destination for men, women, or children subjected to 
conditions of commercial sexual exploitation, forced or 
bonded labor, or other slave-like conditions?  Are citizens 
 
HAVANA 00000109  002.3 OF 017 
 
 
or residents of the country subjected to such trafficking 
conditions within the country?  If so, does this internal 
trafficking occur in territory outside of the government's 
control (e.g. in a civil war situation)?  From where are 
people recruited or from where do they migrate prior to being 
subjected to these exploitative conditions?  To what other 
countries are people trafficked and for what purposes? 
Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for each group 
of trafficking victims.  Have there been any changes in the 
TIP situation since the last TIP Report (e.g. changes in 
destinations)? 
 
The GOC asserts that human trafficking is exceptionally rare 
in Cuba and that it should not be considered a country of 
origin, transit or destination for TIP.  However, since the 
GOC does not publish information on human trafficking, it is 
nearly impossible to accurately understand the TIP situation 
in Cuba.  Nonetheless, sources agree that little has changed 
since the last TIP report. 
 
It is well known that of the many Cubans who seek to leave 
the island illegally every year, some seek the assistance of 
smugglers who provide passage in speed boats in exchange for 
a significant fee. According to the US Coast Guard (USCG) 
representative assigned to USINT, the vast majority of Cubans 
who are smuggled directly into the US are voluntary migrants 
and they do not end up being forced into hard labor or the 
sex trade upon their arrival in the United States.  The GOC 
actively cooperates with the USG in efforts to interdict, 
arrest, and prosecute the smugglers, and repatriate the 
migrants. 
 
However, there is strong evidence that some Cuban migrants 
wind up as victims of human trafficking in transit countries 
like Mexico. The USCG rep said that a growing number of 
credible reports indicated that Cuban migrants were held 
against their will upon arrival in Mexico, some by smuggling 
gangs demanding payment from their families, but also some 
who are compelled into prostitution or forced labor while 
awaiting onward passage to the United States.  Likewise, the 
GOC actively cooperates with the USG to interdict this 
traffic. 
 
There is no evidence of any significant trafficking either 
into or within Cuba for purposes of forced labor.  Although 
there is prostitution in Cuba, particularly in tourist areas, 
there are no indications that a large number of prostitutes 
have entered the profession through force, coercion or 
deception.  The vast majority of prostitutes enter the 
activity for economic reasons without the involvement of 
traffickers or intermediaries.  Commonly, prostitutes seek 
out foreign tourists in exchange for drinks, meals and 
presents.  Strictly-for-cash prostitution is also practiced, 
but it is less common.  Although it is impossible to say how 
many, at least some of these liaisons result in marriages. 
Because many people wish to flee the country, some young 
women who contract such marriages could be vulnerable to 
exploitation.  However, the representatives of the countries 
whose nationals most often enter into this kind of marriage 
have not seen evidence that a significant number of these 
women eventually wind up in forced labor or the commercial 
sex industry. 
 
The issue of the trafficking of children for commercial 
sexual purposes is complicated by the fact that Cuban 
officials have very different approaches to enforcing 
 
HAVANA 00000109  003.3 OF 017 
 
 
prostitution by minors, depending on the age of the victim. 
Prostitution over the age of 18 is not criminalized, though 
police often arrest prostitutes on charges of anti-social 
behavior or "potential dangerousness".  The age of consent in 
Cuba is 14.  Sources agree that Cuban authorities are very 
severe in cases of solicitation or having sex with children 
under the age of 14.  U.S. citizens or other foreigners who 
are convicted of such offenses, invariably received lengthy 
jail terms.  Several sources have indicated that the Cubans 
are very pro-active in prosecuting cases involving child 
pornography and in preventing known child sex offenders from 
visiting the island. 
 
On the other hand, minors between the ages of 14 and 18 fall 
into a gray area.  They are legally able to consent, but it 
is illegal for that age group to engage in prostitution.  No 
data is available on the incidence of prostitution in this 
age group but, according to most local observers, this is the 
most vulnerable age group.  Prosecutions are rare, but youths 
in this age category would be much more likely to face 
compulsory rehabilitation for anti-social behavior than 
charges for illegal prostitution 
 
However, the SEMlac representative stated that local police 
and neighborhood organizations are fairly vigilant in 
watching over children under age 14. Children on the streets 
during school hours and unsupervised at night are frequently 
approached by police and returned to their homes, and parents 
questioned. Repeated neglect can result in legal action 
against the parents, or in the children being taken from the 
home. 
 
USINT did not receive any specific reports during the past 
year of intermediaries in the tourist areas such as taxi 
drivers, hotel workers or policemen directing people to 
prostitutes.  Visitors to such areas and representatives of 
other embassies surmised that due to the desire for tourist 
dollars and the fact that police corruption is widespread, it 
was likely that this occurred but no one contacted knew of a 
specific incident. 
 
 
-- C. To what kind of conditions are the trafficking victims 
subjected? 
 
Beyond the few details about adolescent prostitutes provided 
above, we have no specific information on conditions. 
 
 
-- D. Vulnerability to TIP: Are certain groups of persons 
more at risk of human trafficking (e.g. women and children, 
boys versus girls, certain ethnic groups, refugees, IDPs, 
etc.)?  If so, please specify the type of exploitation for 
which these groups are most at risk 
(e.g., girls are more at risk of domestic servitude than 
boys). 
 
All sources of information indicated that a disproportionate 
number of prostitutes, both male and female, are Afro-Cubans 
or of mixed race.  Some sources reported that homosexual 
males are more likely to turn to prostitution after having 
been shunned by their families (rather than at the behest of 
the family, for economic reasons) and are, therefore, perhaps 
more likely to be vulnerable to abuse. 
 
 
 
HAVANA 00000109  004.3 OF 017 
 
 
-- E. Traffickers and Their Methods: Who are the 
traffickers/exploiters?  Are they independent business 
people?  Small or family-based crime groups?  Large 
international organized crime syndicates?  What methods are 
used to gain direct access to victims?  For example, are the 
traffickers recruiting victims through lucrative job offers? 
Are victims sold by their families, or approached by friends 
of friends?  Are victims "self-presenting" (approaching the 
exploiter without the involvement of a recruiter or 
transporter)? If recruitment or transportation is involved, 
what methods are used to recruit or transport victims (e.g., 
are false documents being used)?  Are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers involved with or 
fronting for traffickers or crime groups to traffic 
individuals? 
 
Post has no information about any organized trafficking 
operations operating within Cuba. 
 
¶26. (U) SETTING THE SCENE FOR THE GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-TIP 
EFFORTS: 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that human trafficking 
is a problem in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
In the January 2009 note to the UN High Commissioner on Human 
Rights, the GOC states that trafficking has become a problem 
in "nearly every country of the world" and calls for 
international efforts to combat the problem.  The GOC further 
states that while these problems are very rare in Cuba, it 
has put into place laws and systems to deal with the issue. 
 
The GOC notes that it is a signatory to many international 
conventions and protocols on TIP and that it has played an 
active role in international conferences and meetings on 
trafficking including: 
 
*Convention No. 105 of the International Labor Organization 
regarding the abolition of forced labor; ratified by Cuba in 
¶1958. 
 
*The 1991 Convention on the Rights of Children, which 
includes several articles on crimes related to trafficking in 
children; ratified by Cuba in 1991. 
 
*The Protocol from the 2000 Convention on the Rights of 
Children, which includes articles on child prostitution, the 
sale of children, and child pornography; ratified by Cuba in 
¶2001. 
 
*Participation in the 2008 Vienna Forum as part of the 
Worldwide Initiative against Human Trafficking. 
 
However, domestically the GOC does not discuss publicly human 
trafficking issues.  In general, the GOC does not provide 
information about crime or social problems in Cuba and daily 
newspapers and broadcast news reports do not generally cover 
these issues.  The GOC resists discussion of issues that 
might suggest weaknesses in the governing and social system. 
 
-- B. Which government agencies are involved in efforts to 
combat sex and labor trafficking - including forced labor - 
and, which agency, if any, has the lead in these efforts? 
 
The GOC agencies involved in anti-trafficking efforts include 
the Ministry of Interior, the Attorney General's Office, the 
 
HAVANA 00000109  005.3 OF 017 
 
 
Ministry of Justice and local governments.  The Ministry of 
Interior has the lead in anti-trafficking efforts, and its 
Border Guards conduct investigations and arrests.  The 
prosecution files charges and submits them to the courts 
(Ministry of Justice).  The GOC's efforts are also channeled 
through the Social Attention and Prevention System (after Law 
Decree No. 242 of May 2007), and the service of Communist 
Party mass organizations such as the Federation of Cuban 
Women (FMC), the Prevention and Social Assistance Commission, 
the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDR), 
Student and Youth Organizations, and so-called "social 
workers" to identify and suppress the activities of 
prostitutes, pimps and traffickers.  The "social workers" 
(who do not possess the training or education one might 
expect of social workers in the U.S.), under the Young 
Communists' League (UJC), interact with the Council of State, 
the Ministry of Interior, the local governments and the 
Ministry of Labor. 
 
-- C. What are the limitations on the government's ability to 
address these problems in practice?  For example, is funding 
for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall 
corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
 
The GOC does not release budgetary information about 
resources devoted to trafficking.  There are frequent reports 
of low level police corruption, and anecdotal reports that 
police officers took bribes to allow prostitutes to operate 
in areas under their jurisdiction rather than book them for 
anti-social behavior.  However, several sources noted that 
police officers who are caught taking bribes can be severely 
punished, indicating that, at least officially, the practice 
is discouraged.  The Cuban government took the lead in 
funding the operation of two centers for the treatment of 
sexually abused children with the help of a UK based NGO and 
the British government.  A small number of the children at 
these centers were believed to be trafficking victims. The 
GOC also provides ongoing funding for women,s shelters, 
where women and children can seek refuge from abusive or 
coercive relationships.  These homes are reportedly staffed 
with trained social workers who provide treatment and 
assistance in the form of job training and educational 
programs.  No information is available about whether or not 
the women and children who receive treatment at these houses 
are trafficking victims.  In addition, when police arrest 
prostitutes under laws dealing with "potential social 
dangerousness", no known efforts were made to ascertain 
whether prostitutes taken into custody were the victims of 
trafficking. 
 
-- D. To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, victim protection, and prevention) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, its 
assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The GOC does not share information with the U.S. about its 
efforts to monitor anti-trafficking efforts.  Although Cuba 
continues to participate in international forums on the 
topic, it does not publicize these efforts through these 
organizations. 
 
-- E. What measures has the government taken to establish the 
identity of local populations, including birth registration, 
 
HAVANA 00000109  006.3 OF 017 
 
 
citizenship, and nationality? 
 
The law requires that all births be registered within 72 
hours of birth or before the child leaves the hospital. 
Citizenship is established by birth within the national 
territory. Available evidence suggests that these 
requirements are carried out effectively. 
 
--F. To what extent is the government capable of gathering 
the data required for an in-depth assessment of law 
enforcement efforts?  Where are the gaps?  Are there any ways 
to work around these gaps? 
 
The GOC does not share information about its data-gathering 
capabilities related to law-enforcement with the U.S. 
However, evidence suggests that the government effectively 
gathers and maintains extensive data on a range of economic 
indicators as well as personal data on millions of its 
citizens.  Without more information on existing systems, it 
is difficult to specify gaps and propose solutions. 
 
¶27. (U) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
For questions A-D, posts should highlight in particular 
whether or not the country has enacted any new legislation 
since the last TIP report. 
 
-- A. Existing Laws against TIP: Does the country have a law 
or laws specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons -- 
both sexual exploitation and labor?  If so, please 
specifically cite the name of the law(s) and its date of 
enactment and provide the exact language (actual copies 
preferable) of the TIP provisions.  Please provide a full 
inventory of trafficking laws, including non-criminal 
statutes that allow for civil penalties against alleged 
trafficking crimes (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws 
against illegal debt). Does the law(s) cover both internal 
and transnational forms of trafficking?  If not, under what 
other laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, are 
there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of force, fraud, or coercion?  Are 
these other laws being used in trafficking cases? 
 
The GOC did not pass new laws regarding trafficking during 
the reporting period.  The Cuban Penal Code , Title 11, 
Section 4 ("Pimping and Trafficking in Persons"), Article 302 
provides penalties for "whoever induces, cooperates with, 
promotes or gets a benefit from the exercise of prostitution. 
 If the offense involves the victim's entry or exit from 
Cuba, the penalty ranges from 20 to 30 years incarceration." 
According to Title III, Section First "Corruption of Minors", 
Article 310, using minors (under 16 years) in prostitution, 
corruption, pornographic acts or other illegal conduct may be 
punished from seven and up to thirty years' imprisonment or 
death (depending on aggravating circumstances).  Likewise, 
according to Article 312, using minors for begging, may 
receive from two to eight years' imprisonment.  Article 316 
of the Penal Code ("Selling and Trafficking in Minors") 
covers trafficking for forced labor, prostitution and trade 
in organs both domestically and internationally and 
establishes punishments between 7 to 15 years.  Article 316.3 
of the Penal Code refers to international trafficking of 
minors (not adults) involving forced labor, among other acts 
of corruption. 
 
In addition, Resolutions 75 of the Ministry of Justice and 87 
 
HAVANA 00000109  007.3 OF 017 
 
 
of MINREX, 2007 require that Cubans wishing to travel abroad 
must receive a letter of invitation through the appropriate 
Cuban consulate and satisfy immigration requirements before 
an exit permit will be granted.  Before these rules were 
introduced, invitation letters could be obtained through a 
fairly simple legal process in Cuba. This meant that a 
tourist (or trafficker) could come to Cuba, meet an 
interested Cuban, go through the legal process to have the 
invitation letter drawn up, and request an exit permit, all 
in a fairly short period of time.  In addition Article 17 of 
Law Number 87 of 1999 sets prison terms of 4 to 10 years for 
"inducing, in any way, or promoting another person to engage 
in prostitution or bodily commerce".  The sentence increases 
to 10 to 20 years for anyone who threatens or forces another 
to engage in prostitution.  The law also provides sentences 
of 20 to 30 years for anyone convicted after a past 
conviction for pimping or anyone accused of habitually 
promoting prostitution.  Civil courts in Cuba only cover 
family law.  To make a complaint equivalent to a tort 
complaint in the US Court system, an individual or group 
would have to convince the authorities to criminally 
prosecute the case.  If the prosecution is successful, the 
court can assess damages. 
 
-- B. Punishment of Sex Trafficking Offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for the trafficking of 
persons for commercial sexual exploitation, including for the 
forced prostitution of adults and the prostitution of 
children? 
 
See the response to the previous question.  The GOC does not 
generally make public information about court cases, so it is 
unknown what penalties were imposed in these cases during the 
reporting period. The GOC informs foreign missions about the 
arrests of their nationals, except in the case of dual 
nationals, including the Consular Section at USINT.  There 
were no reports of new arrests on TIP-related charges during 
the reporting period.  There are US citizens and other 
foreign nationals serving lengthy sentences in Cuba on 
trafficking related charges and for sexual exploitation of a 
minor.  An American citizen was arrested in March of 2008 and 
charged with corruption of a minor, but was released in early 
2009 without being tried. 
 
-- C. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses:  What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for labor trafficking 
offenses, including all forms of forced labor?  If your 
country is a source country for labor migrants, do the 
government's laws provide for criminal punishment -- i.e. 
jail time -- for labor recruiters who engage in recruitment 
of workers using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers 
with the purpose of subjecting workers to compelled service 
in the destination country?  If your country is a destination 
for labor migrants (legal/regular or illegal/irregular), are 
there laws punishing employers or labor agents who confiscate 
workers' passports or travel documents for the purpose of 
labor trafficking, switch contracts without the worker's 
consent as a means to keep the worker in a state of compelled 
service, or withhold payment of salaries as means of keeping 
the worker in a state of compelled service? 
 
Article 316, which only applies to minors, sets penalties of 
7 to 15 years imprisonment for offenses related to forced 
child labor.  A thorough review of Cuban Law failed to 
identify any statute that assessed penalties for the forced 
labor of adults. 
 
HAVANA 00000109  008.3 OF 017 
 
 
 
-- D. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible 
sexual assault? (NOTE:  This is necessary to evaluate a 
foreign government's compliance with TVPA Minimum Standard 2, 
which reads: "For the knowing commission of any act of sex 
trafficking... the government of the country should prescribe 
punishment commensurate with that for grave crimes, such as 
forcible sexual assault (rape)."  END NOTE) 
 
There are three categories of penalties for rape: 4 to 10 
years, 7 to 15 years, and 15 to 30 years or (rarely) capital 
punishment, depending on the circumstances.  Cases for repeat 
offenders, cases that resulted in injury or the transmission 
of a disease and cases involving a child under 12 are subject 
to the more severe penalties. 
 
-- E. Law Enforcement Statistics: Did the government take 
legal action against human trafficking offenders during the 
reporting period?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences imposed, including 
details on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and 
available.  Please note the number of convicted trafficking 
offenders who received suspended sentences and the number who 
received only a fine as punishment.  Please indicate which 
laws were used to investigate, prosecute, convict, and 
sentence traffickers.  Also, if possible, please disaggregate 
numbers of cases by type of TIP (labor vs. commercial sexual 
exploitation) and victims (children under 18 years of age vs. 
adults).   What were the actual punishments imposed on 
convicted trafficking offenders? Are they serving the time 
sentenced?  If not, why not? 
 
The GOC did not share with the U.S. information about its 
criminal proceedings during the reporting period.  During the 
reporting period, there were no reports of foreigners charged 
with trafficking-related crimes. 
 
-- F. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for law enforcement and immigration officials on identifying 
and treating victims of trafficking?  Or training on 
investigating and prosecuting human trafficking crimes? 
Specify whether NGOs, international organizations, and/or the 
USG provide specialized training for host government 
officials. 
 
We had no concrete information on anti-trafficking related 
training held in Cuba, either by the GOC, by NGOs or 
international organizations.  The British Embassy and SEMlac 
reported that some training is offered on treating women and 
children who are sexually abused, but there is no information 
available about whether this training might also be used with 
trafficking victims. 
 
--G. Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases?  If 
possible, provide the number of cooperative international 
investigations on trafficking during the reporting period. 
 
The GOC has extradition treaties with several countries, 
including 
Mexico, but USINT does not know of instances of cooperation 
during the reporting period.  The GOC cooperates in the 
investigation and prosecution of alien smuggling.  A few of 
these cases involved allegations of trafficking, such as 
people who asserted that they were forced to serve as crew 
members on smuggling vessels. 
 
HAVANA 00000109  009.3 OF 017 
 
 
 
-- H. Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, please provide 
the number of traffickers extradited during the reporting 
period, and the number of trafficking extraditions pending. 
In particular, please report on any pending or concluded 
extraditions of trafficking offenders to the United States. 
 
The GOC did not provide information about extraditions. USINT 
does not know of cases involving AmCits or other foreign 
nationals. 
 
-- I. Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
Post is not aware of any evidence of government involvement 
in trafficking on an institutional or local level.  Many 
reliable sources reported that there is no government 
involvement at any level. 
 
-- J. If government officials are involved in human 
trafficking, what steps has the government taken to end such 
complicity?  Please indicate the number of government 
officials investigated and prosecuted for involvement in 
trafficking or trafficking-related criminal activities during 
the reporting period.  Have any been convicted?  What 
sentence(s) was imposed? Please specify if officials received 
suspended sentences, or were given a fine, fired, or 
reassigned to another position within the government as 
punishment. Please indicate the number of convicted officials 
that received suspended sentences or received only a fine as 
punishment. 
 
Post is not aware of investigations or convictions of public 
officials on trafficking-related offenses. 
 
-- K. For countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the government 
vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced 
nationals of the country deployed abroad as part of a 
peacekeeping or other similar mission who engaged in or 
facilitated severe forms of trafficking or who exploited 
victims of such trafficking. 
 
Not applicable. 
 
-- L. If the country has an identified problem of child sex 
tourists coming to the country, what are the countries of 
origin for sex tourists?  How many foreign pedophiles did the 
government prosecute or deport/extradite to their country of 
origin?  If your host country's nationals are perpetrators of 
child sex tourism, do the country's child sexual abuse laws 
have extraterritorial coverage (similar to the U.S. PROTECT 
Act) to allow the prosecution of suspected sex tourists for 
crimes committed abroad?  If so, how many of the country's 
nationals were prosecuted and/or convicted during the 
reporting period under the extraterritorial provision(s) for 
traveling to other countries to engage in child sex tourism? 
 
The GOC strongly denies that Cuba has a problem with child 
sex tourism.  The government adds that, through its Ministry 
of Tourism, it actively works to promote family tourism.  The 
GOC also states that access to bars and clubs is limited to 
people over 16, where identification is required.  According 
to information provided by the GOC, Cuban laws on trafficking 
 
HAVANA 00000109  010.3 OF 017 
 
 
in minors for any purpose (including the sex trade) apply to 
citizens and residents of Cuba whether the acts are committed 
domestically or internationally. 
 
Other embassies (Canada, Great Britain, Spain, France, the 
Netherlands, Sweden) with a large number of tourists 
traveling to Cuba each year did not report evidence that a 
significant number of their visitors come to the island 
primarily seeking sex with children, but that some probably 
took advantage of easy access to prostitutes, some of whom 
may have been under age 18.  The GOC does not release records 
of arrests or prosecutions.  USINT learned of no new 
prosecutions for child sex offenses by U.S. citizens.  In 
cases known to USINT of US citizens or other country 
nationals convicted of child sex offenses in the past, they 
invariably received lengthy prison sentences.  The UN stated 
that the GOC was very pro-active in preventing known 
pedophiles from entering the country.  As explained above, 
all indications are that the authorities acted swiftly in 
cases involving children under 14, but took a  less active 
approach with those between 14 and 18 where no coercion was 
reported. 
 
¶28. (U) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
-- A.  What kind of protection is the government able under 
existing law to provide for victims and witnesses? Does it 
provide these protections in practice? 
 
No official information is available about protection of 
trafficking victims or witnesses.  The sexual abuse treatment 
centers reportedly provide state-of-the-art care and 
counseling to child sexual abuse victims and child witnesses, 
some of whom may be trafficking victims. The GOC operates 
these facilities with the assistance of the Child Protection 
Trust, an NGO respected worldwide in the treatment of sexual 
abuse.  The situation with adults is very unclear.  They 
universally have access to counseling and social services 
through the nation's healthcare system, and women and 
children can access treatment and resources available at the 
women's shelters mentioned above, but post does not have 
information about the use of these services by trafficking 
victims. 
 
-- B.  Does the country have victim care facilities (shelters 
or drop-in centers) which are accessible to trafficking 
victims?  Do foreign victims have the same access to care as 
domestic trafficking victims?  Where are child victims placed 
(e.g., in shelters, foster care, or juvenile justice 
detention centers)?  Does the country have specialized care 
for adults in addition to children?  Does the country have 
specialized care for male victims as well as female?   Does 
the country have specialized facilities dedicated to helping 
victims of trafficking?  Are these facilities operated by the 
government or by NGOs?  What is the funding source of these 
facilities?  Please estimate the amount the government spent 
(in U.S. dollar equivalent) on these specialized facilities 
dedicated to helping trafficking victims during the reporting 
period. 
 
 
The sexual abuse treatment centers mentioned above, accept 
both male and female children.  Adolescents, both males and 
females, who have engaged in prostitution, can be sent to 
either juvenile detention facilities or work camps.  UN 
agencies that had access to these facilities said that the 
 
HAVANA 00000109  011.3 OF 017 
 
 
emphasis was on rehabilitation rather than punishment. 
 
Trafficking victims could access care in local rehabilitation 
centers which in theory have legal, medical and outpatient 
care available.  These centers are designed for people 
recovering from physical or emotional problems and not 
specifically for trafficking victims. USINT has no 
information about foreign trafficking victims or if they 
sought such services during the reporting period. All sources 
indicated that the number of foreign victims of trafficking 
in Cuba was very small, if any existed at all.  USINT did not 
identify any mental health or social services available to 
foreigners without cost.  USINT was not able to ascertain the 
value of government resources that were spent for the purpose 
of assisting trafficking victims. 
 
 
-- C.  Does the government provide trafficking victims with 
access to legal, medical and psychological services?  If so, 
please specify the kind of assistance provided.  Does the 
government provide funding or other forms of support to 
foreign or domestic NGOs and/or international organizations 
for providing these services to trafficking victims?  Please 
explain and provide any funding amounts in U.S. dollar 
equivalent.  If assistance provided was in-kind, please 
specify exact assistance.  Please specify if funding for 
assistance comes from a federal budget or from regional or 
local governments. 
 
Please see previous response for information on legal, 
medical, and psychological services provided by the GOC. 
There are no independent domestic NGOs in Cuba.  The Cuban 
government did not provide information to the U.S. about how 
much it spent on services to trafficking victims.  Post does 
not have any information about GOC payments to international 
NGOs. 
 
-- D. Does the government assist foreign trafficking victims, 
for example, by providing temporary to permanent residency 
status, or other relief from deportation?  If so, please 
explain. 
 
No information is available about this. 
 
-- E. Does the government provide longer-term shelter or 
housing benefits to victims or other resources to aid the 
victims in rebuilding their lives? 
No information is available about this. 
 
-- F. Does the government have a referral process to transfer 
victims detained, arrested or placed in protective custody by 
law enforcement authorities to institutions that provide 
short- or long-term care (either government or NGO-run)? 
 
No information is available about this. 
 
-- G. What is the total number of trafficking victims 
identified during the reporting period?  (If available, 
please specify the type of exploitation of these victims - 
e.g. "The government identified X number of trafficking 
victims during the reporting period, Y or which were victims 
of trafficking for sexual exploitation and Z of which were 
victims of nonconsensual labor exploitation.)  Of these, how 
many victims were referred to care facilities for assistance 
by law enforcement authorities during the reporting period? 
By social services officials?  What is the number of victims 
 
HAVANA 00000109  012.3 OF 017 
 
 
assisted by government-funded assistance programs and those 
not funded by the government during the reporting period? 
 
The GOC did not release this type of information. 
 
-- H. Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, and 
social services personnel have a formal system of proactively 
identifying victims of trafficking among high-risk persons 
with whom they come in contact (e.g., foreign persons 
arrested for prostitution or immigration violations)?  For 
countries with legalized prostitution, does the government 
have a mechanism for screening for trafficking victims among 
persons involved in the legal/regulated commercial sex trade? 
 
Post does not have any information about the existence of 
these types of systems. 
 
-- I. Are the rights of victims respected?  Are trafficking 
victims detained or jailed?   If so, for how long?  Are 
victims fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of 
other laws, such as those governing immigration or 
prostitution? 
 
There is no official information available to answer these 
questions. As previously mentioned, sources agree that there 
are very few foreigners in Cuba, if any, who are victims of 
international trafficking.  In the case of internal 
trafficking, police occasionally arrest prostitutes on 
charges of anti-social behavior.  In these arrests, the 
authorities reportedly made no effort to identify trafficking 
victims instead of those who engage in the profession on 
their own volition.  Those convicted may be sentenced to jail 
or rehabilitation centers.  People who have been released 
from these prisons and rehabilitation centers describe them 
as dirty, and lacking in basic sanitary facilities.  Inmates 
are given insufficient and poor quality food and have little 
access to either education or social services.  UN agencies 
that visited adolescent detention facilities and work camps 
which house juvenile offenders for non-violent offenses as 
well as adolescent prostitutes reported adequate conditions. 
 
-- J. Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  How many 
victims assisted in the investigation and prosecution of 
traffickers during the reporting period? May victims file 
civil suits or seek legal action against traffickers?  Does 
anyone impede victim access to such legal redress?  If a 
victim is a material witness in a court case against a former 
employer, is the victim permitted to obtain other employment 
or to leave the country pending trial proceedings?  Are there 
means by which a victim may obtain restitution? 
 
Traffickers can be prosecuted regardless of whether the 
victim wants to press charges or not.  Victims can 
participate in the investigation and prosecution of their 
cases.  It is unclear if the Cuban legal system encourages 
them to do so and it is unclear how the legal system treats 
material witnesses since the government normally does not 
provide public information about court cases.  The sexual 
abuse treatment centers mentioned above do provide sensitive 
preparation for child witnesses.  Civil law in Cuba only 
deals with family law and does not involve any type of tort 
cases.  A victim would have to convince a prosecutor to file 
a criminal case.  Civil penalties are called 
"responsibilities" and can be charged in criminal cases for 
specific reasons such as damage to a government boat or 
 
HAVANA 00000109  013.3 OF 017 
 
 
injuries to persons during an attempt at trafficking in 
persons.  Reparations can include indemnifications and the 
payment of the costs of treatment to injured parties.  There 
is a policy that provides for victim restitution, but there 
is no information available as to how this works in practice 
and USINT has no knowledge of monetary or other forms of 
restitution having been provided to any victim. 
 
-- K. Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in identifying trafficking victims 
and in the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, 
including the special needs of trafficked children?  Does the 
government provide training on protections and assistance to 
its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that are 
destination or transit countries?   What is the number of 
trafficking victims assisted by the host country's embassies 
or consulates abroad during the reporting period?  Please 
explain the type of assistance provided (travel documents, 
referrals to assistance, payment for transportation home). 
 
USINT does not know of any specialized training that the GOC 
provided to either their officials in Cuba or to their 
diplomatic missions abroad.  USINT does not have information 
regarding cases where a Cuban embassy or consulate assisted 
one of their own citizens who was a victim of trafficking. 
 
-- L. Does the government provide assistance, such as medical 
aid, shelter, or financial help, to its nationals who are 
repatriated as victims of trafficking? 
 
No information is available about assistance provided 
specifically for trafficking victims who have been 
repatriated. 
 
-- M. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, work 
with trafficking victims?  What type of services do they 
provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities? 
 
The UN and the above mentioned Child Protection Trust are the 
only known international organizations that worked with 
trafficking victims.  The GOC took the lead in the management 
of the sexual abuse treatment centers and Child Protection 
Trust served in a consulting role.  Victims can also seek 
assistance through rehabilitation centers run through the 
National Health Service with follow up done by Communist 
Party mass organizations, such as the Federation of Cuban 
Women and the Young Communist Youth League. 
 
¶29. (U) PREVENTION: 
 
-- A. Did the government conduct anti-trafficking information 
or education campaigns during the reporting period?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their objectives 
and effectiveness.  Please provide the number of people 
reached by such awareness efforts, if available.  Do these 
campaigns target potential trafficking victims and/or the 
demand for trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor)?  (Note: This can be an 
especially noteworthy effort where prostitution is legal. 
End Note.) 
 
The official press ran extensive articles and interviews with 
Cuban citizens who reportedly were trafficked into forced 
labor or prostitution in Mexico while awaiting passage to the 
United States. 
 
HAVANA 00000109  014.3 OF 017 
 
 
 
-- B. Does the government monitor immigration and emigration 
patterns for evidence of trafficking? 
 
USINT does not have any information about GOC activities in 
this area. 
 
 
-- C. Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and 
multilateral on trafficking-related matters, such as a 
multi-agency working group or a task force? 
 
Although there were indications that there was some 
coordination within the GOC and with some foreign missions, 
none of this information was available to the public, and it 
was impossible to assess either how extensive or effective 
this cooperation was.  The GOC states that they exchange 
information on trafficking, child pornography, child sex 
abuse and other international crimes through INTERPOL.  The 
GOC receives information through the National Central Office 
of INTERPOL.  The information is reviewed by the Ministry of 
Interior, then passed on to immigration officials and the 
border guards.  There were no indications of the existence of 
a multi-agency working group on trafficking related matters. 
There was no single point of contact on trafficking in the 
Cuban government because the GOC covers the issue through a 
series of different statutes with the responsibility to 
suppress various activities related to trafficking spread out 
among several official entities. 
 
 
-- D. Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If the plan was developed 
during the reporting period, which agencies were involved in 
developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the process?  What 
steps has the government taken to implement the action plan? 
 
USINT does not know of a specific national plan to combat 
trafficking.  However, for many years the GOC has promoted a 
"National Action Plan for Youth and Adolescents" that 
addresses a broad range of topics such as access to health 
care, free schooling and sexual education.  There is a 
section of the plan that is titled "The Need to Protect Youth 
from Mistreatment, Exploitation and Violence" and states as 
an objective to "be vigilant about the application of the 
Protocol on the Convention of the Rights of the Child, 
relative to the sale of children, child prostitution and the 
use of children in pornography." 
 
The plan seeks the "perfecting actions of social workers, the 
FMC, the Ministry of Public Health, the Ministry of Labor and 
Social Security and the UJC in protecting youth from 
mistreatment, exploitation and violence".  The "social 
workers" as well as the police were alert to identifying 
out-of school-youth and confronting the parents in the case 
of truants and other adolescents engaged in socially risky 
behavior.  On the other hand many young adults, especially 
Afro-Cubans and homosexuals, complained that the police 
harassed them for no reason. 
 
-- E: Required of all Posts: What measures has the government 
taken during the reporting period to reduce the demand for 
commercial sex acts? (please see ref B, para. 9(3) for 
examples) 
 
 
HAVANA 00000109  015.3 OF 017 
 
 
Sources did not report any specific actions aimed at reducing 
the demand for commercial sex acts. 
 
-- F. Required of all Posts: What measures has the government 
taken during the reporting period to reduce the participation 
in international child sex tourism by nationals of the 
country? 
 
Sources did not report any specific actions aimed at reducing 
Cuban participation in child sex tourism.  It should be 
noted, however, that the GOC strictly controls international 
travel by its citizens.  Few Cubans travel abroad for tourism 
of any sort. 
 
-- G. Required of posts in countries that have contributed 
over 100 troops to international peacekeeping efforts 
(Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, 
China, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, 
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, 
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, 
Korea (ROK), Malawi, Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco,  Nepal, 
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Russia, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, 
PERSONS (TIP) REPO Ukraine, United Kingdom, Uruguay, Yemen, 
Zambia, and Zimbabwe): What measures has the government 
adopted to ensure that its nationals who are deployed abroad 
as part of a peacekeeping or other similar mission do not 
engage in or facilitate severe forms of trafficking or 
exploit victims of such trafficking?  If posts do not provide 
an answer to this question, the Department may consider 
including a statement in the country assessment to the effect 
that "An assessment regarding Country X's efforts to ensure 
that its troops deployed abroad for international 
peacekeeping missions do not engage in or facilitate 
trafficking or exploit trafficking victims was unavailable 
for this reporting period." 
 
Not applicable. 
 
¶30. (U) PARTNERSHIPS 
 
Secretary Clinton has identified a fourth "P", Partnerships, 
recognizing that governments' partnerships with other 
government and elements of civil society are key to effective 
anti-TIP strategies.  Although the 2010 Report will include 
references and/or descriptions of these partnerships, they 
will not be considered in the determining the tier rankings, 
except in cases where a partnership contributes to the 
government's efforts to implement the TVPA's minimum 
standards. 
 
 
 
-- A.  Does the government engage with other governments, 
civil society, and/or multilateral organizations to focus 
attention and devote resources to addressing human 
trafficking?  If so, please provide details. 
 
Post is not aware of any such partnership, beyond the 
previously mentioned work with the British NGO Child 
Protection Trust. 
 
-- B.  What sort of international assistance does the 
government provide to other countries to address TIP? 
 
HAVANA 00000109  016.3 OF 017 
 
 
 
Post is not aware of any such assistance provided by the GOC. 
 
Post has no comment for sections on the Child Soldier 
Preventions Act, nominations of heroes and best practices, 
and commendable initiatives 
 
 
POINT OF CONTACT for this report is Dale Lawton, Human Rights 
Officer, USINT Havana. Tel. 53-7-833-2686; Fax 53-7-836-4728; 
Email: LawtonLD@state.gov. 
 
Estimated time spent researching and preparing the TIP 
report: 45 hours 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
NEW REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CHILD SOLDIERS PREVENTION ACT 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶31. (U) Title IV of the TVPRA of 2008, the Child Soldiers 
Prevention Act of 2008 (CSPA), was signed into law on 
December 23, 2008 and, pursuant to its terms, became 
effective on June 21, 2009 (see reftel B).  The CSPA defines 
"child soldier" for the first time in U.S. law (see para 32) 
and contains the following provisions on sanctioned forms of 
military assistance. 
 
¶32. (U) Definition of "Child Soldier" under the Child 
Soldiers Prevention Act: Consistent with the provisions of 
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, the term "child soldier" means (i) any person under 18 
year of age who takes a direct part in hostilities as a 
member of governmental armed forces; (ii) any person under 18 
years of age who has been compulsorily recruited into 
governmental armed forces; (iii) any person under 15 years of 
age who has been voluntarily recruited into governmental 
armed forces; or (iv) any person under 18 years of age who 
has been recruited or used in hostilities by armed forces 
distinct from the armed forces of a state; this includes any 
person described in clauses (ii), (iii), or (iv) who is 
serving in any capacity, including in a support role such as 
a cook, porter, messenger, medic, guard, or sex slave. 
 
¶33.  Required for posts in countries that have been the 
subject of allegations regarding unlawful child soldiering 
(by government forces, government-supported militias armed 
groups, or independent militias armed groups) in the TIP 
Report, the Human Rights Report, or both : Report if the 
following occurred: conscription or forced recruitment of 
persons under the age of 18 into governmental armed forces; 
voluntary recruitment of any person under 15 years of age 
into governmental armed forces; the extent to which any 
person under the age of 18 took a direct part in hostilities 
as a member of governmental armed forces; recruitment (forced 
or voluntary) of persons under the age of 18 by armed groups 
distinct from those of the governmental armed forces, 
including paramilitary forces, illegal paramilitary groups, 
guerrillas, or other armed groups.  Describe trends toward 
improvement of the above-mentioned practices, including steps 
and programs the government undertook or the continued or 
increased tolerance of such practices, including the role of 
the government in engaging in or tolerating such practices. 
Report abuse of children recruited by armed forces or the 
armed groups noted above (e.g., sexual abuse or use for 
forced labor). Describe the manner and age of conscription. 
 
HAVANA 00000109  017.3 OF 017 
 
 
In discussing activities of armed groups distinct from those 
of governmental armed forces, explain the position of the 
government towards the armed group (opposition, tolerance, 
support, etc.) in detail. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
NOMINATION OF HEROES AND BEST PRACTICES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶34. (U) HEROES:  The introductions to the past five TIP 
Reports have included sections honoring Anti-Trafficking 
"Heroes".  These individuals or representatives of 
organizations or governments demonstrate an exceptional 
commitment to fighting TIP above and beyond the scope of 
their assigned work.  The Department encourages post to 
nominate one or more such individuals for inclusion in a 
similar section of the 2010 Report.  Please submit, under a 
subheading of "TIP Hero(es)," a brief description of the 
individual or organization's work, and note that the 
appropriate individual(s) has been vetted through databases 
available to post (e.g. CLASS and any law enforcement 
systems) to ensure they have no visa ineligibilities or other 
derogatory information. 
 
¶35. (U) COMMENDABLE INITIATIVES:  For the past six years the 
Report has carried a section on "International Commendable 
Initiatives" in addressing TIP.  This section highlights 
particular initiatives used by governments or NGOs in 
addressing the various challenges of TIP and serves as a 
useful guide to foreign governments and posts as they design 
anti-TIP projects and strategies.  The Department encourages 
post to nominate local anti-TIP initiatives from their host 
countries for showcasing in the 2010 Report.  Please submit, 
under a "Commendable Initiative" subheading, a brief summary 
of the activity or practice, along with the positive effect 
it has had in addressing TIP. 
.FARRAR