10JAKARTA186
MISSION INDONESIA FUNDING REQUEST TO AMPLIFY SOCIAL MEDIA
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0186 0430503
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120503Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4468UNCLAS JAKARTA 000186 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR R/PPR, IIP/EAP, EAP/PD 
INFO FOR PA, PA/OBS, EAP/MTS, S/P FOR JARED COHEN, IIP FOR DAN 
SREEBNY 
NSC FOR PRADEEP RAMAMURTHY 
WHITE HOUSE FOR KATIE LILLIE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO ID XC
SUBJECT: MISSION INDONESIA FUNDING REQUEST TO AMPLIFY SOCIAL MEDIA 
EFFORT IN TIME FOR MARCH POTUS VISIT 
 
REF: Jakarta 0065 
 
¶1. Action/funding request in paragraph 5. 
¶2. Summary:  Mission Indonesia requests immediate additional funding 
to use new media and social networking tools maximize online 
outreach for the POTUS visit scheduled for late March, 2010. 
Already the leading U.S. Mission in the world on Facebook with 
nearly 50,000 "fans," and one of the leading Missions using Twitter, 
YouTube and engaging local bloggers to promote USG messages and 
information, we are uniquely positioned to use these tools to 
amplify key topics and themes to support the upcoming visit by 
President Obama.  We request $100,000 in funding from R to boost our 
Facebook fan page membership to 1 million, and can accomplish this 
in 30 days.  End Summary. 
Proven PD 2.0 Expertise 
 
¶3. U.S. Mission Indonesia is on the forefront of Public Diplomacy 
2.0.  With over 50,000 fans the most of any diplomatic mission 
worldwide, are gaining traction using social media in Indonesia for 
PD.  Our efforts were recently cited in an article on CNET Asia, as 
"a great example of social media interaction in Indonesia," 
prompting the author to wonder "how long will it take for other 
organizations and businesses to do the same?"  We also have our own 
YouTube channel with over 300 videos, almost 1,000 followers on 
Twitter, and -- for the last two years -- engaged positively with 
thousands of country's most influential bloggers. 
 
Indonesia's New Media Environment 
 
¶4. Indonesia's internet community is emerging, but recently has 
become a powerful political force for reform (reftel).  With roughly 
10% of the population able to access the internet at least monthly, 
this represents over 25 million people, nearly half of whom are on 
Facebook.  In the seventh-largest and one of the fastest-growing 
Facebook markets in the world, we will directly reach a young, urban 
population which does not rely on traditional media as information 
sources.  In addition, Indonesians' special connection to the 44th 
President means that interest in the visit is incredibly high.  Our 
Facebook post announcing the visit had interactions and comments 
from over 1,000 people in less than two weeks, and stories about the 
visit appeared in the media every day since the official 
announcement. 
 
¶5. By actively connecting the POTUS visit to our new media efforts, 
we have a unique chance to build a sustainable online platform to 
engage Indonesians on USG issues and messages long after the visit. 
With enough funding to properly amplify and build on past our 
successes, Mission Indonesia requests $100,000 immediately in order 
reach a goal of 1 million Facebook fans in just 30 days -- just 
before POTUS visit. 
 
Action Plan and Implementation 
 
¶6. This money would be used in three areas.  First, it would 
increase direct advertising via Facebook.  Currently, Embassy 
Jakarta spends less than $25 per day on advertising, and nets 
between 300-400 new fans daily.  Increasing this tenfold over 30 
days, results in a gain of 100,000 to 120,000 fans.  The funds would 
also be used to promote the visit and our fan page as the place to 
learn more by extensively advertising on Indonesian online portals, 
banner ads, YouTube, Twitter, and other promotional efforts, 
including embedding bloggers, contests and giveaways, and using SMS 
technology.  With over 100 million mobile phone users in Indonesia, 
texting is a powerful way to include a huge audience.  Partnering 
with a major telecom provider, we can encourage Indonesians to sign 
up for real-time updates via their cell phone -- a great way to 
reach those not yet online about the visit.  Cost: $60,000. 
 
¶7. Another key promotion strategy to generate interest will be 
offering a "golden ticket" via Facebook.  We propose making a dream 
come true for one lucky Indonesian, by providing an opportunity to 
meet POTUS during his visit.  If the White House approves, we could 
invite fans to post why they should meet President Obama, and in 
doing so, use our social media platform to connect fans to the 
visit, as well as build excitement beforehand and follow-up coverage 
afterwards.  In addition, we could partner with a local TV station 
to have a "finalist" show and increase coverage.  RSO would ensure 
any winner(s) are vetted for security issues.  If the White House 
would not agree to this, an alternate "dream prize" might be an 
educational trip to the U.S.  Cost: $15,000. 
 
¶8. Third, in order to implement these ideas in this limited 
time-frame, we need short-term expert help on this promotion in the 
form of a qualified local digital marketing agency, who could assist 
the Embassy's new media team (currently one officer and three FSNs 
working on it part-time). Cost: $25,000. 
 
OSIUS