10KABUL437
Engaging Allies to Conclude MOUs on Life Support
Wed Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3419
OO RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #0437/01 0341536
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031536Z FEB 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5367
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO IMMEDIATE 3897
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL IMMEDIATE 0473
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 000437 
 
DOD FOR USDP FLOURNOY 
USNATO FOR AMB IVO DAALDER 
ISTANBUL PASS TO US DEL AT NATO DEFMIN CONFERENCE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/PPD 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL EAID PHUM SNAR PINR PTER AF
 
SUBJECT:  Engaging Allies to Conclude MOUs on Life Support 
 
REF: (A) 10 Kabul 376, (B) 09 Kabul 4152, (C) 09 Kabul 3981, (D) 09 
Kabul 3870, (E) 09 State 129187, (F) 09 Vilnius 709, (G) 09 
Stockholm 797, (H) 09 Stockholm 796, (I) 09 wellington 329, (J) 09 
Oslo 784, (K) 09 Madrid 1202, (L) 09 Paris 1726 
 
KABUL 00000437  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request - see paragraphs 5 and 6. 
 
Background: 
----------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Embassy Kabul is in the process of significantly 
increasing the number of USG civilians at Provincial Reconstruction 
Teams (PRTs) and other field locations, particularly District 
Support Teams (DSTs).  Of the 27 PRTs in Afghanistan, 14 are ISAF 
Coalition-led.  There are more than 75 U.S. civilians based at 
Coalition-led locations, and we hope to deploy far more in the 
coming months.  In order to facilitate this increase, we are trying 
to conclude MOUs with Coalition partners that will support such 
deployments.  To date, arrangements for accommodation and support of 
USG civilians at partner PRTs have been ad hoc and informal with no 
reimbursement. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Draft MOUs were initially presented in November to 
coalition partner Ambassadors based in Kabul by Ambassador Mussomeli 
(ref D).  Since then, we have been working via U.S. embassies in 
capitals as well as in Kabul to finalize the text of the MOUs, which 
have political rather than legal weight.  Most ISAF contributing 
governments have agreed in principle to sign MOUs with the USG, but 
thus far we have only concluded an MOU with the UK.  We are seeking 
to complete MOUs with the governments of Canada, Italy, New Zealand, 
Lithuania, France,  Hungary, Germany, Norway, Spain, Sweden and, if 
possible, Turkey.  We are seeking to conclude these agreements in 
Kabul. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) One of the key concerns among partners is that they may be 
unable to support large U.S. civilian contingents.  To address this 
concern, we have worked with governments to identify the maximum 
number of civilians that they could support at present, with an 
additional clause that would allow for further consultations if our 
governments wish to revise these projected numbers.  This language 
has satisfied most of our coalition partners.  Additionally, we have 
worked with partners to remove or revise language requiring them to 
provide a minimum number of ground movements for our personnel. 
This requirement has limited impact in the West and most of the 
North of Afghanistan where the relatively permissive security 
environment enables U.S. civilian officers to drive themselves 
rather than rely on military transport and security. 
 
¶5.  (U) We ask that you look for opportunities to use the following 
talking points on the margins of the NATO Defense Ministerial: 
 
General Talking Points: 
 
- The deployment of civilians with expertise in governance, 
agriculture and development is key to the success of our efforts in 
Afghanistan. 
 
- The United States has been working with your government to 
conclude an MOU on Life Support for U.S. civilians at coalition-led 
bases. 
 
- This agreement, while not legally binding, would establish a 
framework for cooperation for support to U.S. civilians at 
coalition-led Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRT) or other 
facilities. 
 
- Our cooperation until now has been under largely ad hoc 
arrangements that have not been funded.  This MOU will provide a 
mechanism for USG payment to coalition partners for support services 
provided to USG civilians at PRTs or other facilities. 
 
- Negotiations to date have taken into account concerns about 
over-burdening coalition partners in terms of numbers of civilians 
and support for mobility outside the base.  We believe the revised 
language we have worked out with each government provides adequate 
flexibility and consultations, and should address any concerns in 
this regard. 
 
- The UK and the U.S. signed an MOU on January 23. 
 
KABUL 00000437  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
- We encourage your government to finalize your review so that we 
can conclude the MOU as quickly as possible. 
 
¶6. (U) Country Specific Talking Points: 
 
(For Italy) 
 
- We have engaged with the Italian Ministry of Defense on the draft 
MOU and the initial response was positive, including in response to 
our request for support from the RC-West Quick Reaction Force and 
MEDEVAC services. 
 
- The MOD has told our Embassy that they will forward any suggested 
changes after they go over it with MFA. 
 
- The interlocutors in Rome did not foresee any problem with 
delegating the signing authority to the Italian Ambassador in Kabul. 
 
 
- One point that the Italian MOD has stressed is that the Italians 
would like to see even closer coordination of USAID, Italian 
Development Officials, and Italian Civil-Military Coordination 
(CIMIC) officers on the ground as a result of this MOU.   As this is 
our goal as well, this MOU will certainly facilitate this kind of 
cooperation. 
 
(For Canada) 
 
- We understand that your Embassy in Kabul is reviewing changes sent 
from Ottawa and has in turn forwarded the document to your PRT in 
Kandahar.  We would encourage your Embassy and PRT to finalize your 
review so that we can conclude the MOU as quickly as possible. 
 
(For Lithuania) 
 
- We understand that your Ministry of National Defense, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, our Embassy in Vilnius and our staff in Kabul and 
Herat had a very successful video conference call January 27, which 
resulted in bringing the two sides closer to reaching agreement on 
the substance of the MOU. 
 
- Once the final language is agreed to, we would request that the 
clearance of the MOU on behalf of the Lithuanian ministries be 
expedited so that we can sign the final agreement as soon as 
possible. 
 
(For Norway) 
 
- We appreciate the Norwegian Government's efforts to work with us 
on placing USG civilians on your PRT and to amend the MOU to address 
the issues of mobility and the ordering of containerized housing 
units for our personnel.  In particular, we appreciate your 
government's agreement to allow our USDA expert to move to the PRT 
without the MOU being concluded.  We encourage you to finalize your 
review of the document so that we can conclude the MOU as soon as 
possible. 
 
(For Germany) 
 
- We are pleased that your government welcomes the additional USG 
civilians on the German facilities in RC-North. 
 
- We recently provided a revised draft MOU to both your MoD in 
Berlin and your personnel at the PRT. 
 
- We hope that this revised version of the MOU will resolve any 
outstanding issues and we can move quickly to conclude the 
agreement. 
 
(For Hungary) 
 
- We have been working with your Ministry of Defense in Budapest to 
resolve issues related to mobility and the number of personnel 
located at the PRT. 
 
- Currently we have one USAID development advisor located at your 
PRT.  Although U.S. Forces will be moving into Kilagai, there is 
still a need to place additional USG civilians at the PRT given its 
 
KABUL 00000437  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
close location to the provincial capital and important Afghan 
officials. 
 
- We hope that the revised version of the MOU resolves your 
governments concerns so that we can move quickly to conclude the 
agreement. 
 
(For Spain and France) 
 
- In November, Ambassador Mussomeli presented your Ambassador with a 
copy of the MOU we are entering into with our coalition partners to 
place USG civilians at their facilities. 
 
- However, there has been no response from your Embassy or Ministry 
on the MOU. 
 
- We have reached out to our Embassies in (Madrid) and (Paris) to 
work with your Ministry on the MOUs.  In addition, Deputy Secretary 
Lew has offered to call your Minister of Foreign Affairs to 
encourage them to review the substance of the documents in 
cooperation with the Ministry of Defense. 
 
- We hope that we will be able to move forward on these documents 
quickly.  Our staff in Kabul stand ready to address any concerns or 
questions you may have on the agreements. 
 
(For Turkey) 
 
- In December, we presented to your Embassy a courtesy copy of the 
MOU we are entering into with our ISAF partners. 
 
- Although we have not placed any USG civilians at the Turkish 
facilities, we hope that as we increase the number of our USG 
civilians in the field and as Turkey establishes new facilities, we 
will be able to closely coordinate U.S. and Turkish activities in 
the field. 
 
- We would welcome the opportunity to place USG civilians at your 
facilities and conclude an MOU to provide for their life support 
needs. 
 
¶7.  (U) Post appreciates Department and USNATO's assistance in this 
request.  POC's for questions or comments on the MOUs are Ann Marie 
Yastishock at Kabul/USAID and Patricia McNerney at Kabul/IPA. 
 
EIKENBERRY