10KHARTOUM214
Sudan: UNMIS SRSG Describes UN Elections Prep in Farewell to
Mon Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO8713
RR RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0214/01 0390931
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080930Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0136
INFO IGAD COLLECTIVE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000214 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM KPKO MOPS SU
SUBJECT: Sudan: UNMIS SRSG Describes UN Elections Prep in Farewell to 
Diplomatic Corps 
 
¶1. Summary:  Ashraf Qazi, the UN Secretary General's Special 
Representative (SRSG) and head of the UN Mission to Sudan (UNMIS), 
assembled Chiefs of Mission and top aid representatives on February 
3 to say goodbye and to preview UN arrangements for the April 2011 
elections.  Qazi emphasized that the UN's priority, to support the 
National Electoral Commission (NEC) to deliver ballots to polling 
places, would strain resources; nonetheless, the UN would do what 
it could to support donor countries' election observation efforts. 
Additional funds are needed to provide elections training for 5,000 
police recruits in the South, and others in the North.  Meeting 
participants suggested close coordination between the UN and donor 
countries fielding observation missions on contentious issues such 
as refused or late-issued travel permits.  End Summary 
 
 
 
¶2. During the February 3 meeting, SRSG Gazi announced that he would 
depart the following week, and that his successor Haile Menkarios, 
whom he described as strong and experienced, would arrive in early 
March.  He also introduced Principal Deputy SRSG Jasbir Lidder 
Singh as the official in charge of the day-to-day operations of 
UNMIS during the interim period. 
 
 
 
-------------------------- 
 
UN Priority To Support NEC 
 
-------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. Qazi emphasized that the UN's priority in the April elections 
must be to support the NEC by helping to move ballots, ballot 
boxes, polling booths and other election-related materials to 
polling places.  With over 1,268 different types of ballot papers 
to be delivered throughout the country, the logistical arrangements 
will be extremely complicated and  strain UN resources. 
Nonetheless, where possible, the UN will do what it can to support 
donor countries' election observation efforts.  Lidder urged that 
countries asking for assistance notify the UN about their 
requirements as early as possible. 
 
 
 
¶4. A UN elections officer told the group that logistical 
arrangements had been complicated by the fact that the NEC had not 
yet announced key elements such as how registered voters will be 
allocated to the polling centers, how voters themselves will know 
to which polling center to go; how the military and internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) will vote, and how civic and voter 
education will be conducted. 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Mitigation Efforts Underway At Flashpoints 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶5. Summing up security matters in advance of the election, Rajendra 
Joshi, Chief of the UN Security and Safety Section, told the group 
that the fact that there had been no major clashes between 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) signatories constituted a major 
accomplishment.  Other security-related accomplishments include 
what he said was complete redeployment of the Sudanese Armed Forces 
(SAF) out of the South.  According to Joshi, the Sudan People's 
Liberation Army (SPLA) had achieved only 35 percent redeployment of 
its forces in the North.  He added that 32,723 soldiers are now in 
the Joint Integrated Units (JIUs), which is 82 percent of the 
planned target strength of 40,000.   However, Joshi warned, the 
potential for clashes between SAF and SPLA had not been eliminated, 
nor had the future of the JIUs following the 2011 referendum on 
independence for the south as yet been determined. 
 
 
 
¶6. The UN is monitoring for potential flashpoints, a UN security 
official pointed out.  Constant engagement, reporting of violations 
and negotiation have served to mitigate CPA-related conflict.  The 
UN has increased patrolling to gather  information and as a 
deterrent in the migration-related flashpoints in Abyei and Unity 
 
KHARTOUM 00000214  002 OF 002 
 
 
State, where the Misseriya exercise grazing rights, and in 
tribal-related flashpoints in Warrab and Unity States, and near 
Malakal, Kadugli, Kurmuk, Bor and Torit, 
 
 
 
¶7. Lord's Resistance  Army (LRA)-related incidents  peaked in March 
and September of 2009, followed by steady decreases, with only one 
incident reported in December 2009 and none in January 2010. 
According to a UN official, this is the result of a substantial 
degradation of LRA logistics and leadership capabilities, and a 
shift of LRA operations from West and East Equatoria to Western 
Bahr El Ghazal.  He added that the LRA is no longer a military 
threat. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
Additional Funds Needed for Police Election Training 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
 
 
¶8.  For the election, the UN has decided to deploy election 
security officers in  areas where there is no UNMIS presence, such 
as  north of Khartoum. 
 
 
 
¶9.  UN police officials also addressed the group.  The UN is 
conducting electoral security training for the police in both the 
North and the South, with better results in the North.  They said 
the South lacks equipment, and that 5,000 southern police recruits 
are currently awaiting training.  More funding is needed so that 
additional police can be trained in both the North and the South in 
advance of the elections. 
 
 
 
¶10.  Those in the meeting asked for information as to who within 
the UN system would coordinate observation missions, and suggested 
that countries fielding observation missions coordinate closely on 
issues such as refused or late issued travel permits. 
WHITEHEAD