10RABAT36
KING MOHAMMED VI'S SPEECH ON REGIONALIZATION
Thu Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0022
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0036/01 0210812
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210812Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1063
INFO RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVEUNCLAS RABAT 000036 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID PHUM MO WI
SUBJECT: KING MOHAMMED VI'S SPEECH ON REGIONALIZATION 
 
REF: RABAT 0026 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The latest cabinet reshuffle 
(reftel) came a day after King Mohammed VI appointed 
a new Advisory Committee on Regionalization tasked 
with developing a strategic plan to empower regional 
governance across Morocco.  Moroccan analysts and 
politicians generally welcomed the initiative to 
devolve power to the regions but which also has 
clear political implications for the Western Sahara. 
Should it gain momentum, the regionalization 
initiative would bolster the legitimacy of autonomy 
as a solution to the Sahara conflict, and would have 
other long-term positive consequences for Moroccan 
democracy.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Devolving Power Away from Rabat 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) More than two years after mooting the idea, 
King Mohammed VI named a 21-member Advisory 
Committee on Regionalization (ACR) on January 3 in a 
bid to accelerate the devolution of government power 
away from Rabat -- but also to reaffirm Morocco's 
claim to Western Sahara.  The King has given the 
committee six months to elaborate a plan "specific 
to Morocco's needs rather than an imitation of 
foreign models."  The result, he stated, would lead 
towards the renovation and modernization of the 
country's democratic institutions.  The King named 
Morocco's current ambassador to Spain, Omar 
Azziman, chairman of this 21-member committee, which 
includes representatives from different academic and 
professional backgrounds and, notably, three women. 
 
¶3.  (U) Regionalization in not a new idea, but 
Moroccan analysts' response to the king's newest 
initiative on the subject has generally been quite 
positive.  Moroccan political scholar Mohammed Darif 
commented in a press interview that the king's 
effort "responds to [Morocco's] authentic needs as 
it moves further along its democratic path."  He 
added that "Morocco is moving ahead with an 
initiative to give regional authorities more power 
to determine their own paths to development based on 
local conditions and not to wait all the time for a 
Rabat green light before launching projects, as the 
case is now."  Others said the initiative would also 
encourage inter-regional coordination, and more 
participatory approach to government.  Zineb El 
Adaoui and Amina Massouadi, two of the female ARC 
members, said in television interviews that 
regionalization would ultimately ensure the best use 
of human, economic and cultural resources. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In a separate discussion with PolCouns and 
Pol LES, Member of Parliament Hamid Narjisse, who is 
also the president of the Marrakesh regional 
council, welcomed the democratic benefits 
regionalization would bring.  He noted, however, 
that the level of "autonomy" that each region 
requires, based on local conditions, is different. 
For example, he said, Marrakesh already functioned 
well and enjoyed excellent cooperation between local 
and national authorities, thereby necessitating a 
different level of local autonomy than in Western 
Sahara, where very significant regionalization would 
be the essential factor in an eventual solution to 
the conflict. 
 
--------------- 
Regionalization 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) These positive responses notwithstanding, 
questions have emerged as to what extent Moroccan 
citizens would be consulted or allowed to be active 
in this new governance scheme.  The king's speech 
made clear that he seeks citizens' participation, 
but regional entities remain under the firm control 
of the powerful Ministry of the Interior (MOI), and 
changing that longstanding model will not be easy. 
Finances are also a critical issue.  Despite the 
presence of elected mayors and regional council 
presidents, the MOI still uses palace-approved 
administrators, known locally as "walis" or 
governors, to control and administer budgets, 
personnel resources and development initiatives 
everywhere -- again, a model that will take time and 
serious political will to change.  Morocco's 
political parties, too, would have to adjust their 
platforms and develop the technical expertise (which 
they do not currently have) to take on greatly 
enhanced administrative and budgetary 
responsibilities at the regional and sub-regional 
level.  Perhaps more importantly, the parties would 
have to find a way to deliver services and good 
governance to the citizens -- a task that up to now 
has been left largely in the hands of the walis. 
Whatever happens, the new setup is designed to shift 
the weight of responsibility to the citizens and 
their representatives and would certainly revive 
political life in Morocco.  This is by all measures 
a very positive step towards entrenching the 
democratic experience in Morocco. 
 
---------------------- 
Autonomy in the Sahara 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In addition to the political and 
administrative implications of an accelerated 
regionalization effort, it is no secret that the 
King intended to bolster and make more credible 
Morocco's autonomy proposal for resolving the 
Western Sahara conflict.  Analysts and politicians 
broadly agree that the king's speech was intended 
not only for Moroccan audiences, but also for 
Algerian leaders, the Spanish government, the 
Polisario in Tindouf , and pro-independence Sahrawis 
in Western Sahara.  Abdelilah Benkiran, leader of 
the Islamist-oriented Party of Justice and 
Development (PJD), interpreted the king's words as a 
clear message to the Polisario and to the Government 
of Algeria:  "We will go ahead with the autonomy 
plan.  You are more than welcome to get on board 
with us."  Likewise, other analysts have interpreted 
it as an equally clear message to domestic pro- 
independence activists, putting them on notice that 
they have six months to figure out ways to join the 
autonomy bandwagon -- otherwise regionalization will 
launch without them. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Certainly the king's plans for a root and 
branch shake up of the way Morocco is governed will 
prove significant -- if it takes hold.  Moroccans, 
including pro-independence activists, agree that the 
GOM's autonomy plan for the Western Sahara is a 
technical impossibility unless the monarchy finds a 
way to begin legitimately sharing power between the 
capital and the regions.  This is a tall order in a 
country that bases even its non-monarchial 
institutions on an ultra-centrist French-style 
model.  The choice of the Moroccan Ambassador to 
Spain to lead the effort and the lack of clarity 
about involving the walis do not bode well. 
Nonetheless, this tall order now appears to have the 
king's backing.  Should it gain momentum, the 
regionalization initiative would bolster the 
legitimacy of autonomy as a solution and would have 
other long-term positive consequences for Moroccan 
democracy.  End Comment. 
 
KAPLAN