10TELAVIV395
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0395/01 0501057
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191057Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5549
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 0315
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 3225
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 7310
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 7491
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 6725
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0065
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 7592
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 4340
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 2565
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 1217
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 8752
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 3751
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 7721
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 9824
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 2543
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 3766
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000395 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Media cited new developments in the investigation of the Dubai 
assassination affair:  Yediot bannered the finding that the 
assassins visited Dubai three times.  Israel Radio cited Irish 
police that there are now 19 suspects in the case.  Maariv led with 
the Dubai police chiefQs announcement yesterday that, if proven that 
the Mossad is behind the incident, PM Benjamin Netanyahu would top 
the list of wanted persons in the case, followed by Mossad Director 
Meir Dagan.  Other media reported that Dubai seeks DaganQs arrest. 
Maariv reported that Israeli representatives were asked to provide 
clarifications throughout Europe.  The Jerusalem Post quoted an 
Israeli diplomatic official as saying that there was no diplomatic 
crisis with the U.K., Qbecause there is nothing to connect this with 
Israel.Q  Yediot cited the British daily The Independent that the 
summons issued to Israeli ambassadors in Britain and Ireland were 
for show only.  Israel Radio cited the British Foreign ServiceQs 
denial of a Daily Mail report that it was informed in advance of the 
use of forged British passports.  The radio quoted William Hague, a 
senior MP of the British Conservative Party, as saying that the 
British Government might well have been told about it.  Israel Hayom 
quoted an Israeli diplomatic source as saying that the bulk of the 
diplomatic crisis is over.  Some media cited Arab media reports that 
Muhammad Dahlan, former head of Fatah security in Gaza, had a role 
in Mahmoud al-MabhouhQs assassination. 
 
Leading media reported that for the first time the U.N.Qs 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) admitted that Iran is 
developing a nuclear weapon.  A secret agency report cited concern 
that Iran is developing a nuclear warhead.  Israel Hayom cited the 
United StatesQ concern over the new revelations.  Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe cited IsraelQs concern that QAmerica is prepared to 
accept a nuclear Iran. 
 
HaQaretz quoted a senior GOI official in Jerusalem as saying 
yesterday that negotiations between Israel and the PA are to be 
renewed next week. The source said Israeli government officials had 
been told as much by Austrian FM Michael Spindelegger. The senior 
Austrian official, who visited Israel and the PA last week, told the 
officials that PA President Mahmoud Abbas had told him he would give 
his consent to the United States' request to renew talks with 
Israel.  Abbas met in Ramallah yesterday with David Hale, the U.S. 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs and 
deputy to U.S. Special Envoy for Middle East Peace Senator George 
Mitchell.  Hale gave Abbas American assurances regarding the renewal 
of talks with Israel, including a timetable for the move from 
indirect to direct talks, and clarifications regarding the issue of 
the 1967 borders.  The nature of these clarifications is unclear. 
The renewed negotiations are to use the "proximity" talks format, 
similar to the model of the Israel-Syria talks that were mediated by 
Turkey.  During the indirect phase of the talks, the Israeli and the 
Palestinian teams will sit in separate locations, and Mitchell and 
his staff will convey messages between them.  It is unclear whether 
the talks will take place in Israel or in Washington.  The U.S. has 
updated Israel on Hale's talks with Abbas.  The Israeli negotiating 
team also visited Washington last week to clarify Israel's position 
on conditions for the renewal of talks.  The team includes attorney 
Yitzhak Molcho and Brig. Gen. Mike Herzog.  A senior government 
source in Israel said that Israel wants the parties to move as soon 
as possible from proximity talks to direct talks on all core issues 
-- including borders, refugees, Jerusalem, and security 
arrangements.  Israel is hoping the direct talks will begin within a 
number of weeks, or two to three months at the most. 
 
HaQaretz reported that DM Ehud Barak will go to Washington next week 
to meet with senior U.S. government officials, including Defense 
Secretary Robert Gates and National Security Advisor Gen. James 
Jones.  Barak will then head to New York for a meeting with United 
Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.  The DM is expected to focus 
in these meetings on negotiations with the Palestinians, the Iranian 
nuclear program, the situation on Israel's northern front with Syria 
and Lebanon, and how to maintain the IDFQs qualitative edge. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the Israeli Foreign Ministry has come to 
regret its snubbing of a U.S. congressional delegation this week and 
sent a senior official to apologize.  The apology, however, failed 
to assuage the deeply insulted congressmen, whose visit was 
sponsored by left-wing American advocacy group J Street. 
 
Leading media quoted Noam Shalit, the father of Hamas prisoner Gilad 
Shalit, as saying during a meeting in Israel with the members of the 
Conference of Presidents of Major [U.S.] Jewish Organizations that 
the U.S. administration is putting off the deal over his sonQs 
release.  Noam Shalit was quoted as saying: QWe are hearing voices 
from the U.S. administration hinting to decision-makers in Israel 
not to carry out the proposed swap to have Gilad released.Q  Noam 
Shalit was quoted as saying that the U.S. fears that the deal will 
endanger the stability of PA President Mahmoud Abbas.  Yediot cited 
the U.S. Jewish leadersQ promise to QdemonstrateQ against the U.S. 
administration. 
 
Yediot reported that British Conservative politicians have promised, 
if elected, to allow Kadima chair and former FM Tzipi Livni to enter 
the U.K without worrying about being arrested. 
 
The Jersalem Post reported that the 27 EU foreign minister, set to 
hold their monthly meeting in Brussels n Monday, are expected to 
discuss the Goldstone ommission report and issue a statement that 
will be the basis of a debate on the issue to begin in the European 
Parliament two days later. 
 
Leading media reported that yesterday a Lebanese court sentenced to 
death a man convicted of collaborating ith Israel.  Israel Radio 
quoted Arab League Secetary-General Amr Moussa as saying that the 
Arabstates will come to LebanonQs rescue, should it be attacked by 
Israel. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Israel and Egypt are considering a joint 
solar energy project in Sinai. 
 
Former Consul-General in New York Alon Pinkas, whose candidacy for 
the U.N. ambassadorship was allegedly thwarted by Sara Netanyahu, 
the PMQs wife, was quoted as saying in an interview with Yediot that 
no matter what Sara did, Benjamin Netanyahu, who had initially 
offered Pinkas the Washington posting, asking for PinkasQ help in 
bringing in useful contacts in the U.S., owes him an answer 
regarding the U.N post.  Yediot cited a response by the Prime 
MinisterQs Office that Pinkas did not receive any promise to become 
IsraelQs ambassador to the U.N. 
 
Major media reported that the first Eitan Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
(UAV), also known as Heron TP, will enter service with the IAF on 
Sunday.  The 4.5-ton plane, made by Israel Aerospace Industries, can 
maintain automatic high-altitude flight for 60 hours and is fitted 
with satellite communications, specialized sensors and other 
equipment for reconnaissance and intelligence-gathering hundreds of 
kilometers beyond Israel's borders.  The Eitan is expected to 
enhance the IAF's ability to operate for a long time at a great 
distance, even over Iran. It can fly at an altitude of 45,000 feet 
and gather much more accurate information than the IDF can obtain 
today.  Media cited classified information that the aircraft is also 
geared for air combat. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Israel has reached an agreement with the U.S. 
over intellectual property rights, after a decade of disagreement. 
Industry, Trade, and Labor Minister Benjamin Ben-Eliezer was quoted 
as saying yesterday that the two countries have reached an 
understanding which will remove Israel from the blacklist of nations 
that violate intellectual property rights.  The agreement states 
that Israeli laws on pharmaceuticals will be changed -- to the 
disadvantage of generic drug makers, such as Teva Pharmaceuticals. 
In practice, the changes will lengthen the patent protection for 
drugs by a year or two.  Once the legislative changes are made, the 
U.S. has committed itself to actively support Israel's acceptance 
into the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, as 
the issue was one of the major disputes holding up Israel's entry 
into the OECD. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Israel will set up a $1.5 million 
school for 1,000children in Haiti. 
 
All media reported somewhat sarcastically that DM Ehud Barak has 
bought a luxury apartment in central Tel Aviv without having to sell 
his current, more expensive one.  The dwelling, which costs 10 
million shekels (around $2.5 million), will be ready in four years. 
 
Major media reported that on Sunday the state will approve a plan 
for the preservation of 150 sites of Jewish and Israeli interest, 
including Masada, Ben GurionQs Tel Aviv house and his Negev 
residence and tomb, RachelQs Tomb at the entrance to Bethlehem, and 
the historical Khan along the Tel Aviv-Jerusalem highway.  The cost 
of the project will be 600 million shekels (around $150 million) -- 
400 million shekels from government funds and 200 million to be 
raised from external sources.  The Jerusalem Post said that RachelQs 
Tomb and the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron -- which the PA wants 
to include in its future stateQs territory -- might not make it onto 
the heritage list. 
Major media reported that yesterdayQs visit by the Dalai Lama to the 
White House is exacerbating Sino-American tension.  HaQaretz dubbed 
him a Qwelcome visitorQ in Washington. 
 
Yediot reported on an art exhibition -- the Qfirst Mediterranean 
biennale in HaifaQ -- held in a shipping container -- that includes 
works by Israeli, Palestinian, Moroccan, Turkish, Dutch, German, and 
Romanian artists. 
 
Maariv cited the concern of Israeli clothing retail chains that 
American chains that are opening stores here might seriously 
challenge their businesses. 
 
-------------------------- 
¶1.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
QThe Ministry for Isolating Israel 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (2/19): QThe 
stupidity that has overtaken the Foreign Ministry under the 
leadership of Avigdor Lieberman and Danny Ayalon sank to a new low 
this week.  When a delegation of American congressmen, who came to 
Israel at the initiative of the leftist Jewish lobby J Street, asked 
to meet with senior Foreign Ministry officials in Jerusalem they 
encountered obstacles and delays.  Then, at the last minute, the 
Foreign Ministry agreed to arrange the meetings -- but said the 
congressmen had to come alone, without their J Street escorts.  The 
guests refused and convened a press conference at which they called 
the behavior of Israel's government a disgrace.  It is hard to 
imagine a more harmful and unnecessary blow to Israel's foreign 
relations than boycotting U.S. congressmen and their escorts from a 
Jewish organization.  No bureaucratic justification -- such as Qthe 
professionals advised against meeting with the group,Q which the 
Foreign Ministry is now claiming -- can excuse this.  The support of 
Congress and the U.S. Jewish community are Israel's greatest 
strategic assets.... The congressmen and their escorts deserve an 
apology from the government.  Even more urgently needed is a 
reassessment of Israel's foreign relations in the Lieberman era. 
Instead of bolstering Israel's international standing, it seems the 
Foreign Minister and his deputy seek to deepen its isolation.  Under 
their leadership, the Foreign Ministry has turned into a thought 
police and a ministry for silencing criticism.  Following angry 
outbursts against the Scandinavians and the Turks, Israel is now 
humiliating U.S. congressmen, whose support is essential.  Before 
any more harm is done, Netanyahu must rescind his problematic 
appointments at the top of the Foreign Ministry and find 
replacements for both Lieberman and Ayalon. 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  QRerun 
 
Diplomatic correspondent and television anchor Ben Caspit wrote in 
the popular, pluralist Maariv (2/19): QWhat was good [in 1970] (when 
[current Mossad head Meir] Dagan was credited with personal 
operations that would QawardQ him three or four Goldstone reports 
today) is not presently valid.  Putting the secret organization in 
his hands, when any tumbling could turn into a global disaster, is 
dangerous.... Something went wrong in Dubai.  According to one 
assessment, the elimination should have been quiet and unsigned. 
MabhouhQs death should have considered natural. 
 
 
 
 
II.  QA Hit with Few Consequences 
 
Palestinian affairs correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote on page one 
of the independent, left-leaning HaQaretz (2/19): Q[HamasQ] panic 
could provide an answer to Israelis' questions about whether the 
[Dubai] assassination was a success or failure: the efforts to keep 
Mabhouh's identity secret failed and a key player in its smuggling 
operation is gone.... Moreover, the killing has a deterrent effect 
-- Hamas' boasts of its military prowess will now be taken with a 
grain of salt by the people in Gaza.  Therefore it's hard to call 
this operation a failure.  The operational goal was achieved.  The 
assassins came home safely (aside from two Palestinians who 
evidently helped them).... The real snafu was the use of forged 
European passports bearing the names of real Israeli dual citizens. 
But it's hard to imagine any other method by which foreign agents 
could enter and operate in hostile territory. 
 
III.  QNo More than Ricochets 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized (2/19): 
QIf those who in the past handled [sic] [Khaled] Mashal and [Imad] 
Mughniyah are the same as those who took care of al-Mabhouh, the 
[Dubai liquidation] was no failure.... Offensive fighting must 
continue.  The achievement is big enough for Israel to take in media 
and diplomatic ricochets.  The damage caused by criminals such as 
the late al-Mabhouh ... justify temporary inconvenience to a few 
citizens who woke up one day to headlines that mentioned their 
names. 
 
IV.  QTearing the Palestinian LeaderQs Mask 
 
Veteran journalist and television anchor Dan Margalit wrote in the 
independent Israel Hayom (2/19): QOlmert quietly promised the 
Palestinians that 25,000 of their people would be able to enter 
Israel within its Green Line border,  But Abu Mazen has not 
responded to this offer until this day.  This is surprising and even 
amazing, since he is interested in a two-state solution.  He should 
have adopted OlmertQs proposal with fervor and embarrassed his 
successor Netanyahu.  But the Ramallah leader is so afraid of peace 
that he wouldnQt even touch the proposal.  It is the mask on Abu 
MazenQs face that Peace Now should tear off tomorrow during a 
demonstration at Tel AvivQs Cinematheque Square [a well-known venue 
for left-wing protests].  The rallyQs organizers will certainly not 
do that. 
 
 
¶V.  QThe Fatah Fairy Tale 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick 
wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (2/19): QThere 
is no doubt that an Israeli denunciation of [Mahmoud] Abbas and his 
mafia would enrage the U.S. and EU.  Apparently, Netanyahu, who, to 
please President Barack Obama, accepted the two-state paradigm in 
spite of the fact that he opposes it, and suspended Jewish 
construction in Judea and Samaria [i.e. the West Bank] despite the 
fact that knows doing this is wrong -- is loath to pick a fight by 
pointing out the obvious fact that the PA is a corrupt band of 
oppressive thieves.  [Fatah whistleblower Fahmi] Shabaneh argues 
that due to PA corruption, Hamas remains the preferred alternative 
for Palestinians in Judea and Samaria.  In his view, the only reason 
Hamas has yet to take over Judea and Samaria is the IDF presence in 
the areas.  The strategic implications of his statement are clear. 
Far from being a bulwark against Hamas, Abbas empowers the 
Iranian-backed jihadist force.  The only bulwark against Hamas is 
Israel.... As for angering the White House, the fact of the matter 
is that by pointing out that Abbas is not a credible leader, Israel 
will make it more difficult for Obama and his advisers to coerce 
Israel into making further concessions that will only further 
empower Hamas. 
 
--------- 
¶3.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  QLet Them Talk with Someone Else 
 
Columnist Shmuel Rosner, who was HaQaretzQs correspondent in 
Washington, wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv (2/19): QThe 
incessant race of American envoys coming to Israel to reassure it is 
actually very discomforting and somewhat pressuring.... Something a 
bit strange happened this week to the Obama administration, just 
after the relative failure of the Q2/11Q events -- i.e. after it 
turned out that the Iranian opposition is far from success (when the 
AyatollahsQ regime managed to suppress and put an end to rioting 
pockets, as Qregime changeQ wouldnQt apparently be here tomorrow 
morning.  The Obama administration suddenly started talking about 
Qregime changeQ with increasing enthusiasm. 
 
II.  QAvoiding the Last Resort 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel and Palestinian affairs 
correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
HaQaretz (2/19): QWhile Iran is deliberately heating up the 
atmosphere, the United States is seeking to cool it down a little. 
Strangely enough, at this stage both sides have interpreted Israel's 
role in a similar manner; both apparently believe it could lose its 
patience.... In [Mohamed ElBaradeiQs] absence, it looks as though 
the IAEA will also align itself with future U.S. analyses and harden 
its tone toward Iran.  Israel will choose to attack only as a last 
resort.  If Iran continues to enrich uranium and Washington does not 
succeed in imposing genuine sanctions, or if such sanctions do not 
move Iran, this question becomes more relevant.  In such a case, 
Israel would have more legitimacy for acting in self-defense, and 
could not be blamed when diplomatic efforts fail.  For the time 
being, the Netanyahu government will try to QtranslateQ the fear of 
its future actions into hard currency.  The United States has 
already deployed a radar system in Israel, which has improved the 
country's deterrent capability against missile strikes.  Israel 
recently received a commitment regarding U.S. Army emergency 
storehouses here.  If we accept the version of the Prime Minister's 
Office, there may also have been success on the Russian front, in 
the form of another delay in the deal to sell SA-300 anti-aircraft 
missiles to Tehran. 
 
III.  QMullen and Biden Are Coming to Sniff Around 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Lord wrote in the nationalist, Orthodox Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe (2/19): QIranQs clients fear that Israel is 
deliberately conducting an assassination campaign in order to 
produce deterioration.  Deterioration means escalation at some time, 
followed by a flare-up.  This seems to be the reason for their 
frequent talk of war.  The Americans can see this.  They may wonder 
why Israel would want a war.  If such big guns as Mullen and Biden 
come to Israel, they must be afraid that Israel might want to take 
advantage of a flare-up in its vicinity in order to deal a military 
blow on IranQs nuclear installations.  Israel appears to signal that 
it encourages an international a clash over Iran.  But Israel has no 
reason to trust such steps -- certainly not under the direction of 
President Barack Obama.  To this day he hasnQt demonstrated 
leadership to match the magnitude of the challenge.  He has neither 
enlisted international forces needed to wrap up the sanctions issue 
nor creates a credible military threat.  Deadlines follow one 
another and nothing tangible is happening. 
 
IV.  QIt Is Now Clear : ElBaradei Tried to Put the World to Sleep 
 
Veteran journalist and television anchor Dan Margalit wrote in the 
independent Israel Hayom (2/19): QThe International Atomic Energy 
Agency has stopped lying to itself and to the world.  Its new head, 
Yukiya Amano, has drafted a detailed report that unequivocally 
determined that Iran is acting to develop nuclear weapons.... It is 
hard to know on whose behalf Dr. ElBaradei churned out the delaying 
tactics that could have turned into a long-lasting catastrophe.... 
What remains to be seen now is whether the world was terribly 
naove.... In the wake of yesterdayQs report, it is not enough for 
foreign ministries to express their concern.  Economy ministries 
around the world, followed by defense ministries, must be enlisted 
to contain the Iranian move.... It is too late anyway. 
 
CUNNINGHAM