04DUBLIN1770
SHANNON/IMMIGRATION: PM EXPRESSES CONCERNS
Wed Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2004
SECRET
Embassy Dublin
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T DUBLIN 001770 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/03/2014 
TAGS: MOPS PREL SMIG SOCI
SUBJECT: SHANNON/IMMIGRATION: PM EXPRESSES CONCERNS 
 
REF: DUBLIN 1739 
 
Classified By: AMB JAMES KENNY FOR REASONS 1.4 B AND D 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  During a meeting with the Ambassador and 
Senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham, the Irish Prime 
Minister raised his concerns about two separate issues:  the 
U.S. military's use of Shannon and the immigration bill 
pending in Congress. He also updated the Senators on the 
Northern Ireland Peace Process and discussed transatlantic 
relations.  End Summary 
 
A Warning on Shannon 
-------------------- 
¶2. (S) PM Ahern asked the Ambassador to confirm that the U.S. 
has not and will not transport prisoners through Shannon 
airport.  Echoing comments we had heard from DFA earlier in 
the week (reftel), the prime minister said that while there 
are no plans to alter arrangements with the U.S. at Shannon, 
the subject is "beginning to worry people."  He referenced 
his government's repeated defense of the U.S. military's use 
of Shannon to parliament, in which he and other ministers 
have referred to U.S. assurances that enemy combatants have 
not transited Shannon enroute to Guantanamo or elsewhere and 
will not without consultation.  "Am I all right on this?" he 
asked the ambassador.  Following the meeting, Sen McCain told 
the ambassador he plans to raise Shannon with the 
Administration when he returns to Washington and will 
underscore how very important it is that the U.S. not ever be 
caught in a lie to a close friend and ally. 
 
Immigration Bill - Concerns about Irish "overstays" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶3. (SBU) The Prime Minister raised the issue of Irish 
citizens who had overstayed their visas in the U.S. and asked 
for an amnesty for them.  He indicated that the Irish 
government is following legislation in Congress closely and 
would like Irish "overstays" to get a second chance.  Sen 
McCain recognized his concern and explained some of his own 
goals with regard to the legislation.  Comment:  The prospect 
of Irish overstays being deported from the U.S. is a major 
concern with the Irish government and public.  It garners 
much press attention, and adds to disgruntlement over 
fingerprinting.  End Comment 
 
Transatlantic Relations, Iraq, MEPP and Ukraine 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶4. (C) Responding to questions from Senator McCain, the Prime 
Minister said that the U.S. could solve its problems in 
Europe by putting attention into the Middle East peace 
process.  PM Ahern said that Iraq must be a success and that 
all must help make that happen.  Politicians, the prime 
minister said, were "getting over" their disagreement with 
the U.S., but the public has not, yet, especially as regards 
Guantanamo and Abu Graib.  McCain raised the issue of 
Ukraine.  Ahern referred to Russian President Putin as a 
"slippery character."  He talked about the gala Putin had put 
on for the EU at the celebration of St. Petersburg's 400th 
anniversary but said there had been absolutely no Russian 
follow through on promises made then with the EU.  "All show 
and no action" is how he described Putin's approach to the EU. 
 
Sen. McCain Gets Standing Ovation 
--------------------------------- 
¶5.  (U) Senator McCain came to Ireland to deliver a speech to 
Trinity College on re-building transatlantic ties.  He 
received a standing ovation from the crowd of 400, and 
favorable press coverage. His reference to Putin as an 
autocrat meddling in Eastern Europe drew headlines, but the 
thrust of his message was this, "When the United States and 
the countries of Europe stand together, it creates a moral 
and political force that gives no ground to the enemies of 
freedom.  The world needs us together and we need each 
other." 
KENNY