04WELLINGTON662
U) NSDD-38 REQUEST FOR NEW POSITION IN WELLINGTON
Wed Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2004
SECRET
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T WELLINGTON 000662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR HR/RMA/CSEP (LOWENGART) AND EAP/EX (MITCHELL) 
CANBERRA FOR SUSLOC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/04/2014 
TAGS: APER AMGT NZ
SUBJECT: (U) NSDD-38 REQUEST FOR NEW POSITION IN WELLINGTON 
 
REF: STATE 138636 
 
Classified By: AMB. CHARLES J. SWINDELLS FOR REASON 1.5 (C). 
 
¶1.  (S) The National Security Agency (NSA) has requested a 
new, permanent position in Wellington attached to, but not 
residing at, the Embassy (reftel) - a Deputy Special U.S. 
Liaison Officer.  Based on a thorough review of the policy 
and resource implications of this request, the Ambassador 
recommends that the State Department approve this request. 
He believes that the potential benefits of the new position 
-- in terms of closer signals intelligence cooperation with 
New Zealand -- far outweigh the additional administrative 
burden it will place on the Embassy. 
 
¶2.  (S) The Ambassador's recommendation reflects the 
following analysis.  The new position will advance US 
interests in New Zealand by improving liaison and cooperation 
on vital signals intelligence matters.  This is an area where 
the US and NZ already work together closely and profitably, 
and continuing to build and expand that relationship clearly 
stands to benefit both countries.  This is especially true in 
the post-September 11 environment, where NZ sigint 
capabilities significantly enhance our common efforts to 
combat terrorism in the region and the world.  The Embassy 
already has a close working relationship with the NZ 
Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) that will be 
enhanced by the establishment of this new position.  Embassy 
also has an understanding with NSA that the new position will 
cover Congressionally mandated information security 
requirements that neither the Defense Attache Office nor our 
State officers have the technical expertise to undertake. 
 
¶3.  (S) On administrative matters, the GCSB will provide the 
new NSA officer with office space; office furniture; 
computer, telephone and other equipment and supplies.  NSA 
will fully fund the position and will pay for housing and 
purchase all residential furnishings directly.  NSA will 
contract with the Embassy for the following ICASS services: 
Basic Package; Community Liaison Office services; Financial 
Management Services (medium level support); General Services 
(low level support); and Short-Term Residential Lease 
Building Operations.  As a result of these arrangements, the 
resource impact of the new position on this Special Embassy 
Program post will be minimized, and can be fully absorbed 
within post's current ICASS system. 
 
¶4.  (S) Based on the scenario above, there should be no 
start-up costs associated with this new position.  Using 
Embassy's FY 2004 service costs as a base, the total annual 
estimated cost of providing ICASS services is USD 23,649. 
 
¶5.  (S) Embassy recommends that Washington agencies determine 
the appropriate level and type of accreditation for this new 
position. 
 
Swindells