06MANAGUA841
VENEZUELA NOW USING FERTILIZER TO GROW SUPPORT FOR
Mon Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
SECRET
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0841/01 1072126
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 172126Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5984
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0615S E C R E T MANAGUA 000841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/12/2016 
TAGS: ECON ENRG EFIN PGOV NU PREL SOCI VE CU EPET
EAGR 
SUBJECT: VENEZUELA NOW USING FERTILIZER TO GROW SUPPORT FOR 
FSLN IN NICARAGUA 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2613 
 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2599 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 1944 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 1577 
     ¶E. MANAGUA 1333 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR PAUL TRIVELLI FOR REASONS 1.4 (a & b) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In only the latest example of Bolivarian 
Republic of Venezuela (BRV) efforts to bolster the Sandinista 
Front Party (FSLN) in Nicaragua's 2006 national elections, 
11,260 metric tons of urea have been sent for distribution by 
a Sandinista Cooperative to the rural poor as part of an 
eventual provision of 50,000 tons.  Several of the FSLN's 
opponents claim that the urea is part of a US $50 million 
electoral aid package for the FSLN by the BRV.  While post 
cannot verify that figure, other BRV assistance includes 
still theoretical reduced-price oil, funding of a 
Cuban-administered literacy campaign, and free medical care 
for poor Nicaraguans.  While presented as benign economic and 
social aid, these donations are managed by FSLN-run 
municipalities and announced with FSLN leader Daniel Ortega 
and the Venezuelan ambassador on hand. 
 
¶2. (S) Summary Continued: USG sources also have evidence of 
direct campaign assistance from Venezuela, such as the 
financing of three helicopters for use by the FSLN and an 
underground network of cash payments.  Local executives of 
ESSO (Exxon Mobile) who run Nicaragua's only oil refinery 
also suspect that Venezuela's oil politics are aiming to 
drive them out of the country, paving the way for Venezuela 
to purchase the refinery at a bargain price.  Although 
Venezuelan election activities in Nicaragua present a cause 
for real concern, the Liberal Constitutionalist Party (PLC) 
is attempting to increase USG alarm about improper influence 
by the Chavez government to weaken our resolve in calling for 
an end to the party's control by convicted ex-president 
Arnoldo Aleman.  End Summary. 
 
¶3. (U) Over the last week, local press has covered claims by 
representatives of various political parties in Nicaragua 
that Venezuela plans to spend US $50 million to bolster the 
FSLN's chances of winning the November national elections. 
The PLC and Sandinista-breakaway party Herty 2006 have been 
most vocal.  Both the FSLN and Venezuela's ambassador to 
Nicaragua deny allegations of direct political interference. 
Sandinista Front leader, Daniel Ortega, and the BRV have, 
however, proudly trumpeted several "humanitarian" programs 
offered by the BRV and administered by FSLN mayors. 
 
¶4. (S) Sandinista Front opponents have not offered concrete 
information as to how they arrived at the $50 million figure. 
 They do argue that the fuel and urea offered by the BRV give 
the FSLN the opportunity to both benefit politically from 
making these products available below cost and to convert the 
profits into cash for electioneering.  While post has no 
specific information about the $50 million figure, it is 
clear that the BRV is providing direct financial assistance 
to the Sandinista Front.  USG sources have verified that the 
Chavez government is paying for three helicopters and fuel 
for use by the FSLN in election activities.   Also, sources 
assert that several FSLN party officials frequently travel to 
Venezuela and return with large sums of cash. 
 
¶5. (C) Recent press reports state that the BRV plans to 
donate 50,000 tons of urea (a powderized fertilizer/animal 
feed obtained by the reaction of liquid ammonia and liquid 
carbon dioxide from petroleum processing) for distribution to 
the rural poor of Chinandega and Corinto by the Sandinista 
Agricultural Services Cooperative (Nicaraocoop).  While some 
claims of Venezuelan support in the past have proven 
nebulous, the urea delivery is proceeding quickly.  In an 
April 12 telephone conversation, Luvy Perez, Director of 
Inspections for the Nicaraguan Customs Agency (DGI) confirmed 
that 11,260 metric tons of urea have already arrived from 
Venezuela and are ready for distribution to 
Sandinista-controlled municipalities.  In a press report, the 
president of Nicaraocoop said that the urea is being provided 
below-cost rather than as a donation, although Sandinista 
officials called it a donation when they announced the 
program with great fanfare. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Venezuela has also reportedly donated US $10 million 
for a new literacy program developed by the Government of 
Cuba, to be run by local governments, called "Yo Si Puedo" 
("Yes I Can").  While now technically open to any city in 
Nicaragua (in order to receive GON permission to operate), it 
was originally only offered to FSLN-controlled local 
 
governments and only those governments are now participating. 
 REFTEL C reported that the GON had planned to deny the 
Sandinista-oriented Augusto C. Sandino Foundation (FACS) 
permission to import equipment needed for the program. 
Recent press reports, however, state that the GON capitulated 
and the materials have entered.  The equipment consists of 
5,000 televisions, 5,000 VCRs and a large amount of training 
materials (including 500,000 workbooks).  The estimated cost 
of the three-year program is US 21.6 million.  The Office of 
the Mayor of Managua has begun airing television commercials 
to hype the program and the Office of the Mayor of Masaya has 
posted "Yo Si Puedo" billboards. 
 
¶7. (U) The FSLN and the BRV have received a great deal of 
media attention for the announced deal to sell or loan 
below-market priced oil to Sandinista Municipalities (REFTELs 
B and E).  In fact, versions of the deal have been announced 
multiple times.  Despite the political benefit derived from 
the hoopla, technical issues have prevented the deal's 
implementation. 
 
¶8. (C) On the other hand, Venezuela's oil politics in 
Nicaragua may have an even more nefarious purpose.  During 
the recent agitation for an extra confiscatory tax on oil 
companies to subsidize the transport system, the manager of 
the Esso refinery, which operated throughout the years of 
Sandinista government without being confiscated, raised the 
possibility to the Ambassador that behind-the-scenes forces 
might be angling to maneuver his company out of Nicaragua. 
If ExxonMobil were to be placed in a position where all of 
their Nicaraguan profits were taxed away, he explained, they 
might see no alternative to closing down operations here, 
leaving Nicaragua's only petroleum refinery available, no 
doubt at a sale price, to another entrant - quite possibly a 
Venezuelan one. 
 
¶9. (U) The BRV has also announced plans to provide surgical 
care in Venezuela for 3,000 people from Nicaragua.  This 
program would be administered by the FSLN-run Office of the 
Mayor of Managua.  In addition to the medical care, the BRV 
will pay for airfare, room and board.  The first 120 patients 
are slated to travel to Venezuela this week. 
 
¶10. (C) Novis Rosales, Executive Director of the Liberal 
Patriotic Mayors Association (ASALPAT) informed poloff on 
April 17 that 25 PLC mayors recently received an offer from 
the Venezuelan ambassador to participate in a city exchange 
program with mayors in Venezuela.  The offer includes an all 
expense-paid tour of Venezuela, including a charter flight 
from Managua.  Rosales stated that he reported the plan to 
PLC president Jorge Castillo Quant, who categorically 
rejected the offer as a publicity stunt of Venezuelan 
president Hugo Chavez.  Rosales and Castillo Quant believe 
that Chavez would use the event to deflect charges that the 
Venezuelan government is unfairly favoring FSLN mayors with 
donations during an election year.  Castillo Quant instructed 
Rosales to make sure that PLC mayors avoid any appearance of 
cooperating with the Venezuelan government. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Comment: Venezuela is clearly pulling out all the 
stops to assist the FSLN in this critical election year. 
Sandinista opponents and much of the media have pointed out 
the hypocrisy of those who criticize U.S. "interference" and 
yet allow Venezuela play a direct role in assisting a 
specific Nicaraguan political party.  The PLC, however, has a 
special motive to foster USG fears of improper Venezuelan 
influence.  The PLC likely hopes that alarm over BRV 
interference will lead the United States to curb its 
criticism of ex-president and PLC leader Arnoldo Aleman, who 
was convicted for defrauding the GON of US $100 million and 
money laundering.  End Comment. 
TRIVELLI