09GUATEMALA311
A/S SHANNON'S MARCH 19-21 VISIT TO GUATEMALA
Wed Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Embassy Guatemala
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGT #0311/01 0911711
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 011711Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7218
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0279
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHDCS E C R E T GUATEMALA 000311 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2018 
TAGS: PREL ECON SNAR CVIS PGOV PHUM UN HO ES CU GT
SUBJECT: A/S SHANNON'S MARCH 19-21 VISIT TO GUATEMALA 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 222 
     ¶B. GUATEMALA 170 
     ¶C. GUATEMALA 239 
     ¶D. GUATEMALA 265 
     ¶E. GUATEMALA 134 
     ¶F. 2008 GUATEMALA 1550 
     ¶G. 2008 GUATEMALA 387 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Counselor Drew Blakeney for reasons 1.4 (b&d). 
 
Summary 

------- 
¶1.  (C) During his March 19-21 visit to Guatemala, WHA 
Assistant Secretary Shannon met with President Colom, other 
senior members of government, CICIG Commissioner Castresana, 
and representatives of civil society, press, and the business 
sector.  Colom said Guatemala's fiscal conservatism would 
help it weather the global economic crisis, but that the 
economy is vulnerable to weakening export markets and slowing 
remittances.  Enhanced counter-cyclical assistance from IFIs 
could help limit the social and political impact of the 
economic crisis.  Also discussed were the security 
environment and counternarcotics assistance, including the 
Merida Initiative.  CICIG Commissioner Castresana sought 
support for extension of CICIG's mandate, and addressed 
worrisome developments on the security front.  End Summary. 
 
 
Meeting with President Colom 

---------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) President Alvaro Colom opened his meeting with 
visiting WHA Assistant Secretary Tom Shannon by confirming 
his attendance at the March 30 meeting with Vice President 
Biden in Costa Rica.  He thanked Assistant Secretary Shannon 
for USG counternarcotics assistance and specifically for the 
Merida Initiative, and lauded President Obama's announcement 
that his administration would pursue immigration reform.  A/S 
Shannon said counternarcotics and economic issues would be 
priorities at upcoming meetings with Vice President Biden as 
well as at the Summit of the Americas. 
 
Economic and Regional Developments 

---------------------------------- 
¶3.  (C) The USG is looking at how it can help the most 
vulnerable Latin American countries, specifically those of 
Central America and the Caribbean, weather the global 
economic downturn, A/S Shannon said.  Colom said that 
Guatemala's traditional fiscal conservatism had positioned it 
fairly well, but the country's principal export markets -- 
the U.S. and Central America -- are being hit hard. 
Additionally, Guatemala's economy is vulnerable to 
diminishing remittances from the U.S.  A/S Shannon said the 
USG was working with International Financial Institutions 
(IFIs) to help the most vulnerable countries ensure that the 
economic crisis does not become a social and political one. 
The region will have many elections in 2010, and it will be 
important that the resulting governments not be the product 
of voters' economic desperation.  Colom urged the USG and 
other participating countries to recapitalize the 
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB).  Colom said economic 
issues would dominate the upcoming Summit of the Americas, 
and that President Obama would be "the star of the summit." 
Regarding El Salvador, A/S Shannon opined that the FMLN was 
better positioned than ARENA to manage the serial 
consequences of the downturn due to the FMLN's strong 
organization in El Salvador's poorest communities.  Colom 
said he was deeply worried by Daniel Ortega's erratic 
leadership in Nicaragua.  Turning to his recent visit to 
Cuba, Colom said his decision to bestow the Order of the 
Quetzal on Fidel Casto had been "a huge mistake." 
 
¶4.  (C) Turning to human rights, Colom mentioned civil 
society and state efforts to gain access to military 
Qsociety and state efforts to gain access to military 
archives, and said the state needs to develop better 
mechanisms for exploiting state security force archives in 
support of investigations into conflict-era crimes (ref a). 
Colom mentioned that the Army is recruiting 2,000 more 
soldiers in order to strengthen state control in areas under 
threat from narcotraffickers. 
 
Discussion with Senior Security Leaders 

--------------------------------------- 
¶5.  (C) The Ambassador hosted a security issues meeting for 
A/S Shannon with Minister of Government Salvador Gandara, 
Attorney General Amilcar Velasquez, Minister of Finance 
Alberto Fuentes Knight, and Coordinator of the National 
Security Council Francisco Jimenez.  Attorney General 
Velasquez said the current Extraditions Law hamstrings 
authorities by requiring that foreign nationals be tried 
first in Guatemala for any crimes committed in the country 
prior to extradition.  CICIG was working with Congress on 
draft legislation that would change that.  Minister Gandara 
said the press were to blame for misconstruing his public 
comments about remitting approximately USD 35 million to the 
Treasury because the police did not need additional 
equipment, and there were pressing needs at other ministries. 
 In fact, he said, he had to return the money -- which had 
been earmarked for police salaries -- because the Ministry 
had been able to hire only 4,800 new police officers, rather 
than the planned 10,000.  NSC Coordinator Jimenez said 
consensus on the need for specialized courts to deal with 
organized crime cases was emerging (ref b).  AG Velasquez 
urged the Assistant Secretary to support extension of CICIG's 
mandate, which is currently due to expire in September (ref 
c). 
 
More Unconditioned Financial Assistance Needed 

--------------------------------------------- 
¶6.  (U) Minister of Finance Fuentes Knight told A/S Shannon 
that Central American countries need more counter-cyclical 
assistance resources with fewer conditions attached.  Too 
much of donors' (U.S., Germany, Taiwan, Japan, and others) 
assistance ebbed and waned in line with global economic 
conditions.  More IFI resources were needed.  Minister 
Fuentes opined that the current recession would get much 
worse in Central America (ref d).  Gangs and 
narco-trafficking were always a temptation for poor young 
people, and could be relatively more attractive as Guatemala 
begins to feel the full effects of the global downturn.  Tax 
revenues were already falling in line with decreasing 
economic activity, which would in turn further weaken the 
state's inadequate social safety net, Minister Fuentes said. 
 
Meeting with CICIG Commissioner 

------------------------------- 
¶7.  (S) CICIG Commissioner Castresana told Assistant 
Secretary Shannon that CICIG's lawyers and the GOG's 
disagreed about whether the Guatemalan Congress would need to 
approve a two-year extension of CICIG's mandate.  CICIG 
thinks it does, but the GOG intends to renew via an exchange 
of diplomatic notes with the UN.  (Note: Earlier in the day, 
Foreign Minister Rodas told A/S Shannon that CICIG's mandate 
can and will be extended via an exchange of diplomatic notes 
with the UN.  End Note.)  Castresana said that immediate 
congressional approval would be politically useful because he 
will soon announce indictments of former President Alfonso 
Portillo and several former senior military officers for 
corruption.  He anticipated that would earn him many enemies 
in Congress.  Castresana said he also soon would have major 
announcements in the case against former Chief Homicide 
Prosecutor Alvaro Matus (ref e) and the Nicaraguan bus 
murders case (ref f). 
 
CICIG's Security Concerns 

------------------------- 
¶8.  (S) Targeted criminals so far are opposing CICIG's 
efforts mostly in the courts, Castresana said, where they 
currently have the upper hand.  If their legal defenses 
falter, those under CICIG investigation might next resort to 
a public campaign to disparage CICIG.  Only if that too fails 
does Castresana believe that the next step might be violence, 
first against CICIG's Guatemalan collaborators and perhaps 
then against himself and his staff.  Noting that the state 
has yet to provide adequate security for its own public 
servants, Castresana said that he feared for the security of 
Qservants, Castresana said that he feared for the security of 
Organized Crime Chief Prosecutor Rony Lopez and Police Chief 
Marlene Blanco.  He said Attorney General's Office needs $4 
million for armored vehicles and other protection for its 
staff; the bill for hardened courts that would try organized 
crime cases would be higher.  It will be important to get 
clean magistrates elected to the Supreme Court (the election 
must be held NLT Sept. 12), Castresana opined.  In response 
to A/S Shannon's question about Mexican narcotraffickers' 
penetration of the state, Castresana said Guatemalan 
traffickers had initially thought they could form 
partnerships with the Mexican traffickers, but that the 
Mexicans are now taking over, as was graphically demonstrated 
by the March 2008 narco-massacre in Zacapa (ref g).  The 
Guatemalan traffickers are now being forced to loan to the 
Mexicans their entire infrastructure -- police, prosecutors, 
judges, and Members of Congress.  Castresana thanked A/S 
Shannon for the USG's and the Embassy's strong operational, 
financial, and political support.  He said he enjoys good 
relations with President Colom and correct relations with 
MinGov Gandara and AG Velasquez; the tremendously corrupt 
courts -- including the Supreme and Constitutional Courts -- 
are the weakest links. 
 
¶9.  (U) WHA Assistant Secretary Shannon cleared this message 
prior to transmission. 
McFarland