09STATE45204

Mon May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Secretary of State
P 042046Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO PAGE 02        STATE   045204  042105Z 
AIT TAIPEI PRIORITY 4260
INFO MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME COLLECTIVE PRIORITYS E C R E T STATE 045204

E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/04/2034 TAGS: PARM MTCRE PREL TW IR

Classified By: ISN/MTR ACTING DIRECTOR RALPH PALMIERO REASONS 1.4 (B), (C) AND (D).

¶1. This is an action request. AIT Taipei, please see paragraph 3.

¶2. (S) Background: As part of the U.S.-Taiwan "Gameplan" to improve Taiwans export controls, the United States routinely alerts Taiwan to exports that pose potential proliferation risks. It is in this context that we would like to inform Taiwan authorities that in March 2009, Irans Faratech CNC Milling Services was seeking to procure a computer numerically controlled (CNC) rotary table from Tanshing Accurate Industrial Company Ltd. The rotary table sought by Faratech CNC Milling Services is potentially controlled by the Wassenaar Arrangement and will be used to upgrade a vertical machining center to perform 5-axis machining operations. A machine with such capabilities would be suitable for use in a variety of applications required for the production of ballistic missile, nuclear, and advanced conventional weapons components. We want to provide this information to Taiwan authorities to support their export control efforts and urge them to take measures to ensure that any proposed sale of this equipment to Iran is thoroughly scrutinized.

¶3. (S) Action Request: Request AIT Taipei approach appropriate officials to deliver talking points/non-paper in paragraph 4 below and report response. Talking points also may be provided as a non-paper. (NOTE: Pursuant to a decision made at the February 2009 Gameplan discussions, Department plans to concurrently deliver this demarche to TECRO officials in Washington, D.C. END NOTE)

¶4. (S) Begin talking points/non-paper:

(SECRET REL TAIWAN)

-- We appreciate our close cooperation on export control issues as part of the U.S.-Taiwan "Gameplan."

-- It is in this context that we would like to raise with you a matter of potential proliferation concern and request your assistance in investigating this activity.

-- The United States has information that in March 2009, Irans Faratech CNC Milling Services was seeking to procure either a model TRNC-255 or TRNC-170 computer numerically controlled (CNC) rotary table from Tanshing Accurate Industrial Company Ltd.

-- Our information indicates that these rotary tables are potentially controlled by the Wassenaar Arrangement and are being sought by Faratech CNC Milling Services to upgrade a vertical machining center to perform 5-axis machining operations.

-- As you are aware, a machine with such capabilities would be suitable for use in a variety of applications required for the production of ballistic missile, nuclear, and advanced conventional weapons components.

-- We are providing you this information to support your export control efforts and hope you will take measures to ensure that any proposed sale of this equipment to Iran is thoroughly scrutinized by your export control authorities.

-- We look forward to continuing cooperation on export control issues and to hearing of the actions you take in response to this information.

¶5. (U) Washington POC is ISN/MTR James Mayes (Phone: 202-647-3185). Please slug any reporting on this issue for ISN/MTR.

¶6. (U) A word version file of this document will be posted at .

CLINTON