09STATE124128

Thu Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4128 3372135
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P R 032133Z DEC 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY SEOUL PRIORITY 0000
INFO MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME COLLECTIVES E C R E T STATE 124128

SIPDIS

E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/03/2034 TAGS: PARM MTCRE PREL IR TU KS

REF: A. STATE 28283 B. SEOUL 504 C. SEOUL 677 D. STATE 50260 E. STATE 66211

Classified By: ISN/MTR DIRECTOR PAM DURHAM FOR REASONS 1.4 (B), (C), AND (D).

¶1. (U) This is an action request. Embassy Seoul, please see paragraph 3.

¶2. (S) Background: The United States has information that the Iranian firm Machine Sazi Tabriz was attempting to acquire computer numerically controlled (CNC) machine tools from the South Korean manufacturer Hyundai-Kia in October 2009. Machine Sazi Tabriz is the largest machine tool manufacturer in Iran and likely supplies imported machine tools to Irans nuclear and ballistic missile programs. Earlier this year, we alerted South Korean authorities to a similar case involving an effort by an Iranian missile- related entity to procure machine tools from Hyundai-Kia through the Turkey-based company Ak Makina (Reftels). We understand and appreciate the ROK ultimately denying the license for this previous transaction. We now want to ask South Korean authorities to investigate this effort by Machine Sazi Tabriz to acquire goods from Hyundai-Kia and urge the ROK to closely scrutinize all machine tool exports to Iran to ensure that such equipment is not used to support programs of proliferation concern.

¶3. (U) Action Request: Request Embassy Seoul approach appropriate host government officials to deliver talking points in paragraph 4 and report response. Talking points may also be left as a non-paper.

¶4. (S) Begin talking points/non-paper:

(SECRET//REL SOUTH KOREA)

-- We would like to alert you to information of potential proliferation concern and request your assistance in investigating this activity.

-- The United States has information that in October 2009, Irans Machine Sazi Tabriz was seeking to acquire machine tools from South Koreas Hyundai-Kia.

-- We understand that the machines sought by Machine Sazi Tabriz include two model HS630 horizontal machining centers and one model HS800 machining center.

-- We are bringing this matter to your attention because we are concerned that Machine Sazi Tabriz could potentially be seeking these machines on behalf of weapons-related end-users in Iran.

-- While just below the control thresholds of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and Wassenaar Agreement, the HS630 and HS800 machining centers are versatile machine tools capable of performing precision machining operations required for the production of missiles and other weapons components.

-- Machine Sazi Tabriz is the largest machine tool manufacturer in Iran and likely supplies imported machine tools to Irans nuclear and ballistic missile programs.

-- You will recall that earlier this year, we shared with you our concerns that Irans missile program was seeking a variety of machine tools produced by Hyundai-Kia through the Turkish company Ak Makina.

-- We hope you will investigate this activity and use your catch-all control authorities to closely scrutinize all machine tool exports to Iran to prevent such equipment from being used to support Irans weapons development efforts.

-- We look forward to continued cooperation on export control and nonproliferation issues and would appreciate hearing of the actions you take in response to this information at the earliest possible time.

End talking points/non-paper