04MANAMA1927
BAHRAIN:  2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT
Thu Dec 23 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

230751Z Dec 04UNCLAS MANAMA 001927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, NEA/ARPI 
STATE PASS TTIC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC BA
SUBJECT: BAHRAIN:  2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 245841 
 
¶1.  Per reftel, below please find the draft report on Bahrain 
for the 2004 Patterns of Global Terrorism. 
 
¶2.  Begin text of draft report on Bahrain: 
 
Bahrain 
 
Bahrain is providing important support to our 
counterterrorism efforts, particularly efforts to block the 
financing of terror groups. Bahrain has continued to respond 
positively to requests for assistance to combat terror 
financing; it has frozen about $18 million in 
terrorist-linked funds.  In November 2004, Bahrain hosted the 
inaugural meeting of the Middle East and North Africa 
Financial Action Task Force (MENA FATF).  Bahrain worked 
closely with FATF for several years to establish this 
regional body.  Located in Bahrain, the new MENA FATF 
secretariat will promote the FATF 40 and 9 Special 
 
SIPDIS 
Recommendations to combat money laundering and terrorist 
financing. 
 
Through hosting the U.S. Navy's Fifth Fleet and other 
activities, Bahrain contributes to coalition operations in 
Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
Bahrain is an eager participant in the U.S. Government's 
Anti-Terrorism Assistance programs.  Bahrain continued to 
provide intelligence and law enforcement cooperation.  In 
2004, Bahrain arrested, released, and re-arrested a group of 
terrorist suspects.  The court released them for the period 
of the trial, which is ongoing. 
 
- In June, the Government of Bahrain arrested six Bahrainis 
and placed one Bahraini under house arrest on suspicion of 
plotting terrorist attacks.  All seven were released within 
two days. 
 
- The Government of Bahrain re-arrested the six individuals 
in mid-July.  The court ordered the release of two in 
mid-September and ordered the release of the remaining four 
in early November pending trial. 
 
- Preliminary hearings for the case began in early December. 
The court referred to the Constitutional Court a motion 
contesting the constitutionality of the charges against the 
suspects. 
 
- One of the four escaped the courtroom during a hearing in 
mid-September and was re-captured the same day.  He was 
convicted in mid-November and is serving a six-month sentence. 
 
Bahrain's lack of a domestic conspiracy law hampers its 
ability to intervene against suspected extremist plots. This 
could encourage terrorists to value Bahrain as a potential 
logistic haven.  The Government is developing a draft 
amendment to the penal code addressing conspiracy to commit 
terrorist acts. 
 
Bahrain is a party to seven of the 12 international 
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism and is a 
signatory to the Convention for the Suppression of the 
Financing of Terrorism. 
 
End text. 
 
MONROE