04MANAMA414
DEMONSTRATION AT U.S. EMBASSY BAHRAIN
Sat Mar 27 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA, M, S/CT, CA/OCS, INR, DS/ITA, NEA/EX, 
NEA/ARP, AND A/OPR/ALS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ALOW ASEC BA CASC PTER
SUBJECT: DEMONSTRATION AT U.S. EMBASSY BAHRAIN 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  On 26 March 2004, approximately 400 to 500 
individuals staged a demonstration outside of the US Embassy 
Manama, Bahrain, purportedly to protest the killing of Sheikh 
Yassin by the Israeli Government.  The demonstrators held a 
short peaceful demonstration in the immediate vicinity of the 
Embassy and quickly moved to a field approximately 300 yards 
from the Embassy.  In what appeared to be a coordinated 
effort, demonstrators began throwing rocks and small pieces 
of concrete at police.  The police responded immediately with 
repeated volleys of teargas and the crowd dispersed. 
Although police and demonstrators continued to engage in 
small skirmishes in the village of Zinj, the police remained 
in control of the area and by early evening calm had returned 
to the streets.  Police reported numerous arrests and one 
injury to a demonstrator.  US Embassy Manama did not sustain 
any damage and there were no injuries to personnel. END 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  On 26 March 2004, at 1630 approximately 150 demonstrators 
assembled on the south side of the Embassy complex and took 
up position on the Sheikh Isa Bin Salman Highway.  The police 
immediately re-routed traffic off of Sheikh Isa Bin Salman 
Highway and stationed riot police in the immediate area. 
This initial group of 150 individuals appeared to be mainly 
students and appeared unorganized and more intent of taking 
photographs of each other than actually demonstrating. 
Within minutes, this group was joined by a larger group of 
300 plus adults who appeared to be much better organized and 
more intent on making themselves heard. Upon arrival of the 
second group, the total crowd of 400 to 500 individuals began 
chanting anti-American and anti-Israeli slogans.  RSO staff 
noted that during this time period, numerous Palestinian and 
Hizbollah flags could be seen.  Although the crowd was vocal, 
they remained relatively peaceful and made no attempts to 
attack either the Embassy or riot police stationed in the 
area. 
 
¶3.  At 1700, the crowd departed the immediate area of the 
Embassy in mass and re-assembled in a field 300 yards to the 
west of the Embassy compound.  After fifteen minutes of 
continued flag waving and chanting, members of the crowd, in 
what appeared to be a determined effort to provoke police, 
began throwing rocks and pieces of concrete.  The police 
responded immediately with numerous volleys of teargas and 
began pursuing the protesters as they dispersed.  Over the 
next hour the police continued to skirmish with small groups 
of protesters as the protesters set fire to trash dumpsters 
and tires in the village of Zinj.  RSO staff counted 
approximately 200 canisters of teargas fired into the area. 
Shortly after 1800, calm appeared to have returned to the 
village of Zinj, police reported an end to the confrontation 
and reopened Sheikh Isa Bin Salman Highway. 
 
¶4.  Police reported eight arrests and only one injury to a 
demonstrator.  No injuries to police were reported. 
FORD