05MANAMA1677
BAHRAIN VOLUNTARY VISITOR FY-05 "VOLUNTEERISM AND
Mon Nov 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141403Z Nov 05UNCLAS MANAMA 001677 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ECA/PE/V/F/A NALINE CAIN; NEA-PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL BA
SUBJECT: BAHRAIN VOLUNTARY VISITOR FY-05 "VOLUNTEERISM AND 
YOUTH ENGAGEMENT, SEPTEMBER 30-OCTOBER 4, 2005. 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Zakeya Ahmed Ali, Education Specialist, 
Ministry of Education and Eman Yusuf Abdulkarim, High School 
Student, Hamad Town Girls Secondary School and Globe 
Student, went on a five-day VOLVIS program "Volunteerism and 
Youth Engagement". 
 
¶2. Zakeya has come back from the trip with "more motivation 
and encouragement to initiate the Volunteers program in 
Bahrain as soon as possible.  I have already established 
contacts with key persons in the relevant NGOs that I have 
visited."  She has provided PAO with the contact list of 
these persons and a brief on their organizations. 
 
¶3. The program has helped Zakeya to gain first-hand 
experience on how NGOs operate in the U.S and the number and 
type of people involved in voluntary service, in addition to 
their sense of devotion to such work. She 
comprehended that volunteerism and community service are 
part of the American culture. 
 
¶4. The program has helped Zakeya to compare between the 
functioning of NGOs in Bahrain and the U.S. and youth 
involvement and commitment in non-profit organizations. 
Both Zakeya and Eman were amazed that some NGOs were 
operating at managerial level by Americans who are in their 
early 20s.  Zakeya underlined that Bahrain's youth are being 
marginalized in decision-making process, thus their 
leadership skills are minimal.  She pointed out that these 
youths are in need for volunteerism education, in order to 
change their behavior and attitude towards social engagement 
and environmental concerns. 
 
¶5. Zakeya is seriously thinking of establishing her own NGO. 
During the debriefing, she informed PAO about receiving 
preliminary support from Greater DC Cares in Washington. 
Her contact is Julie Howard, Volunteer Outreach Associate. 
She is also coordinating with Discovery Channel to hold an 
International Science Fair, which will include Bahrain for 
the first time.  Zakeya is also working on sending Bahraini 
GLOBE students to US summer science camps. 
 
¶6. Our contact added that Eman has significantly benefited 
from the trip in two ways; attending the specific scheduled 
meetings for Zakeya, and interacting with her American 
counterparts.  She excitedly and enthusiastically got 
herself into exchanging ideas on youth being actively 
involved in voluntary work for the betterment of their 
Communities, as well as understanding the U.S educational 
system. 
 
¶7. As the Educational Specialist at the Ministry of 
Education, Zakeya is responsible for introducing new and 
innovative educational programs in the school system, 
and ensuring that these programs are effectively 
implemented.  In 2001, Zakeya became GLOBE Coordinator. 
She has successfully managed the program through sheer 
determination to recruit students into this program. 
Zakeya is now the Regional Coordinator for the GLOBE Middle 
East Program.  Her responsibilities include expanding the 
Participation of teachers and schools in the program, 
setting up joint projects with GLOBE schools abroad, 
developing the involvement of scientists in the Middle East 
and supporting the infrastructure of Country Coordinators in 
the region. 
 
MONROE