05MANAMA838
CROWN PRINCE ATTENDS AMBASSADOR'S BAHRAIN SCHOOL
Mon Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000838 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/FO, NEA/PPD, NEA/ARPI, NEA/SA/EX/PMO, 
A/OPR/OS - BEA CAMERON, M/FLO, ECA - A/S HARRISON 
SECDEF FOR DEPSECDEF ENGLAND, DOD/ISA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ASCH KPAO BA
SUBJECT: CROWN PRINCE ATTENDS AMBASSADOR'S BAHRAIN SCHOOL 
ALUMNI RECEPTION 
 
¶1. Underscoring his support for the Bahrain School, the 
premier K-12 American-model school in Bahrain and the only 
DODDS (Department of Defense Dependent School) institution in 
the Middle East, Crown Prince Shaikh Salman attended an 
Ambassador-hosted reception at the residence June 8 in honor 
of Bahrain School alumni.  More than 100 alumni attended the 
reception, including -- in addition to the Crown Prince -- 
other members of the royal family, senior Government of 
Bahrain officials, senior staff from Bahrain's finance and 
banking institutions, NGO activists, artists, and several 
very recently-returned graduates of American universities. 
 
¶2. The gathering was a huge success, exceeding all 
expectations.  As there is no formal alumni association, or 
listing of alumni, the Embassy put together a guest list with 
the assistance of several enthusiastic alumni.  Clearly 
pleased with the opportunity to meet old friends and 
teachers, many attendees expressed the hope that a more 
formal listing or even alumni association could be 
established to facilitate future gatherings. 
 
¶3. Several of the guests signaled out freedom of expression 
as the single most important aspect of the Bahrain School and 
an American education.  One female member of the royal family 
told the PAO that the Bahrain School had changed her life by 
encouraging her to follow her dream of majoring in film 
production.  She now works in the court of the Crown Prince 
on programs in support of the GOB's on-going reform efforts. 
Bahrain's best known professional photographer told the 
acting DCM and PAO that the Bahrain School had given her the 
"stamina and grounding" needed to succeed internationally as 
a woman from the Gulf in a very competitive field. 
 
¶4. Emboffs were pleased to learn that many alumni are 
planning to send their children to Bahrain School.  The 
Ambassador made brief remarks about the importance of a U.S. 
education, and he emphasized the continuing support of the 
U.S. Government for the Bahrain School. 
 
¶5. Comment: This event demonstrated exactly why the Bahrain 
school is so important in helping reach out to and instill 
American values in an important segment of society in a 
Middle East country like Bahrain, and why it is so vital that 
the U.S. Government continue to support, with funding as 
needed, this school.  Bahrain School graduates, most of whom 
went on to the U.S. for university, have returned with great 
affection for the school, and friendship for the United 
States.  Among those graduates is the Crown Prince himself, 
who spent almost 90 minutes at the residence talking with 
fellow alumni. 
MONROE