10AITTAIPEI116
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, OBAMA
Fri Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0116 0290851
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290851Z JAN 10
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3236
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9673
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 1058UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - THOMAS HAMM 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, OBAMA 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage January 29 on President Ma Ying-jeou's visit in Honduras; 
the debut of Apple's iPad; the aftermath of a Taiwan T-34C trainer 
plane crash; and the soaring land prices in Taipei City.  In terms 
of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times" discussed a recently-published Congressional 
Research Service report on China's naval modernization.  The article 
said, judging from this report, the general strategic direction of 
the United States is to safeguard the common interests of the 
democratic countries in the Asia-Pacific region.  A column in the 
KMT-leaning "China Times" discussed President Barack Obama using the 
Internet to broadcast his State of the Union address live.  The 
article said it appears that Obama is going to use the Internet as a 
weapon both diplomatically and domestically.  End summary. 
 
¶2. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
"The United States' General Strategic Direction: Safeguarding the 
Common Interests of Democratic Countries" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 680,000] 
editorialized (1/29): 
 
"A U.S. Congressional Research Service (CRS) report said:  The 
near-term focus of China's military modernization is to address the 
Taiwan issue, and as a result, China wants [its military] to develop 
the capability so that it can act as a so-called anti-access force, 
which can deter U.S. intervention in a conflict involving Taiwan. 
This analytical report on 'China's naval capabilities' also pointed 
out that China's military buildup has in fact demonstrated greater 
ambition that has caused the United States and other nations to 
align their military deployments in the Asia-Pacific with China. ... 
 Ma Ying-jeou's China-tilting remarks and practices have obviously 
aroused grave concerns in the United States.  Some people asserted 
that since Ma wants to tilt toward China, the United States should 
consider stopping its arms sales to Taiwan, removing Taiwan from its 
list of allies in Asia and, further, abolishing the Taiwan Relations 
Act.  An article published not long ago in the 'Foreign Affairs' 
journal regarding Taiwan moving toward Finlandization was a result 
of [such a viewpoint]. ... 
 
"Another viewpoint, however, said that Ma disregards Taiwan's 
security and has been deliberately trying to incorporate Taiwan into 
China's sphere of influence.  As a result, Washington should be 
fully prepared to come up with an effective resolution for the U.S. 
military, based on the scenario that the Ma administration has 
absolutely no motive or capability to resist China's invasion, in 
case any conflict break out in the Taiwan Strait.  The 
afore-mentioned CRS report analyzing China's naval capabilities 
comes closer to such a viewpoint.  In fact, such a perspective is 
not only correct but also consistent with the common interests of 
the United States, Taiwan and the island's neighboring countries. 
Of course, such an assertion cannot be viewed as [a move to] 
'safeguard Taiwan' but should be interpreted as [an effort to] 
'safeguard the common interests of democratic countries.' ... 
 
"... Ma's confusing national identity has also caused the United 
States, when making its decisions about arms sales to Taiwan, to 
consider how to strengthen Taiwan's defense capabilities to the 
extent that it is at least capable of resisting China's invasion 
until the moment of international intervention.  On the other hand, 
however, Washington needs to take precautions so that the advanced 
weapons [it provides to Taiwan] will not be misused by the Ma 
administration that they become the 'dowries' when Taiwan 'throws 
itself at the Chinese communists' one day.  Nevertheless, the United 
States has at least demonstrated its willpower to 'help defend 
Taiwan.' ..." 
 
¶3. Obama 
 
"Obama Wants to Use the Internet to Fix Foreign and Domestic 
Problems" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the KMT-leaning "China Times" 
[circulation: 120,000] wrote (1/29): 
 
"The U.S. President has delivered his first-ever State of the Union 
address since he assumed office.  What is new was that, amid his 
dropping approval ratings, he tried to create his new personal image 
via the Internet; his speech was broadcast live via the CitizenTube 
channel of YouTube and the latest iPhone application software. ... 
It appears that the Obama administration is not only using the 
Internet as an attack weapon diplomatically but is also going to use 
it as a weapon to maintain his prestige domestically.  This is 
already an ironclad fact, which will not be changed anymore, because 
other than this weapon, Obama really cannot find any other more 
effective means to maintain his authority. ..." 
 
STANTON