10BEIJING138
JANUARY 19, 2010 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHINA'S INTERNET,
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0879
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0138/01 0192258
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192258Z JAN 10         ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7664
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBUQEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 0022
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0716
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0171
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 5025UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000138 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM EINT TINT SENV CH AR AF IN JA
SUBJECT: JANUARY 19, 2010 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHINA'S INTERNET, 
CHINA IN HAITI, ARGENTINE PRESIDENT'S VISIT TO CHINA 
 
BEIJING 00000138  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the January 19 MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- China asserts that foreign firms, including Google, must respect 
Chinese laws and customs China claimed to be the biggest victim of 
hacking attacks. 
 
-- A Japanese proposal to build facilities on Okinotori reef is 
inconsistent with international law and therefore "isolated and 
twisted, as well as groundless." 
 
-- Argentine President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner will meet with 
President Hu Jintao during a January 25-28 visit to China. 
 
China's Internet 
---------------- 
 
¶2. At the January 19 regularly scheduled Foreign Ministry press 
briefing, Spokesperson Ma Zhaoxu stated that "foreign firms, 
including Google, must respect Chinese laws and customs."  China had 
an open Internet and encouraged the development and application of 
the Internet, Ma continued.  China welcomed Internet businesses from 
all countries that operated in accordance to Chinese law. 
 
¶3. In response to questions regarding Google's statement that it was 
considering leaving China, Ma said he was not aware of any 
discussions on this subject between Google and the Chinese 
government.  He noted that the United States government had not made 
any formal representations to China regarding Google or Internet 
freedom.  If the U.S. were to raise such issues, Ma said, China 
would stress the position that its Internet is open. 
 
¶4. Ma claimed that China was the "biggest victim of hacking 
attacks." He said that there had been a 148 percent increase in 
hacking attempts against Chinese websites in 2008.  Ma cited Baidu 
as an example of a Chinese website that had been the victim of a 
large-scale cyber attack.  Ma also said that reports of an attack by 
Chinese hackers on Indian government computers "are entirely without 
basis." 
 
China's Earthquake Disaster Relief in Haiti 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Ma announced that the remains of eight Chinese peacekeepers who 
had died during the Haiti earthquake had arrived in Beijing.  Ma 
stated that China provided immediate legal and consular assistance 
to Chinese citizens in Haiti who had been affected by the 
earthquake.  Ma emphasized that China's disaster relief efforts were 
under the scope of UN regulations. 
 
¶6. Ma stated that China's relief efforts received "great praise from 
relevant authorities."  This illustrated that China had "fully 
fulfilled" its responsibilities.  Besides finding the bodies of the 
Chinese peacekeepers, Chinese rescue workers had helped find the 
bodies of UN officials and others, said Ma.  He also noted that 
Chinese doctors set up a medical station and had helped over 200 
Haitian earthquake victims. 
 
¶7. When asked if Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou's upcoming visit to 
Haiti would affect China's disaster relief contributions, Ma 
referred the question to the Taiwan Affairs Office.  Regarding 
prospects for cross-Strait cooperation on relief efforts, Ma said 
that there had been no cross-Strait coordination on the Haiti 
earthquake response but that China hoped to enhance contact and 
cooperation and to "uphold the humanitarian spirit." 
 
Argentina's President Visit to China 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. Ma announced that Argentine President Cristina Fernandez de 
Kirchner would visit China January 25-28.  President Fernandez de 
Kirchner and President Hu Jintao would discuss the bilateral 
strategic partnership and sign cooperative documents that would 
further enhance the bilateral relationship, Ma said. 
 
¶9. When asked about whether the indictments, by an Argentine judge, 
of Jiang Zemin and Luo Gan for their role in crimes against humanity 
committed against Falun Gong practitioners would affect the visit, 
Ma responded that Falun Gong was a cult that tried to bring false 
charges against Chinese officials.  He asserted that attempts by 
Falun Gong practitioners to damage China's relations with other 
countries would notQcceed. 
 
Okinotori Reef Territorial Dispute 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Ma said Article 121 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 
provided that Japanese proposals to build facilities on Okinotori 
reef would not change the reef's legal status.  Since Okinotori 
 
BEIJING 00000138  002 OF 002 
 
 
could not sustain human habitation, it could neither be an exclusive 
economic zone nor a continental shelf.  Ma stated that the Japanese 
proposal did not conform to international laws, was against the 
overall interests of the international community and was therefore 
"isolated and twisted, as well as groundless." 
 
Iranian Nuclear Program 
----------------------- 
 
¶11. China's approach to Iran's nuclear program was consistent and 
emphasized dialogue and cooperation, Ma said.  China continued to 
support the peaceful use of nuclear energy.  Ma said China had not 
made any decision regarding further actions to be taken by the P5+1. 
 
Kidnapped Chinese Engineers in Afghanistan 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶12. Ma stated that China was making every effort to rescue two 
Chinese engineers who had been kidnapped in Afghanistan January 16. 
The two Chinese nationals were kidnapped by unknown armed 
individuals.  Ma said that the relevant departments were 
investigating the situation. 
 
HUNTSMAN