10BERLIN74
MEDIA REACTION: HAITI EARTHQUAKE, OBAMA PRESIDENCY;BERLIN
Wed Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO2919
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0074/01 0201336
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201336Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6311
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1938
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0658
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1177
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2680
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1699
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0862
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 000074 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC KMDR US HA
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: HAITI EARTHQUAKE, OBAMA PRESIDENCY;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   Aftermath of Haiti Earthquake 
¶3.   Obama Presidency - One year On 
 
¶1.    Lead Stories Summary 
 
ZDF-TV's and ARD-TV's primetime newscasts opened with reports on 
Haiti, both of which emphasized two main points: the situation is 
chaotic and U.S. aid efforts on the ground are getting underway. 
Newspapers led with many different stories: Sueddeutsche and 
Frankfurter Rundschau highlighted President Obama's first year in 
office.  Die Welt and Berliner Morgenpost showed a large photo of 
pioneering Springer journalist Ernst Cramer, who died yesterday at 
the age of 96.  Frankfurter Allgemeine led with a story on the 
parliamentary budget debate, headlined "A quarter of the budget 
consists of new debts."  Editorials focused on the budget debate and 
the many appointments Germans have with doctors. 
 
¶2.    Aftermath of Haiti Earthquake 
 
ARD-TV's primetime newscast Tagesschau reported: "A week after the 
earthquake, international assistance is now in full swing, but is 
reaching the people only slowly because many places are difficult to 
get to.  The UN has therefore set up an airlift and also the U.S. 
air force is dropping food over Port-au-Prince."  The newscast 
emphasized that the situation in Haiti is "chaotic" and that "the 
logistical challenges are enormous," adding: "Many just want to 
leave the country.  Hundreds are queuing in front of the U.S. 
Embassy in the hope of getting a U.S. visa."  Tagesschau showed a 
Haitian man saying that the U.S. should take over the country.  "The 
U.S. presence is becoming increasingly visible and the U.S. army 
announced the opening of a second airport in the seriously destroyed 
city of Jacmel," a reporter stated. 
 
Berliner Zeitung's report headlined "Help for Haiti from the air" 
and noted in its intro that "the U.S. has begun to drop aid supplies 
from the air for the victims of the earthquake in Haiti.  According 
to the U.S. army, 15,000 liters of water and 14,000 food packages 
reached the people in the northeast part of the capital of 
Port-au-Prince."  Tagesspiegel reported on its front-page that "a 
U.S. plane that dropped food and water for the first time over 
Port-au-Prince raised hope that the provision of supplies will 
improve." 
 
Handelsblatt editorialized: "Haiti has been an impoverished country 
for a long time.  It is now completely destroyed.  Only a Marshall 
Plan with global support could help the country emerge from this 
desolate situation....  A protectorate, a word that was forbidden 
for a long time and was even seen as high treason, is now being 
considered as the only solution.  Haiti needs godfathers and 
godmothers to take care of the country.   The U.S., Europe, the UN 
and countries like Brazil and Chile must cooperate and help until 
the Haitians can one day help themselves." 
 
In an op-ed for Tagesspiegel, a medical expert commented: "The 
earthquake finally woke up the international community; the rescue 
operation that was overdue for decades has finally begun.  It will 
only work if it is continued for years after medical care has been 
provided to those injured and buildings have been repaired and 
re-built. .  To release the chronically sick patient after only 
treating the wounds would be irresponsible.  Under certain 
circumstances, the catastrophe could be the beginning of a better 
time in the history of the Caribbean country." 
 
ARD-TV's Tagesthemen commented: "It is true that the UN was 
paralyzed when the catastrophe in Haiti unfolded....  It is true the 
UN has a blown-up and often badly coordinated bureaucracy, which 
makes the organization even more incapable of taking action in times 
of crises....  It is true that we see the UN's helplessness on the 
 
BERLIN 00000074  002 OF 003 
 
 
Balkans, in Africa or Haiti then we see its actual assistance.  So 
should the United Nations be done away with?  Before we come to a 
conclusion, let's look at some facts:  the truth is that people 
everywhere and the governments that represent them are the United 
Nations....  The UN is as strong as its member states want it to be, 
in regarding to both its finances and other matters.  When the power 
politics of important countries paralyze the UN and provide 
ridiculous mandates, it is at the expense of the poorest people in 
war and crisis regions, just as we are seeing now in Haiti." 
 
¶3.     Obama Presidency - One year On 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine's Klaus-Dieter Frankenberger wrote in a 
front-page editorial: "Obama's achievements have not been 
insignificant: America's reputation has been restored in a part of 
the world -- it was never damaged in other parts....  Europe now 
basically accepts America's lead role.  Regardless of the broad 
skepticism, Obama kept his word and drastically increased the U.S. 
military and civilian engagement in Afghanistan.  Afghanistan is now 
his war, the war of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate.  Ultimately, 
more Americans will enjoy a health insurance after the reform. 
Given the resistance, this is not insignificant.... In foreign 
policy, he might have to choose a tougher approach....  Iran is 
ignoring his extended hand.  The leadership in Beijing has 
humiliated him.  Moscow responded coolly to the offer of a new 
beginning.  And the Mideast conflict is proving to be resistant to 
solutions.  Obama will hopefully no longer allow America's enemies 
and those who want to be partners to make him look like a fool.  And 
he should not get used to arguing with Washington's strongest 
allies." 
 
Handelsblatt's editorial headlined "Obama can do everything but 
magic" and added: "Hardly anything is nicer than seeing a star 
topple.  Those, who analyze Barack Obama's first year in office like 
an accountant by comparing the intentions and the results, can 
satisfy this desire....  Has he failed all along the line?  Not at 
all.  Many of the things the U.S. government tackled a year ago 
cannot be done in twelve months.  With a bit of luck, they can be 
done in one legislative period.  Health care, finances and climate 
protection are huge projects that touch massive political and 
industrial interests.  He did achieve what many thought would be 
impossible: to stop the economic decline....  The political attitude 
in Washington has changed.  Issues and goals are being discussed 
with a goal to reach a solution.  The pragmatist Obama looks at the 
best argument, not an ideology." 
 
Spiegel Online reported that the Republicans won the Senate seat in 
Massachusetts, describing it as a "setback for Obama."  The webzine 
headlined: "Electoral disaster threatens his health care reform," 
and noted: "Serious defeat for Barack Obama: one year after his 
inauguration, the Democrats lost the former Senate seat of Edward 
Kennedy in Massachusetts and with it a strategic majority in the 
Senate.  The President's giant project of health care reform has now 
become uncertain."  In a derogatory commentary, Spiegel Online's 
Washington correspondent Gabor Steingart stated: "Barack Obama's 
magic is no longer working.  His supporters, who believed in the 
promises of hope and change, are disillusioned.  The President has 
failed to change America's reality in his first year.  Today, he 
arouses feelings of pity instead of enthusiasm.  The inappropriate 
feeling of pity creeps over those who listen to the American 
President today.  We still call Barack Obama the most powerful man 
in the world because that's what we always call U.S. Presidents. 
However, this is no longer the case.  His powerlessness looms very 
large." 
 
Under the headline "Obama's tough landing," Frankfurter Rundschau 
opined: "When Obama moved into the White House a year ago, many 
adored the son of a white globetrotter from Kansas and a Kenyan 
man....  Everybody could see in Obama what he or she wanted.  A 
 
BERLIN 00000074  003 OF 003 
 
 
majority in the U.S. saw hope for a better future.  A year later, 
contours and policies of the President have become visible.  In 
foreign policy, he reclaimed the lead role of the U.S. in a 
multipolar world after the hubris and militancy of the Bush years. 
He reestablished its lead role not as an arrogant hegemonic power 
but within a network of partnerships....  Under Obama, the U.S. has 
a more realistic picture of the world and the world sees the U.S. in 
more friendly light.  This is not a small achievement for a young 
presidency.  In the U.S., Obama has a different effect.  He 
polarizes and divides the country....   There is not yet an 
anti-Obama sentiment - he is still a long way away from becoming an 
American Gorbachev, who is respected throughout the world and 
laughed about at home.  However, the Senate race in Massachusetts is 
a warning shot.  Prior to the Congressional elections this autumn, 
doubts are rising whether Obama and the Democrats should be given 
all the power in the country.  The second year will not become 
easier." 
 
FT Deutschland commented: "It will be difficult for Obama to buck 
the trend in his second year, although he thinks highly of the 
opportunities international cooperation offers.  Paradise-like 
approval rates in Germany mean little given that half of the 
Americans have fallen out of love with him.  Healthcare reform is 
still stuck in Congress, and important Congressional elections will 
come up in autumn.  Given this, other projects Obama's fans 
elsewhere in the world would like to see happening are getting a 
lower priority: a planned climate protection bill in the U.S. and 
the mediation of peace in the Middle East.  Obama cannot be blamed 
for these developments.  The power of the American president in the 
democratic system of the U.S. is significantly limited by local 
interests.   He has tried and deserves gratitude." 
 
 
MURPHY