10BRASILIA68
More than US$ 5 Million has been provided for earthquake relief by members of Mission Brazil's Corporate Social Responsibility Group, Mais Unidos.
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0024
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0068 0221914
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221912Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0342
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS BRASILIA 000068 

SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR HAITI TASKFORCE, WHA, WHA/AMBASSADOR SHANNON 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID BR
SUBJECT: More than US$ 5 Million has been provided for earthquake relief by members of Mission Brazil's Corporate Social Responsibility Group, Mais Unidos. 

¶1. Summary: Members of the Mission Brazil supported corporate Social Responsibility group, Mais Unidos, have donated more than US$ 5 million in cash, supplies and services for relief efforts in the week following the Haitian Earthquake of January 12, 2010. 

¶2. To date, Brazilian subsidiaries of a number of U.S. companies that make up the Corporate Social Responsibility group, Mais Unidos, had donated or pledged more than US$ 5 million for earthquake relief efforts in Haiti, with more donations expected. Led by the Brazilian operations of Alcoa, Citi, Dow, GE, HP, Intel, Ketchum, Lilly, Microsoft, Rigesa, Visa, and Whirlpool, Mais Unidos members have already donated more than US$ 5 million in funds to various non-profits working on providing relief in Haiti. Members including AES, Cummins, IBM, Merk Sharp & Dohme Farmaceutica, and Wal-mart are encouraging employees to give generously through internal campaigns. As an added incentive, many members, including Baxter, Cargill, Cisco, Dow, GE, Lilly, Motorola, Rigesa, and 3M, and will match employee contributions. Visa has pledged to match all employee contributions on a two to one basis. 

¶3. In addition to cash contributions, member companies have also donated their expertise and products. Caterpillar set up a task force with machine operation instructors to assist in the rescue of victims, and FedEx is providing logistical support to a number of NGOs operating in the field. Pharmaceutical company Bristol Meyer shipped a large donation of antibiotics to Haiti, and Proctor & Gamble donated hygiene products and cleaning materials. Fast food giant MacDonald's has pledged that a portion of sales from each Big Mac sold will be donated to earthquake relief. 

¶4. This is not the first time the group members have mobilized in support of natural disasters. In the aftermath of flooding in the Brazilian state of Santa Catarina, the network created by Mais Unidos enabled the U.S. corporations to quickly coordinate relief efforts with USAID's OFDA team, the Government of Brazil, and civil society groups. As with the Haiti disaster, the U.S. private sector contributions included donations of food, water, medicine, and hygiene products, in addition to logistical support for delivery of the donations. 

¶5. The Board of Mais Unidos consists of Chief Executives of the Brazilian subsidiaries of Microsoft, Motorola, Citi, Wal-Mart, Cummins, Ford, HP, Intel, and Dow and the USAID/Brazil Mission Director. The U.S. Ambassador to Brazil serves as honorary Co-Chair of the Board. 

¶6. Created in October 2006, Mais Unidos is a partnership between the U.S. Mission in Brazil through its U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and American companies established in Brazil. Its mission is to strengthen public and private alliances to optimize and enhance U.S. corporate social responsibility investments in Brazil towards sustainably achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Mais Unidos seeks to promote visibility for its member's investments in environment, social and economic-related projects, as well as to promote the theme of corporate social responsibility among different sectors of Brazilian society. This is done through the dissemination of best practices, success stories, and the establishment of public-private partnerships. 

¶7. More information can be found on the group, their CSR projects throughout Brazil, and on their contributions to the Haiti Earthquake relief effort at http://www.maisunidos.org . 

KUBISKE