10BRASILIA48
BRAZIL: DHS DEPUTY SECRETARY LUTE'S VISIT TO BRAZIL JANUARY
Wed Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0048/01 0201155
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201154Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0304
INFO RHMFIUU/TSA HQ WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIAUNCLAS BRASILIA 000048 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR EEB/TRA/OTP, WHA/BSC, WHA/EPSC 
STATE PASS USDHS/TSA RROTTMAN 
STATE PASS USTR FOR KKALUTIEWICZ 
STATE PASS USTDA FOR GMANDEL 
STATE PASS USDOC FOR LFUSSELL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAIR ASEC BR PTER PREL
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: DHS DEPUTY SECRETARY LUTE'S VISIT TO BRAZIL JANUARY 
13-14, 2010. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In response to the failed bombing attempt of 
Delta flight 253 destined for Detroit on December 25, 2009, DHS 
Deputy Secretary (DEPSEC) Lute visited Brazil on the last stop of a 
10 country trip designed to elicit support from partner nations in 
adopting a multilateral/global response to tackling the challenges 
that civil aviation security present.  Accompanied by DHS Assistant 
Secretary David Heyman, TSA Director for International Operations 
Robert Rottman, DEPSEC Lute's Chief of Staff David Pressman, and 
Associate General Counsel Brad Kieserman, DEPSEC Lute emphasized in 
meetings with Brazil's Ministry of Foreign Relations (MRE), Defense 
(MOD), Justice (MOJ) and the Cabinet of Institutional Security 
(GSI), that the December 25th incident was global in nature and 
required a unified and coherent global response. All parties agreed 
that improving information gathering and sharing techniques among 
partner countries, utilizing the latest technologies while still 
relying on the "human touch", and promoting a global response 
designed to strengthen the weakest link, were necessary to achieve 
greater civil aviation security. To kick start the achievement of 
these goals, all sides agreed to participate in an aviation 
security ministerial meeting to be held in the first half of 2010. 
End Summary. 
 
MRE- KEY STAKEHOLDER 
 
-------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) In concurring with these shared aviation security 
objectives and with the ministerial aviation security meeting 
proposal, MRE's Deputy Minister, Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, stated 
that although Brazil has not been a victim of a direct attack, it 
would be na????ve to think it was immune, especially given its 
increased diplomatic presence overseas and its hosting of the World 
Cup in 2014 and the Olympics in 2016.  Patriota was especially 
appreciative of the USG identifying Brazil as both a leader and 
partner in this endeavor, and of the multilateral approach 
communicated by DEPSEC Lute, adding that by taking into account the 
various cultural differences within the international aviation 
community through such a forum, the resulting common ground will 
have a greater impact on improving global aviation security.  In 
reinforcing the global nature of the December 25th incident, DEPSEC 
Lute pointed to the fact that it involved the purchasing of the 
airline ticket in one country, the boarding of the flight in a 
second, a connection in a third with a fourth country as the 
suspected bomber's final destination; all the while transiting 
through several nation's airspace and with a multinational 
passenger list. DEPSEC Lute mentioned that the December 25th 
incident caught many by surprise and called attention to the need 
for the international aviation community to be proactive instead of 
reactive.  Patriota agreed with this position stating that the 
interconnectivity of the civil aviation community requires a global 
approach and response.  Virginia Toniatti, Director for the General 
Coordination to Combat Transnational Crimes (or Assistant Secretary 
for the Department of International Security Coordination, which 
will be the new title once officially approved) at MRE, and a 
pivotal player in ensuring aviation security cooperation with GOB, 
acknowledged the beneficial cooperation between GOB and TSA, citing 
the recent successful completion of airport security cooperation 
visits between TSA and their Brazilian Civil Aviation Agency 
Authority (ANAC) counterparts at all 8 of Brazil's airports with 
direct service to the U.S., but questioned whether there was 
political support to adopt TSA's January 4, 2010 new security 
directive mandating enhanced passenger screening, sufficient 
manpower/planning capacities to implement these measures, and 
expressed doubts over how much it would cost Brazil in order to 
comply with a USG mandate.  Patriota immediately clarified that 
Brazil shared the same concerns and objectives as the U.S. on this 
issue and suggested that DEPSEC Lute consult with ANAC about the 
status of the Civil Security Policy document that has been 
transmitted from MOD and awaits President Lula's approval and that 
is designed to give ANAC the abilities to comply with the mandate 
through collaboration with Brazil's airport authority INFRAERO and 
with the airlines. 
 
 
 
MOD- POSITIVE COLLABORATION 
 
 
---------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) MOD's Secretary of Civil Aviation, Brigadier Jorge 
Godinho, welcomed DEPSEC Lute's comments on the need for an 
international approach/response to the challenges in civil aviation 
security and greater engagement in information sharing and 
technology exchanges, adding that civil aviation security is a 
difficult and complex issue, one that requires a proactive approach 
through the combined efforts of the international flying community. 
Godinho, who was filling in for Minister Jobim who had traveled to 
earthquake stricken Haiti earlier in the day, added that December 
25th  wasn't just a U.S. problem, but a Brazilian problem and that 
both sides, and the international flying community, should work 
diligently to find not only immediate solutions to the threat, but 
long-term sustainable ones as well. Godinho pointed out that Brazil 
and U.S. have similar aviation challenges given the size and 
widespread population distribution the 2 countries have in common 
that results in a high reliance on air travel by its citizens. He 
stated that without appropriate civil aviation security measures, 
domestic and international air travel would be compromised in 
Brazil, with grave consequences. Solange Vieira, President of 
Brazil's Civil Aviation Regulatory Agency (ANAC), highlighted 
ANAC's beneficial and cooperative relationship with both FAA and 
TSA and pointed to ANAC's success in complying with ICAO based 
standards during recent FAA and TSA airport inspections.  Vieira 
recognized the fluid nature that is airport security and expressed 
a willingness to work with TSA on new directives as they are 
mandated. She stated that she expects the new Civil Security Policy 
document to be approved by President Lula within the next 15 days 
and stands ready to work with INFRAERO and the airlines to 
implement the January 4 TAS security directive.  Vieira also 
mentioned that given the fact that Brazil's aviation network has 
never been attacked, ANAC does not set aviation security standards; 
rather it follows and implements aviation security standards set by 
others.  Murilo Barboza, President of INFRAERO, showed great 
enthusiasm in working closer with TSA to improve 
information/intelligence sharing and gathering techniques, stating 
was a key element in effective aviation security, and hoped to 
improve this through greater cooperation with TSA.  Barboza also 
stressed the importance of using TSA expertise in determining the 
appropriate types of screening machinery needed given an airport's 
passenger volumes and threat information, and is ready to "roll up 
his sleeves, and get to work" with TSA soon. Assistant Secretary 
Heyman expressed appreciation for the both ANAC and INFRAERO's 
desire to work closer with TSA and added that an enhanced TSA 
relationship with Brazil would not only combat threats against its 
civil aviation infrastructure, but would also help in combating the 
illegal trafficking of contraband and persons. Rottman amplified 
this working relationship theme by stating that the approval of a 
TSA representative office in Brazil, which is still pending MRE 
approval, would greatly strengthen all of the above shared 
objectives.  Godinho responded positively, stating that the MOD 
welcomed the presence of a TSA office in Brazil and would support 
this initiative. (NOTE: Toniatti, who is seen as the primary 
obstacle in TSA opening an office in Brazil, was present at the 
meeting but did not speak. In a subsequent conversation with the 
Charg????, she stated that Godinho's endorsement of a TSA office in 
Brazil did not constitute permission to move forward with this. END 
NOTE). In expressing MOD's eagerness to move forward on this 
cooperation initiative, Godinho suggested that the proposed 
ministerial aviation security meeting be held in the first half of 
¶2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
MOJ- CONSTRUCTIVE INPUT 
 
----------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Dr. Luiz Paulo Barreto, the Executive Secretary at 
Brazil's Ministry of Justice, welcomed DEPSEC Lute's global 
approach in tackling the challenges of improving civil aviation 
security in a proactive manner, adding that the December 25th 
incident was a threat against the international aviation system and 
that the international community should not succumb to these types 
 
 
 
of threats. In picking up the 3 part approach outlined by DEPSEC 
Lute, Barreto stressed the importance of improving information 
sharing and screening technologies that would allow for a more 
targeted approach to aviation security screening that wouldn't 
violate certain human rights guaranteed under the Brazilian 
constitution.  Barreto suggested that DHS explore the possibility 
of establishing an early warning system that could help identify 
security problems in advance and allow for the implementation of 
proactive preventative measures.  Among other ideas suggested by 
Barreto were a public relations campaign aimed at educating the 
flying public on newly implemented security measures, the 
establishment of a positive registry to be shared by partner 
nations that rewards passengers who fly regularly, without 
incident, a categorical approach to solving and improving security 
related issues that identifies the key elements such as information 
sharing, technology and minimum security standards, and finally, 
utilizing ICAO or the UN forums to host global aviation security 
summits.  Barreto stressed that it will be important for Brazil to 
balance the need show a human, friendly face while also ensuring 
that they do everything possible to ensure aviation safety when 
they host the World Cup in 2014 and the Olympics in 2016. 
Alexandre Aragon, Secretary for National Security, fully agreed 
with DEPSEC Lute's approach and said that they were ready to work 
with DHS on immediate and long term solutions in addressing 
aviation security concerns.  Dr. Marcos Aurelio Pereira de Moura, 
Brazil's General Coordinator for Institutional Defense also agreed 
with DEPSEC Lute's approach, but cautioned that this approach will 
only work with the right partner countries and that countries like 
Brazil and the U.S. should vet carefully potential partners in this 
initiative so as to avoid wasting time, technology and money on 
those countries that don't have the will or the way to participate. 
Moura stressed the importance of sound institutional training as 
the cornerstone towards the successful implementation of long term 
strategies in aviation security.  Oswaldo Portella, Brazil's 
Ambassador to the Ministry of Justice, echoed DEPSEC Lute's central 
themes, while pointing to the reliance on air travel both 
countries' citizens have given the size of Brazil and the United 
States.  Dr. Romeu Tuma Junior, Brazil's National Secretary of 
Justice, commented on the Brazilian constitutional constraints that 
affect a full screening regime, but offered that with improved 
information gathering and sharing, and the introduction of new 
technologies, a more targeted approach could be accomplished 
without encumbering the entire flying public.  He pointed to the 
failures by the U.S. in not reacting to information received on the 
suspected December 25th bomber as an example of failing to act on 
key intelligence and offered this as a reason why partner nations 
must work together to close these security gaps and share lessons 
learned.  Tuma noted that the majority of the general public in 
Brazil had not recognized terrorism as a national threat as little 
as 10 years ago, but a new recognition has evolved within Brazil, 
and with it, increased anti-terrorism training. (Note: drafter 
counted the use of the word "terrorism" by Tuma 6 times in his 
remarks. End Note).  Tuma recommended that besides the 
ministerial/global approach to aviation security, Brazil and the 
U.S. should look to use regional fora in Latin America to push this 
agenda forward with the idea of streamlining regional aviation 
security practices in order to address regional aviation security 
threats.  Barreto closed by again offering full support to DEPSEC 
Lute in this initiative and suggested that the proposed aviation 
security ministerial meeting be convened as soon as possible. 
 
 
 
GSI- WILLING PARTNER 
 
-------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU)  In responding positively to DEPSEC Lute's three part 
approach in addressing global civil aviation security challenges, 
General Antonio Sergio Geromel, the Acting Minister at GSI, agreed 
to an integrated approach to finding solutions and offered GSI's 
full support in this endeavor.  Geromel expressed concerns about 
the vulnerability of the global aviation security system and 
stressed the importance of producing effective counter measures to 
these threats through global and regional fora.  Marcio Paulo 
Buzanelli, Director of the Prevention and Combating Terrorism 
Coordination Center and advisor to Minister Felix at GSI, said that 
the December 25th incident impacted Brazil given its multinational 
footprint and established Yemen as a terrorist center and a country 
 
 
of interest to the international community.  Buzannelli encouraged 
the adoption of international aviation security measures through 
multinational fora mechanisms, adding that although Brazil has not 
been specifically targeted by terrorists, it shared the same 
aviation system with those countries that have been, and that 
partner countries are only as strong as the weakest link. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: GOB interlocutors demonstrated unanimous and 
unambiguous support for the overarching goal of recognizing 
aviation security threats as a global issue and readiness to 
participate in developing standards and methods to address. These 
interactions made clear that GOB agencies are willing and eager to 
engage in specific follow-up, and expressed hope the proposed 
Aviation Security Ministerial could be held sooner rather than 
later (NOTE: Due to upcoming elections in Brazil, many Ministers 
must vacate their positions by the beginning of April.  While 
agency heads such as ANAC and INFRAERO who are not running for 
election are not required to depart, the Justice Minister, for 
example, is expected to depart, and some agency heads closely 
associated with political parties or candidates might also leave 
office over the next months.  END NOTE).  Post stands ready to 
support follow up action and visits as DHS and TSA requires.  In 
the short term, Post suggests that DEPSEC Lute reach out to MRE's 
Patriota to discuss the issue of the establishment of a TSA office 
in Brazil to ensure that momentum is carried forward from these 
positive meetings and translated into beneficial aviation security 
cooperation between the U.S. and Brazil. END COMMENT 
 
 
 
¶7.  (U) The message has been cleared by the delegation. 
 
 
 
KUBISKE 
KUBISKE