10DAKAR76
Senegal: The Return of Political Violence
Thu Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO4154
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0076 0211513
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211513Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3645
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 000076 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL,INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM ECON SG
SUBJECT: Senegal: The Return of Political Violence 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On January 17, two arsonists, allegedly belonging 
to the ruling Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) set ablaze the stand 
where Ousmane Tanor Dieng, the leader of the Socialist Party (PS) 
was sitting during a political rally in Thies.  Dieng and key 
leaders of the PS, including the Mayor of Dakar, were in Thies to 
launch the PS's national "one Month One Region" campaign aimed at 
galvanizing the party's grassroots.  The fire was put out by the 
PS's youth; however, the tarp covering the stand was burnt down. 
Luckily, the wooden bleachers did not collapse and no stampede took 
place.  Dieng called it an assassination attempt by the PDS, adding 
that his party's response will be, "an eye for an eye".  End 
Summary. 
 
The ruling PDS suspected 
------------------------ 
¶2. (SBU) The PDS is generally dubbed as the "party of violence" as 
they have been known to use violence as a means to intimidate 
opponents.  A member of the Directorate of the Socialist Party told 
Embassy that they were informed prior to the meeting that the PDS 
would seek to sabotage the event.  A journalist named Leopold Tamba, 
who is the correspondent of Walf FM and Walf Tv in Thies, confirmed 
to the Embassy that Mouhamadou Massaly, a local PDS youth leader 
("Jeunesse Wadiste") based in Thies called him to say he was the 
instigator of the arson.  Tamba added that Massaly had called him 
twice to make sure that he reported that he had been the one who had 
derailed the PS's meeting; he even offered to pay him 300,000 CFA 
(600 USD)if he made the announcement.  Massaly who is also the 
Chairman of the Board of Directors of Dakarnave (a ship repair 
company in Dakar) is probably seeking a fast political promotion by 
showing off his zeal.  Tamba says that during Massaly's last call he 
had given his cell phone to Tanor Dieng who was able to hear Massaly 
boast that he was behind the arson.  This is the second attack in 
which the PDS have targeted an opposition leader.  On January 1, 
Macky Sall and his associates were stoned in the Pikine suburb of 
Dakar where his party had a major political rally. 
 
Impunity for criminals 
---------------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) The Socialist Party has indicated that it will take the 
case to court.  Macky Sall did the same a week ago.  However, 
historically arrests in such cases are rarely made as the criminals 
enjoy protection from the ruling party.  In this case, the regional 
leader of the PS in Thies told Embassy that he twice went to the 
police to report the event but did not feel he was welcome.  He said 
that only thirty six hours after the event did the police finally 
summon Massaly and Leopold Tamba for an interrogation.  Tamba 
confirmed to Embassy that he had told the police that Massaly had 
called him twice and they could use the records of the phone company 
to check.  For his part Massaly, after being interrogated for nine 
hours, made a statement to the press where he denied any involvement 
in the arson and of calling Tamba.  He went on to claim that he was 
being set up. 
 
¶4. (SBU) COMMENT: The PDS realizes that the 2012 elections will be 
fiercely contested and that it could lose power.  As a result, it is 
implementing a multi-pronged strategy against the opposition that 
includes distributing money and positions to destabilize opposition 
parties and enacting more institutional and legal reforms to 
strengthen the PDS' position.  However, the most worrying element of 
this latest offensive seems to be the use of violence to intimidate 
opponents and prevent them from making a public show of their 
political strength.  On December 24, President Wade changed both the 
Minister of Justice Moustapha Sourang, who was on the job for only 
two and a half months, and his deputy.  A senior official of the 
Ministry of Justice told Embassy that the changes were made for 
political reasons to ensure that the Ministry would be more willing 
to turn a blind eye to the transgressions of certain PDS elements. 
END COMMENT. 
 
BERNICAT