10OTTAWA60
Canada's 2010 Investment Climate Statement
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHOT #0060/01 0192238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191518Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0265
INFO RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWAUNCLAS OTTAWA 000060 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR EB/IFD/OIA AND WHA/CAN 
DEPT FOR USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPIC KTDB USTR ETRD EINV
SUBJECT: Canada's 2010 Investment Climate Statement 
 
A.1.  Openness to Foreign Investment 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
 
Strong economic fundamentals, proximity to the U.S. market, highly 
skilled employees, and abundant resources are key attractions for 
American investors in Canada.  With few exceptions, Canada offers 
full national treatment to foreign investors within the context of 
a developed open market economy operating with democratic 
principles and institutions.  Canada is, however, one of the few 
OECD countries that still has a formal investment review process. 
Foreign investment is also prohibited or restricted in several 
sectors of the economy. 
 
 
 
Canada's economic development relies on foreign investment flows to 
a significant extent.  The Canadian government estimates that 
foreign investors control about one quarter of Canada's 
nonfinancial corporate assets.  The stock of global foreign direct 
investment in Canada stood at C$504.9 billion in 2008, an increase 
of 13.6 billion from 2007.  U.S. investment accounted for 58 
percent of the total (the same as 2007).  However, for the first 
year ever Canadian direct investment to the United States exceeded 
US investment to Canada (by C$17.1 billion at the end of 2008). 
 
 
 
The United States and Canada agree on important foreign investment 
principles, including right of establishment and national 
treatment.  The 1989 Free Trade Agreement (FTA) recognized that a 
hospitable and secure investment climate is necessary to achieve 
the full benefits of reducing barriers to trade in goods and 
services.  The FTA established a framework of investment principles 
sensitive to U.S. and Canadian interests while assuring that 
investment flowed freely between the two countries and investors 
were treated in a fair and equitable manner.  The FTA provided 
higher review thresholds for U.S. investment in Canada than for 
other foreign investors, but the agreement did not exempt all 
American investment from review nor did the agreement override 
specific foreign investment prohibitions, notably in "cultural 
industries" (e.g., publishing, film, music). 
 
 
 
The 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) incorporated 
the gains made in the FTA, expanded the coverage of the Investment 
chapter to several new areas, and broadened the definition of 
investors' rights.  The NAFTA also created the right to binding 
investor-state dispute settlement arbitration in specific 
situations. 
 
 
 
--  Legal Framework: The Investment Canada Act 
 
 
 
Since 1985, foreign investment policy in Canada has been guided by 
the Investment Canada Act (ICA), which replaced the more 
restrictive Foreign Investment Review Act.  The ICA liberalized 
policy on foreign investment by recognizing that investment is 
central to economic growth and key to technological advancement. 
The ICA also provided for review of large acquisitions by 
non-Canadians and imposed a requirement that these investments be 
of "net benefit" to Canada.  For the vast majority of small 
acquisitions, as well as the establishment of new businesses, 
foreign investors need only notify the Canadian government of their 
investment. 
 
 
 
The threshold for investments subject to ICA review was increased 
in 2009 to C$312 million for WTO Members. (Indirect control 
acquisitions by WTO Members do not have to be reviewed.)  For 
non-WTO Members, the threshold remains at C$5 million for direct 
control and C$50 million for indirect control acquisitions.  From 
November 2008 to the end of October 2009, 371 foreign acquisitions 
were notified to Industry Canada, of which less than 10 percent 
were subject to review. 
 
 
 
Investment in specific sectors is covered by the special 
 
legislation.  For example, foreign investment in the financial 
sector is administered by the federal Department of Finance Canada. 
Investment in any activity related to Canada's cultural heritage or 
national identity is administered by the Department of Canadian 
Heritage.  Under provisions of Canada's Telecommunications Act, 
foreign ownership of transmission facilities is limited to 20 
percent direct ownership and 33 percent through a holding company, 
for an effective limit of 46.7 percent total foreign ownership. 
The Broadcast Act governs foreign investment in radio and 
television broadcasting.  (See below for more detail on these 
restrictions). 
 
 
 
In addition to federal regulation, investment in Canada is also 
subject to provincial jurisdiction.  Restrictions on foreign 
investment differ by province, but are largely confined to the 
purchase of land and to provincially regulated financial services. 
Provincial government policies relating to, inter alia, culture, 
language, labor relations or the environment, can be a factor for 
foreign investors. 
 
 
 
U.S. foreign direct investment in Canada is subject to provisions 
of the Investment Canada Act, the WTO, and the NAFTA.  Chapter 11 
of the NAFTA ensures that future regulation of the U.S. investors 
in Canada (and Canadian investors in the United States) results in 
treatment no different than that extended to domestic investors 
within each country, i.e., "national treatment."  Both governments 
are free to regulate the ongoing operation of business enterprises 
in their respective jurisdictions provided the governments accord 
national treatment to both U.S. and Canadian investors. 
 
 
 
Existing U.S. and Canadian laws, policies, and practices were 
"grandfathered" under the NAFTA except where specific changes were 
required.  The "grandfathering" froze various exceptions to 
national treatment provided in Canadian and U.S. law, such as 
foreign ownership restrictions in the communications and 
transportation industries  The Canadian government retains the 
right to review the acquisition of firms in Canada by U.S. 
investors at the levels applicable to other WTO members and has 
required changes before approving some investments. 
 
 
 
The U.S. and Canadian governments are free to tax foreign-owned 
companies on a different basis from domestic firms, provided this 
does not result in arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination.  The 
governments can also exempt the sale of Crown (government owned) 
corporations from any national treatment obligations.  Finally, the 
two governments retain some flexibility in the application of 
national treatment obligations.  They need not extend identical 
treatment, as long as the treatment is "equivalent." 
 
 
 
--  Services Trade 
 
 
 
Bilateral services trade is largely free of restrictions, and the 
NAFTA ensures that restrictions will not be applied in the future. 
However, preexisting restrictions, such as those in the financial 
sector, were not eliminated by the NAFTA.  The NAFTA services 
agreement is primarily a code of principles that establishes 
national treatment, right of establishment, right of commercial 
presence, and transparency for a number of service sectors 
specifically enumerated in annexes to the NAFTA.  The NAFTA also 
commits both governments to expand the list of covered service 
sectors (except for the financial services covered by NAFTA Chapter 
14). 
 
 
 
-- Federal Procurement 
 
 
 
NAFTA grants U.S. firms that operate from the United States 
national treatment for most Canadian federal procurement 
opportunities.  Interprovincial trade barriers, however, mean that 
U.S. firms established in one Canadian province can be prevented 
from bidding on another province's procurement opportunities.  As a 
 
first step in the ongoing and difficult process of reducing trade 
barriers within Canada, the Canadian federal, provincial, and 
territorial governments negotiated the Agreement on Internal Trade 
(AIT) that came into effect on July 1, 1995.  The Agreement 
provides a framework for dealing with intra-Canada trade in ten 
specific sectors and establishes a formal process for resolving 
trade disputes. In January 2009, the provinces expanded the AIT to 
include improvements for labor mobility and dispute resolution. 
 
 
 
In an attempt to further reduce interprovincial trade barriers, the 
provinces of British Columbia and Alberta signed a Trade, 
Investment, and Labor Mobility Agreement (TILMA) in 2006 to ensure 
that any provincial measures will not "operate to impair or 
restrict trade between or through the territory of the Parties, or 
investment or labor mobility between the Parties."  The Agreement 
came into force in April 2009. 
 
 
 
Besides the areas described above, the NAFTA includes provisions 
that enhance the ability of U.S. investors to enforce their rights 
through international arbitration; prohibit a broad range of 
performance requirements, including forced technology transfer, and 
expand coverage of the NAFTA investment chapter to include 
portfolio and intangible investments, as well as direct investment. 
 
 
 
-- Investment in Cultural Industries 
 
 
 
Canada defines cultural industries to include:  the publication, 
distribution or sale of books, magazines, periodicals or 
newspapers, other than the sole activity of printing or 
typesetting; the production, distribution, sale or exhibition of 
film or video recording, or audio or video music recordings; the 
publication, distribution or sale of music in print or 
machine-readable form; and any radio, television and cable 
television broadcasting undertakings and any satellite programming 
and broadcast network services. 
 
 
 
The Investment Canada Act requires that foreign investment in the 
book publishing and distribution sector be compatible with Canadian 
national cultural policies and be of "net benefit" to Canada. 
Takeovers of Canadian-owned and controlled distribution businesses 
are not allowed.  The establishment of new film distribution 
companies in Canada is permitted only for importation and 
distribution of proprietary products.  Direct and indirect 
takeovers of foreign distribution businesses operating in Canada 
are permitted only if the investor undertakes to reinvest a portion 
of its Canadian earnings in Canada. 
 
 
 
The Broadcasting Act sets out the policy objectives of enriching 
and strengthening the cultural, political, social, and economic 
fabric of Canada.  The Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) administers broadcasting 
policy.  Under current CRTC policy, in cases where a Canadian 
service is licensed in a format competitive with that of an 
authorized non-Canadian service, the commission can drop the 
non-Canadian service if a new Canadian applicant requests it to do 
so.  Licenses will not be granted or renewed to firms that do not 
have at least 80 percent Canadian control, represented both by 
shareholding and by representation on the firms' board of 
directors. 
 
 
 
While Canada allows up to 100 percent foreign equity in an 
enterprise to publish, distribute and sell periodicals, all foreign 
investments in this industry are subject to review by the Minister 
for Canadian Heritage, and investments may not occur through 
acquisition of a Canadian-owned enterprise.  No more than 18 
percent of the total advertising space in foreign periodicals 
exported to Canada may be aimed primarily at the Canadian market. 
Canadian advertisers may place advertisements in foreign-owned 
periodicals, and may claim a tax deduction for the advertising 
costs, including in cases where the periodical is a Canadian issue 
of foreign-owned periodical.  One-half of advertising costs may be 
deducted in the case of publications with zero to 79 percent 
 
original editorial content, and the full cost of advertising may be 
deducted in the case of publications with advertising may be 
deducted in the case of publications with 80 percent or more 
original editorial content. 
 
 
 
This regime is the result of a 1999 agreement between the United 
States and Canada, which balanced U.S. publishers' desire for 
access to the Canadian market against Canada's desire to ensure 
that Canadian advertising expenditures support the production of 
Canadian editorial content. 
 
 
 
--  Investment in the Financial Sector 
 
 
 
Canada is open to foreign investment in the banking, insurance, and 
securities brokerage sectors, but there are barriers to foreign 
investment in retail banking.  Foreign financial firms interested 
in investing submit their applications to the Office of the 
Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI) for approval by the 
Minister of Finance.  U.S. firms are present in all three sectors, 
but play secondary roles.  Canadian banks have been much more 
aggressive in entering the U.S. retail banking market because there 
are no barriers that limit access.  Although U.S. and other foreign 
banks have long been able to establish banking subsidiaries in 
Canada, no U.S. banks have retail banking operations in Canada, 
which is regarded as a fairly "saturated" market.  Several U.S. 
financial institutions have established branches in Canada, chiefly 
targeting commercial lending, investment banking, and niche markets 
such as credit card issuance. 
 
 
 
Chapter 14 of the NAFTA deals specifically with the financial 
services sector, and eliminates discriminatory asset and capital 
restrictions on U.S. bank subsidiaries in Canada.  The NAFTA also 
exempts U.S. firms and investors from the federal "10/25" rule so 
that they will be treated the same as Canadian firms.  The "10/25" 
rule prevents any non-NAFTA, nonresident entity from acquiring more 
than ten percent of the shares (and all such entities collectively 
from acquiring more than 25 percent of the shares) of a federally 
regulated, Canadian-controlled financial institution.  In 2001, the 
Canadian government raised the ten percent limit for single, 
non-NAFTA shareholders to 20 percent.  Several provinces, however, 
including Ontario and Quebec, have similar "10/25" rules for 
provincially chartered trust and insurance companies that were not 
waived under the NAFTA. 
 
 
 
--  Investment in Other Sectors 
 
 
 
Commercial Aviation:  Currently Canada limits foreign ownership of 
Canadian air carriers to 25 percent of voting equity.  In addition, 
foreigners may own nonvoting equity subject to the overall 
requirement that they are not permitted to control a Canadian air 
carrier.  The recently signed Canada-EU Aviation Agreement 
envisions changes to Canadian legislation that will allow up to a 
49 percent foreign stake in Canadian airlines; but this will 
require action by the parliament and no specific date for the new 
limits to come into force have been announced. 
 
 
 
General Aviation:  No non-Canadian (other than permanent residents) 
may register a general aviation aircraft for commercial or personal 
use in Canada. 
 
 
 
Energy and Mining:  Generally foreigners cannot be majority owners 
of uranium mines. 
 
 
 
Telecommunications:  Under provisions of Canada's 
Telecommunications Act, direct foreign ownership of Type 1 carriers 
 
(owners/operators of transmission facilities) is limited to 20 
percent.  Ownership and control rules are more flexible for holding 
companies that wish to invest in Canadian carriers.  Under these 
 
 
rules, two thirds of the holding company's equity must be owned and 
controlled by Canadians. 
 
 
 
Fishing:  Foreigners can own up to 49 percent of companies that 
hold Canadian commercial fishing licenses. 
 
 
 
Electric Power Generation and Distribution:  Regulatory reform in 
electricity continues in Canada in expectation that increased 
competition will lower costs of electricity supply.  Province-owned 
power firms are also interested in gaining greater access to the 
U.S. power market.  Since power markets fall under the competency 
of the Canadian provinces, they are at the forefront of the reform 
effort.  The reforms will also help to further integrate the U.S. 
and Canadian electricity markets. 
 
 
 
Real Estate:  Primary responsibility for property law rests with 
the provinces.  Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, and Nova Scotia 
all limit real estate sales to out-of-province parties.  There is 
no constitutional protection for property rights in Canada. 
Consequently, government authorities can expropriate property after 
paying appropriate compensation. 
 
 
 
Privatization:  Federal and provincial privatizations are 
considered on a case-by-case basis, and there are no overall 
limitations with regard to foreign ownership.  As an example, the 
federal Department of Transport did not impose any limitations in 
the 1995 privatization of Canadian National Railway, whose majority 
shareholders are now U.S. persons. 
 
 
 
--  Investment Incentives 
 
 
 
Federal and provincial governments in Canada offer a wide array of 
investment incentives that municipalities are generally prohibited 
from doing.  None of the federal incentives are specifically aimed 
at promoting or discouraging foreign investment in Canada.  The 
incentives are designed to advance broader policy goals, such as 
boosting research and development or promoting regional economies. 
The funds are available to any qualified Canadian or foreign 
investor who agrees to use the monies for the stated purpose.  For 
example, Export Development Canada can support inbound investment 
under certain specific conditions (e.g., investment must be 
export-focused; export contracts must be in hand or companies have 
a track record; there is a world or regional product mandate for 
the product to be produced). 
 
 
 
Provincial incentives tend to be more investor-specific and are 
conditioned on applying the funds to an investment in the granting 
province.  Provincial incentives may also be restricted to firms 
established in the province or that agree to establish a facility 
in the province.  Government officials at both the federal and 
provincial levels expect investors who receive investment 
incentives to use them for the agreed purpose, but no enforcement 
mechanism exists. 
 
 
 
Incentives for investment in cultural industries, at both the 
federal and provincial level, are generally available only to 
Canadian-controlled firms.  Incentives may take the form of grants, 
loans, loan guarantees, venture capital, or tax credits.  Incentive 
programs in Canada generally are not oriented toward export 
promotion.  Provincial incentive programs for film production in 
Canada are available to foreign filmmakers. 
 
 
 
-- Canada's Ranking in Selected Business Indices 
 
 
 
Index 
 
Year 
 
Metric 
 
Ranking 
 
TI Corruption Index 
 
2009 
 
CPI Score 8.7 
 
8 
 
Heritage Economic Freedom 
 
2009 
 
Overall Score 80.5 
 
7 
 
WB Ease of Doing Business 
 
2009 
 
 
 
8 
 
(MCC Indices Not Applicable) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.2.  Conversion and Transfer Policies 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
 
The Canadian dollar is fully convertible.  The Canadian government 
provides some incentives for Canadian investment in developing 
countries through Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 
programs.  Canada's official export credit agency, the Export 
Development Corporation (EDC), provides political risk insurance to 
Canadian companies with investments in foreign countries and to 
lenders who finance transactions pursued by Canadian companies 
abroad. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.3.  Expropriation and Compensation 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
 
Canadian federal and provincial laws recognize both the right of 
the government to expropriate private property for a public 
purpose, and the obligation to pay compensation.  The federal 
government has not nationalized any foreign firm since the 
nationalization of Axis property during World War II.  Both the 
federal and provincial governments have assumed control of private 
firms usually financially distressed ones after reaching agreement 
with the former owners.  In December 2008, the province of 
Newfoundland and Labrador acted to take control of assets relating 
to a U.S. company's operations in the province.  The action raised 
questions as to whether the province was expropriating rights and 
assets of the company - possibly without compensation. 
 
 
 
A.4.  Dispute Settlement 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Canada is a member of the New York Convention of 1958 on the 
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.  The 
Canadian government has made a decision in principle to become a 
member of the international Center for the Settlement of Investment 
Disputes (ICSID).  However, since the ICSID legal enforcement 
mechanism requires provincial legislation, the federal government 
must also obtain agreement from the provinces that they will 
enforce ICSID decisions.  Although most provinces have endorsed the 
agreement, full agreement is unlikely in the foreseeable future. 
 
 
 
Canada accepts binding arbitration of investment disputes to which 
it is a party only when it has specifically agreed to do so through 
a bilateral or multilateral agreement, such as a Foreign Investment 
Protection Agreement (see below).  The provisions of Chapter 11 of 
the NAFTA guide the resolution of investment disputes between NAFTA 
persons and the NAFTA member governments.  The NAFTA encourages 
parties to settle disputes through consultation or negotiation.  It 
also establishes special arbitration procedures for investment 
disputes, separate from arbitration procedures, for investment 
disputes separate from the NAFTA's general dispute settlement 
provisions. 
 
 
 
Under the NAFTA, a narrow range of disputes dealing with government 
monopolies and expropriation between an investor from a NAFTA 
country and a NAFTA government may be settled, at the investor's 
option, by binding international arbitration.  An investor who 
seeks binding arbitration in a dispute with a NAFTA party gives up 
his right to seek redress through the court system of the NAFTA 
party, except for proceedings seeking nonmonetary damages. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.5.  Performance Requirements and Incentives 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
The NAFTA prohibits the United States or Canada from imposing 
export or domestic content performance requirements, and Canada 
does not explicitly negotiate performance requirements with foreign 
investors.  For investments subject to review, however, the 
investor's intentions regarding employment, resource processing, 
domestic content, exports, and technology development or transfer 
can be examined by the Canadian government.  Investment reviews 
often lead to negotiation of a package of specific "undertakings," 
such as agreement to promote Canadian products.  In 2009, the 
Government of Canada filed a suit in the Canadian courts against 
U.S. Steel alleging that the company had failed to fulfill its 
undertaking to maintain minimum employment levels in exchange for 
permission to acquire a Canadian steel mill. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.6.  Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
 
 
Investors have full rights to private ownership. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.7.  Protection of Property Rights 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
Foreigner investors have full and fair access to Canada's legal 
system, with private property right limited only by the rights of 
governments to establish monopolies and to expropriate for public 
purposes.  Investors from NAFTA countries have mechanisms available 
 
to them for dispute resolution regarding property expropriation by 
the Government of Canada. 
 
 
 
Canada has yet to ratify key treaties that protect copyright works 
on the Internet (the World Intellectual Property Organization) 
(WIPO) "Internet Treaties") that the government signed in 1997. 
Refer to the copyright section of this report for more details.  U. 
¶S. (and many Canadian) companies have complained that Canada's 
enforcement regime against counterfeiting and piracy, both at the 
border and internally, is cumbersome and ineffective and further 
hampered law enforcement officials' legal restrictions from sharing 
information with rights holders. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.8  Transparency of the Regulatory System 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
 
 
The transparency of Canada's regulatory system is similar to that 
of the United States.  Proposed legislation is subject to 
parliamentary debate and public hearings, and regulations are 
issued in draft form for public comment prior to implementation. 
While federal and/or provincial licenses or permits may be needed 
to engage in economic activities, regulation of these activities is 
generally for statistical or tax compliance reasons.  The Bureau of 
Competition Policy and the Competition Tribunal, a quasi -judicial 
body, enforce Canada's antitrust legislation. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.9.  Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
--- 
 
 
 
Canada's capital markets are open, accessible, and without onerous 
regulatory requirements.  Foreign investors are able to get credit 
in the local market.  In 2008 and 2009, the World Economic Forum 
and Moody's Investor Service ranked Canada's banking system as the 
"most sound" in the world, and first in the world for financial 
strength, respectively.   Canadian banking stability is linked to 
high capitalization rates that are well above the norms set by the 
Bank for International Settlements. 
 
 
 
The Canadian banking industry includes 22 domestic banks, 26 
foreign bank subsidiaries and 22 full-service foreign bank branches 
and seven foreign bank lending branches operating in Canada. In 
total, these institutions manage close to C$2.9 trillion in assets. 
Many large international banks have a presence in Canada through a 
subsidiary, representative office or branch of the parent bank. 
 
 
 
In Canada, the regulation of defensive tactics against hostile 
takeovers is handled by provincial securities regulators rather 
than the courts.  Canadian regulators have adopted a National 
Policy regarding takeovers that seeks to encourage open and 
unrestricted auctions to maximize target company shareholder value 
and choice between competing alternatives.  The nationality of the 
bidding entity is not considered by the provincial securities 
regulators but trigger a federal review under the Investment Canada 
Act. 
 
 
 
While cross-shareholding arrangements are permitted in Canada, the 
extent of foreign investment and cross-border M&A activity suggests 
that they do not pose any practical barriers. 
 
A.10.  Competition from State-Owned Enterprises 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
 
 
Canada has around 100 state-owned enterprises (SOEs), however the 
vast majority of assets are held by four federal crown 
corporations: Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation; Farm Credit 
Canada; Business Development Bank of Canada; and Export Development 
Canada.  The Treasury Board Secretariat provides an annual report 
to Parliament regarding the governance and performance of Canada's 
crown corporations and other corporate interests. 
 
 
 
There are no restrictions on the ability of private enterprises to 
compete with SOEs.  However, the functions of most Canadian crown 
corporations have limited appeal to the private sector, e.g. the 
Canadian Space Agency.  However, the activities of some SOEs such 
as VIA Rail and Canada Post do overlap with private enterprise.  As 
such, they are subject to the rules of the Competition Act to 
prevent abuse of dominance and other anti-competitive practices. 
Foreign investors are also able to challenge SOEs under the NAFTA 
and WTO. 
 
 
 
Canada does not have a sovereign wealth fund but the province of 
Alberta has the Heritage Savings Trust Fund established through 
province's share of petroleum royalties. The fund's value was 
approximately C$15 billion in 2009.  It is invested in a globally 
diversified portfolio of public and private equity, fixed income 
and real assets. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.11.  Corporate Social Responsibility 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
 
The Government of Canada encourages Canadian companies to observe 
the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises in their 
operations abroad and provides a National Contact Point for dealing 
with issues that arise in relation to Canadian companies.  Despite 
the increased level of official attention paid to CSR, the 
activities of Canadian mining companies abroad remain the subject 
of critical attention and have prompted calls for the government to 
move beyond voluntary measures. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.12.  Political Violence 
 
------------------------------ 
 
 
 
Political violence occurs in Canada to about the same extent as in 
the United States.  For example, protest at the North American 
Leaders, Summit in Montebello, QC in August 2007 led to 
confrontation between police and protesters. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.13.  Corruption 
 
---------------------- 
 
 
 
On an international scale, corruption in Canada is low and similar 
to that found in the United States.  In general, the type of due 
diligence that would be required in the United States to avoid 
corrupt practices would be appropriate in Canada.  Canada is a 
party to the UN Convention Against Corruption.   Canada is also a 
party to the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public 
Officials in International Business Transactions, as well as the 
 
Inter-American Convention Against Corruption. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.14.  Bilateral Investment Treaties 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
While the terms of the FTA and NAFTA guide investment relations 
between Canada and the United States, Canada has also negotiated 
international investment agreements with non-NAFTA parties.  These 
agreements, known as Foreign Investment Protection Agreements 
(FIPAs), are bilateral treaties that promote and protect foreign 
investment through a system of legally binding rights and 
obligation based on the same principles found in the NAFTA.  Canada 
has negotiated FIPAs with countries in Central Europe, Latin 
America, Africa, and Asia, and has over 100 international tax 
treaties in force. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.15.  OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
-- 
 
 
 
Because Canada is a developed country, the U.S. Overseas Private 
Investment Corporation does not operate in Canada. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.16.  Labor 
 
---------------- 
 
 
 
The federal government and provincial/territorial governments share 
jurisdiction for labor regulation and standards.  Federal employees 
and those employed in the railroad, airline, and banking sector are 
covered under the federally administered Canada Labor Code. 
Employees in most other sectors come under provincial labor codes. 
As the laws vary somewhat from one jurisdiction to another, it is 
advisable to contact a federal or provincial labor office for 
specifics, such as minimum wage and benefit requirements.  The 
global economic crisis of 2008-2009 was accompanied by job loss 
across the country, particularly in manufacturing and construction. 
Canada's unemployment rate stood at 8.5 percent at the end of 2009, 
up from years of relative stability between 6 and 6.5 percent. 
 
 
 
Figures for 2008 show the proportion of union membership among 
those in paid, nonagricultural employment at 29.4 percent.  Overall 
union membership reflected a 16.3 percent unionized rate in the 
private sector and a 71 percent unionized rate in the public 
sector. 
 
 
 
 
 
A.17.  Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
 
Under the NAFTA, Canada operated as a free trade zone for products 
made in the United States.  U.S. made goods enter Canada duty free. 
 
A.18.  Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
The United States has long been Canada's top target for foreign 
investment, and Canada is the third largest recipient of U.S. 
direct investment after the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. 
About 58 percent of Canada's foreign direct investment comes from 
the United States. At the end of 2008, Canada hosted some C$293.6 
billion in U.S. direct foreign investment abroad. U.S. investors 
with large direct investments in Canada include major automakers 
(GM, Ford, Chrysler), integrated energy, chemical and mineral 
producers (e.g., ExxonMobil, ChevronTexaco, ConocoPhillips), 
financial services firms (e.g., Citibank), and retailers (e.g., 
Wal-Mart).  In terms of inward FDI performance, Canada attracted 
3.2 per cent of the world's FDI in 2008 and accounted for 1.9 per 
cent of world GDP. 
 
 
 
Canadian residents have become increasingly active as worldwide 
investors, and their net international liabilities have been 
shrinking over the past decade relative to national income.  The 
United States is the top destination for Canadian foreign direct 
investment.  In 2008, with total investment around C$310 billion, 
Canada took the top spot as the largest source of FDI to the United 
States.  Other major destinations for Canadian FDI are the United 
Kingdom, other European Union countries, Brazil, Australia and 
Chile. 
JACOBSON