10STATE7439
TFHA01: INL RESPONSE TO NAS NEEDS FOR HNP,
Mon Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7439 0252103
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 252056Z JAN 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0000UNCLAS STATE 007439 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR ASEC EFIN KJUS KPKO PGOV SOCI HA XL
SUBJECT: TFHA01: INL RESPONSE TO NAS NEEDS FOR HNP, 
MINUSTAH, AND CORRECTIONS 
 
REF: PAP 0068 
 
 MINUSTAH 
 
¶1. In response to reftel request concerning issues to be 
addressed by INL in support of Embassy Port au Prince.  The 
Department has taken steps to assist with the following: 
 
¶2.  INL is preparing the procurement, delivery, and 
construction of a temporary camp for the US contingent to be 
located.  This will allow the US contingent to be 
self-sustaining.  A 10,000 square foot site has been 
identified but will only hold 25 people.  INL will continue 
to work with NAS to locate additional land to house the 
contingent. 
 
¶3.  INL has funded the procurement of emergency supplies for 
the US contingent.  Supplies include bottled water, MREs, 
uniforms, gloves, masks, medical supplies, and hygiene kits. 
INL will continue to work with the contractor and NAS to 
ensure US contingent needs are met. 
 
HNP 
 
¶4.  INL stands ready to assist the NAS office with support to 
the HNP.  INL is prepared to fund the procurement of 
additional uniforms when needed, equipment, and supplies for 
HNP.  INL will use the information in paragraph 12 to procure 
items for the HNP.  INL requests NAS assistance in securing a 
shipping method through SOUTHCOM and logistical support on 
the ground for disbursement. 
 
¶5.  INL will work with various bureaus in the Department to 
provide a method to provide salary payments to HNP officers. 
Embassy, MINUSTAH and HNP assistance will be needed to ensure 
that any salary disbursement will be coordinated and secured. 
There will be an end-use monitoring requirement to report on 
the actual disbursement and receipt of salaries to specific 
individual HNP officers. 
 
CORRECTIONS 
 
¶6.  INL appreciates the status reports on prison conditions 
and the capacity of the prison administration and its 
personnel.  The INL,s corrections team is developing 
contingency plans to respond to the needs of the DAP and 
MINUSTAH with Post concurrence. 
 
¶7.  Structure and Capacity Surveys: INL plans to deploy a 
structural engineer and a corrections facility expert to PAP 
within the next five days to conduct a complete structural 
and capacity survey of prison and jail facilities in PAP. 
INL requests that Embassy PAP ensure that these individuals 
are provided security, ground transportation, and a 
translator for at least 5 to 7 days while the surveys are 
completed.  INL is also prepared to support Embassy PAP and 
the NAS with a TDY deployment of a corrections facility and 
management expert beyond the initial assessment, if Embassy 
PAP desires to have this in-house expertise during the 
recovery period.  INL will work with NAS to work out specific 
details of the site survey. 
 
¶8.  INL is prepared to erect a new, temporary prison compound 
with an initial estimated capacity of 500 adult male, female, 
and juvenile prisoners within the next 60 to 90 days.  In 
order to execute this plan, INL requests that Embassy PAP and 
the NAS work with the GOH and MINUSTAH to secure a level, 
readily accessible, 10 to 12 acre site for this compound.  If 
Embassy PAP supports this proposal, INL can prepare a 
statement of work and begin the competition process. 
 
¶9.  INL will immediately initiate procurement and 
distribution of water and MREs for those DAP staff who have 
reported to duty, as well as those prisoners remaining in 
custody.  INL estimates that the number of people requiring 
this support over the next 30 days to be 1,500.  INL requests 
that the NAS provide updates as more staff report for duty 
and criminals are apprehended, so that additional 
procurements can be made and quantity estimates can be 
adjusted. 
 
¶10.  INL will include in its communications support package 
for the HNP, 20 to 25 radios, batteries, chargers, and a 
repeater for DAP HQ to assist with the facilitation of its 
operations. It is our expectation that the DAP will secure 
its own frequency on the HNP network and adhere to HNP radio 
protocols and procedures. 
 
¶11.  INL is preparing to deploy, as soon as MINUSTAH 
indicates it is ready to receive additional personnel, five 
Creole-speaking correctional advisors in addition to the two 
already deployed by the USG, including a senior level, former 
deputy chief of corrections for New York City, whom INL 
recommends be teamed with DAP Director.  INL is working with 
the New York City Department of Corrections and the Florida 
Department of Corrections in an effort to find additional 
Creole-speaking corrections professionals.  However, INL 
notes that the request is for these advisors to perform 
executive authority functions (reftel PAP 0068), which is not 
allowed under the UN mandate at this time.  Therefore, INL 
cannot include in these advisors, duties the requirement to 
assist with apprehending, detaining, or guarding any 
prisoners.  If the UN mandate is modified to include such 
executive authorities, then INL can and will modify their 
work requirements. 
 
¶12.  INL will initiate procurement of the basic equipment 
noted in the cable including: uniforms, boots, duty belts 
with keepers, flashlights and batteries, flexi-cuffs and 
cutters, handcuffs, police whistles, and leg chains.  INL 
concurs with the Embassy PAP recommendation not to provide 
batons or pepper spray due to the inadequacy of training and 
the lack of Embassy ability to conduct Leahy vetting at the 
moment.  INL requests NAS assistance with compiling a list as 
soon as possible. 
 
¶13.  Upon completion of the site capacity surveys, INL 
intends to prepare an additional procurement of those items 
identified, such as office furniture and supplies, necessary 
to facilitate recovery by the DAP of basic operations. 
CLINTON