10STATE7686
Guidance: Middle East Consultations, January 27
Tue Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0024
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7686 0261632
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 261625Z JAN 10
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0000UNCLAS STATE 007686 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IS KPAL
SUBJECT: Guidance: Middle East Consultations, January 27 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  USUN may draw from 
para two elements in making its intervention during 
Middle East consultations in the Security Council on 
January 27, 2010 and in answering subsequent press 
inquiries. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Begin elements: 
 
I thank Assistant Secretary General Fernandez-Taranco 
for his report. 
 
Advancing the cause of comprehensive peace in the Middle 
East remains one of the United States' most important 
foreign policy endeavors.  Our commitment to this goal 
is unwavering.  Only through negotiations can this 
objective be realized, an approach we strongly encourage 
the international community to support. 
 
The immediate and unconditional resumption of 
negotiations toward a two-state solution is the only 
realistic way forward.  It is in the interests not only 
of the United States but of Israelis, Palestinians, and 
all of the region's people. 
 
We call on all members of this Council to underscore 
this message publicly and with the parties.  Waiting to 
resume talks benefits no one.  The status quo does 
nothing to meet the legitimate needs of Israelis or 
Palestinians. 
 
As Secretary of State Clinton has said, we believe that 
through good faith negotiations the parties can mutually 
agree on an outcome which ends the conflict and 
reconciles the Palestinian goal of an independent and 
viable state based on the 1967 lines, with agreed swaps, 
and the Israeli goal of a Jewish state with secure and 
recognized borders that reflect subsequent developments. 
Despite the difficulties and the complex political 
circumstances in the region, we are committed to re- 
launching negotiations, and to the cause of 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. 
 
National Security Advisor Jones and Special Envoy for 
Middle East Peace Mitchell both conducted talks in the 
region this month.  Senator Mitchell also traveled to 
Europe to consult with the Quartet and other key 
partners, and high-level Egyptian and Jordanian 
delegations made helpful visits to Washington. 
 
The Quartet has long called on all parties to uphold 
their Roadmap obligations.  A freeze on settlement 
activity is an Israeli obligation under the Roadmap, and 
U.S. policy on this remains unchanged. We do not accept 
the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements.  That 
said, we also believe the settlement moratorium recently 
declared by the Israeli Government is a significant step 
that could have a meaningful effect on the ground. 
 
U.S. policy on Jerusalem also remains unchanged.  The 
status of Jerusalem and all other permanent status 
issues should be resolved through negotiations.  We 
disagree with some Israeli actions in Jerusalem 
affecting Palestinians in areas such as housing, 
including the continuing pattern of evictions and 
demolitions of Palestinian homes.  Neither party should 
take actions that could unilaterally pre-empt, or appear 
to pre-empt, negotiations. 
 
The United States recognizes that Jerusalem is a deeply 
important issue for Israelis and Palestinians, and for 
Jews, Muslims and Christians around the world.  We 
believe that through good faith negotiations the parties 
can agree on an outcome that realizes the aspirations of 
both parties for Jerusalem and safeguard its status for 
people around the world. 
 
We call on the Palestinian Authority to fulfill its 
Roadmap obligations to ensure security, reform its 
institutions of governance, and refrain from any acts of 
incitement.  In this regard, we express our strong 
concern that PA officials recently attended a ceremony 
commemorating Dalal Mughrabi, who was responsible for a 
terrorist attack that claimed the lives of many Israeli 
civilians. 
 
We were pleased to see the letter from the Secretary- 
General reporting that his staff continues to work 
constructively with the Government of Israel on issues 
related to the Gaza Board of Inquiry, and to note that 
the financial issues have been resolved in a manner 
satisfactory to both Israel and the Secretariat. 
 
At the same time, we call on Israel to reopen its border 
crossings with Gaza, with appropriate monitoring to 
address security concerns.  This would allow for greater 
movement of people and humanitarian and reconstruction 
materials, consistent with UN Security Council 
Resolution 1860 and the 2005 Agreement on Movement and 
Access, thus alleviating the hardship and stress that 
civilians in Gaza face. 
 
Hamas has yet to accept the principles established by 
the Quartet that are the building blocks of an 
independent Palestinian state--renunciation of violence, 
recognition of Israel, and acceptance of previous 
agreements and obligations, including the Roadmap.  Nor 
has it shown a greater interest in building a future for 
the Palestinian people than in its own violence and 
rhetoric.  We are concerned as well about Hamas 
interference with international efforts to deliver 
humanitarian assistance in Gaza.  And we call for the 
immediate release of Israeli Sergeant Gilad Shalit, 
abducted and held by Hamas since 2006. 
 
A key component of international support for the 
Palestinian people comes via the UN Relief and Works 
Agency for Palestine Refugees - UNRWA.  We thank 
Commissioner General Karen AbuZayd for her devoted 
service to UNRWA over the past nine years, and welcome 
the appointment of Filippo Grandi of Italy to this post, 
and of Margot Ellis of the United States to the post of 
Deputy Commissioner General. 
 
The United States is UNRWA's largest single donor.  In 
2009 we provided over $267 million, including over $116 
million to the General Fund.  Unfortunately, the Fund 
still faces severe and chronic shortfalls, estimated at 
$140 million for this year. 
 
We appreciate the efforts of donors who have provided 
sizeable emergency support, but there is no substitute 
for predictable, annual contributions to the General 
Fund.  As such, we welcome the renewed commitment of the 
Arab League, whose members have pledged collectively to 
provide UNRWA with no less than 7.8% of its General 
Fund.  It is imperative that these pledges are 
delivered. 
 
On Lebanon, we thank General Graziano for his service 
with UNIFIL and welcome General Asarta, who begins his 
new assignment tomorrow.  We recall as well the 
important contribution that all troop contributing 
countries are making to this vital effort.  We call upon 
all parties to fulfill the provisions of Council 
resolutions 1559, 1680, and 1701. 
 
[Contingency point on Goldstone: With respect to the 
Goldstone report, we look forward to the report the 
Secretary General will issue to the General Assembly 
next month, including information on the parties' 
investigations into alleged abuses.] 
 
End elements. 
CLINTON