10TUNIS18
FY 2010 BIOTECHNOLOGY OUTREACH FUNDS:  TUNISIA PROPOSAL
Wed Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0018/01 0131451
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 131451Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7132
INFO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 8591UNCLAS TUNIS 000018 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR EEB/TPP/MTAA/ABT SZYMANSKI AND BOBO; ALSO FOR NEA/MAG 
USDA FOR FAS/OCRA, FAS/OCBD, FAS/OSTA, AND FAS/OFSO 
RABAT FOR AGRICULTURAL ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAGR ETRD TBIO KPAO TS
SUBJECT: FY 2010 BIOTECHNOLOGY OUTREACH FUNDS:  TUNISIA PROPOSAL 
 
REF: 09 State 122732 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified; please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Tunisia is at a crossroads on biotechnology policy. 
Tunisian policymakers are aware of the potential for biotechnology 
to address chronic problems such as crop disease, weeds, and 
irregularity of rainfall.  A draft law currently under consideration 
would establish a legal framework for the importation, 
commercialization, and usage of biotechnology in agriculture. 
However, this effort may be compromised by skepticism on the use of 
biotechnology, a reflection of Tunisia's close ties with Europe. 
Embassy Tunis's proposed outreach project would target 
decision-makers and opinion leaders in the administration, 
legislature, and civil society to help assure the passage of viable 
biotechnology legislation; counter EU policies by explaining the 
benefits of biotechnology; and encourage the adoption in Tunisia of 
a science-based regulatory approach to biotechnology.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Project Proposal:  Tunisia Workshop on Ag-Biotech 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (U) Per reftel questions, Embassy Tunis's biotechnology outreach 
project consists of the following: 
 
-- Purpose and impact:  A regional leader in science and technology, 
Tunisia holds great potential for the advancement of ag-biotech and 
science-based policies.  There are currently a dozen major 
institutes conducting biotech research on new molecular biology 
technologies such as viral genome isolation, gene cloning, 
transformation methods and functional genomics.  However, although 
Tunisia is a signatory to the Cartagena protocol, this activity is 
limited to the research level because current Tunisian law does not 
treat the use and release of products of agricultural biotechnology. 
 
 
A draft law on the use, marketing, and import of biotech products is 
currently under review and could be adopted by the National Assembly 
before the end of 2010.  As this review goes forward, Embassy Tunis 
proposes to hold a one-day international workshop to address key 
questions raised by the biotechnology legislation; to counter EU 
policies by explaining the benefits of biotechnology; and to 
encourage the adoption in Tunisia of a science-based regulatory 
approach to biotechnology.  By weighing in on biotechnology while 
the draft law is under consideration, the project could have a 
direct positive impact on the future application of biotech 
agriculture in Tunisia. 
 
-- Specific ag-biotech issues to be addressed:  With growing 
population pressure and limited farm lands, Tunisia's food security 
is increasingly threatened by irregularity of rainfall.  The 
proposed workshop would address the advantages of agricultural 
biotechnology in arid and semi-arid regions, including positive 
effects on crops yields, biotechnology's impact on biodiversity and 
the environment, and direct socio-economic benefits to Tunisian 
farmers from the use of biotechnology in agriculture. 
 
In order to address these issues, Embassy Tunis would host two to 
three U.S. experts to serve as keynote speakers and roundtable 
participants at the workshop.  These experts would also conduct 
targeted outreach to key stakeholders through Embassy-organized 
visits to research centers, Ministry offices, and other venues. 
(Note:  Embassy proposes to recruit the speakers through the Bureau 
of International Information Programs and will coordinate with the 
Office of Agricultural Affairs in making the final selection.  End 
note.) 
 
-- Target audiences:  The workshop would target decision-makers and 
opinion leaders in the administration, legislature, and civil 
society.  These include Government of Tunisia officials from the 
Ministries of Agriculture, Environment, and Public Health, as well 
as key stakeholders in the National Assembly.  Other participants 
would include researchers and faculty members of universities and 
research institutions; leaders of associations and nongovernmental 
institutions dealing with agricultural issues; private agri-business 
firms; and farmers' cooperatives and associations.  Embassy Tunis 
would work to obtain positive media coverage of the event to further 
project the positive benefits of biotech agriculture. 
 
-- Length of program:  The program would consist of a one-day 
workshop with two days of meetings, consultations, and other 
targeted outreach activities.  The optimal time frame would be June 
¶2010. 
 
-- Name of post responsible officer and contact information: 
Youssef Chahed, Agricultural Specialist, Foreign Agriculture 
Service, (216) 71-107-486, ChahedY@state.gov 
 
-- Cost of the proposed program:  $25,000 for the following 
components: 
$15,000 for three speakers' airfare, per diem, and lodging; 
$5,000 rental of conference space; 
$5,000 supplies and representational costs. 
 
GRAY