05SOFIA2076
BULGARIA HAILS SUCCESSFUL IRAQI VOTE, PLEDGES COOPERATION
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sofia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SOFIA 002076 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER KPAO IZ BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA HAILS SUCCESSFUL IRAQI VOTE, PLEDGES COOPERATION 
WITH NEW GOVERNMENT 
 
Ref: STATE 225860 
 
¶1. Bulgaria's government congratulated the Iraqi people on the 
successful conduct of the December 15 parliamentary elections and 
said it was ready to continue its cooperation with the new Iraqi 
leadership.  In a special public statement issued December 16, 
Foreign Ministry Spokesman Dimiter Tsanchev said Bulgaria welcomed 
the successful Iraqi vote that marked the onset of a new period of 
economic recovery, consolidation of state institutions, security 
and legal order in Iraq.  "The high voter turnout is evidence of 
the Iraqi citizens' will to take the fate of their country in their 
own hands and of their desire to ensure a better future for 
themselves and the succeeding generations," Tsanchev said.  "We 
expect the future Iraqi government, which will be elected for a 
full four-year term, to work for the establishment of Iraq as a 
free, democratic and prospering state, in accordance with the 
principles set down in the new Constitution," said the spokesman. 
He said, "Bulgaria will continue to contribute, within the 
international coalition and NATO, to the stabilization of Iraq." 
 
¶2. In addition, the Bulgarian state television BNT prime time 
newscast aired a report December 16 about 200 Iraqis living in 
Bulgaria traveling to Istanbul to vote.  The Embassy worked closely 
with the Iraqi Embassy in Sofia and local media to ensure coverage 
of this story.  The report focused on the enthusiasm and euphoria 
of the Iraqi citizens who were given the chance to take part in 
free and democratic elections for the first long-term legislative 
body since the ousting of Saddam's regime.  BNT also aired expanded 
coverage of the Iraqi expatriate's absentee vote December 17.  The 
Iraqi Ambassador to Bulgaria and Iraqi embassy staff traveled with 
the group to Istanbul.  Local press also reported on the Iraqi 
elections noting that, despite the threats and several bomb 
explosions, voter turnout was high.  Newspapers quoted a Defense 
Ministry statement that said voting in the area of Diwanya, which 
is the Bulgarian troops' area of responsibility, went smoothly and 
without incident, with voter turnout around 60 percent. 
LEVINE