06SOFIA926
BULGARIAN CHIEF PROSECUTOR'S JULY 9-13 VISIT TO
Wed Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO1994
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHSF #0926/01 1860728
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 050728Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2159
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYid: 70225
date: 7/5/2006 7:28
refid: 06SOFIA926
origin: Embassy Sofia
classification: CONFIDENTIAL
destination: 06SOFIA198
header:
VZCZCXRO1994
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHSF #0926/01 1860728
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 050728Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2159
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY

----------------- header ends ----------------

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SOFIA 000926 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NCE AND INL 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, OPDAT, CRIM DIV AND AG 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/06/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KCOR KCRM OVIP BG
SUBJECT: BULGARIAN CHIEF PROSECUTOR'S JULY 9-13 VISIT TO 
WASHINGTON 
 
REF: SOFIA 198 
 
SOFIA 00000926  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Beyrle, reasons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  New Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev is 
arguably Bulgaria's best hope for fighting organized crime 
and related political corruption.  His position under the 
constitution gives him vast powers, which, if wielded 
effectively, could put a major crimp in the activities of 
organized crime figures and corrupt politicians.  However, he 
has cautioned supporters against unrealistic expectations in 
the short term, arguing that sustainable change takes time. 
Saddled with his predecessor's venal legacy, Velchev began 
his term with a strident commitment to build solid cases 
against organized crime (OC) figures and assert control over 
an undisciplined prosecutorial system.  His ambition is 
bridled, however, by the highly centralized and hierarchical 
system he inherited, which makes it difficult to fire even 
notoriously corrupt prosecutors.  Nevertheless, he has taken 
the first steps toward pushing some of the worst offenders 
overboard by asking the Supreme Judicial Council to dismiss 
two senior prosecutors.  He has also successfully requested 
parliament to lift the immunity of seven MPs accused of 
corruption and other crimes.  We should emphasize our strong 
support for his reform agenda and encourage him to develop 
alliances within the government to smooth the rocky road 
ahead.   END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------- 
VELCHEV: ONE OF THE GOOD GUYS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) From the very beginning of his term, Velchev has said 
all the right things.  His priorities align closely with 
ours, and he has demonstrated a great rceptivity to U.S. 
assistance.  His shared interet in the issues we care about 
) OC, corruption, udicial reform ) makes him a key partner 
in pushig through reforms.  Velchev has impressed us with 
his commitment to building solid cases against oranized 
crime figures and asserting control over he unruly 
prosecutorial system.  He has consistetly voiced his 
intention to introduce critical reorms to strengthen 
Bulgaria's lethargic and corrption-ridden prosecutorial 
system, but he is thefirst to admit that he has not yet 
accomplished uch.  Though under pressure from Brussels and 
th Government to show results before the European 
Cmmission's September monitoring report, Velchev cations 
against expecting high-profile results in he short term, 
arguing that sustainble change requires longer than the four 
months he has been in office. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Velchev has already taken steps to root out corrupt 
elements in government.  He has initiated proceedings to 
strip seven MPs of their criminal immunity  in order to bring 
charges against them.  The Service is reexamining cases 
closed by former CP Filchev without prosecution, as well as 
those opened by Filchev solely to harass his personal and 
political enemies.  Velchev is expected to initiate 
disciplinary proceedings against two prosecutors after an 
internal investigation found evidence of improper suppression 
of case files over a two-year period.  These steps only mark 
the beginning of a much needed housecleaning of the whole 
Prosecution Service.  Because of his strained relationship 
with Interior Minister Petkov, however, it is difficult to 
predict whether Velchev will be successful in his plan to 
organize special district-level units focusing on OC, 
corruption, and money-laundering and to link these units to 
similar specialized units within the MoI. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Despite what we assess as his good intentions, 
Velchev's ability to restructure the prosecutorial system is 
restricted by entrenched interests and laws that divide the 
Prosecution Service into two branches ) the Supreme 
Cassation Service and the Supreme Administrative Service. 
Although the law prevents him from elevating the director of 
the Anti-Corruption Department to the level of Deputy Chief 
Prosecutor, he recently named two additional Deputy CPs, who 
are expected to oversee new administrative and internal 
inspection divisions.  He has appointed a prosecutor to be 
spokesman of the Supreme Cassation Service ) a critical 
public relations move that Filchev never made ) while also 
serving as head of the Anti-Corruption Department, a move 
that combines both posts. 
 
 
 
SOFIA 00000926  002.3 OF 003 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
ENTRENCHED INTERESTS INHIBIT CP'S POTENTIAL 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Weakening the grip of OC and corruption is a key 
objective for Velchev, who is quite aware that Brussels is 
looking over his shoulder.  Notwithstanding the omnipresence 
of "mutri" (thugs) on Sofia streets, Velchev's forcefully 
articulated desire to root out OC is encouraging.  But 
commitment alone will not suffice to jumpstart these efforts. 
 He will need the active cooperation of Interior Minister 
Petkov, with whom Velchev has a strained personal and 
professional relationship.  While maintaining a "correct" 
public relationship, Velchev and Petkov privately blame each 
other for Bulgaria's lack of success in fighting organized 
crime and related political corruption.  In a recent 
conversation with us, Velchev blamed both the Minister and 
his institution for the lack of success in setting up joint 
teams to fight organized crime, implying that Petkov himself 
had links to OC figures, saying that the MoI as an 
institution refused to share information, and suggesting that 
corruption was pervasive throughout the MoI. 
 
¶6. (C)  Velchev is also dealing with the legacy of his 
predecessor.  During his seven-year term, Nikola Filchev 
developed a reputation as perhaps the most corrupt and 
malevolent high-ranking official in Bulgaria.  Unfortunately 
for Velchev, both the Supreme Cassation Service and the 
Supreme Administrative Service are headed by Deputy Chief 
Prosecutors who had close ties to Filchev and have two or 
three years left in their terms.  Under the Bulgarian 
constitution, Velchev cannot fire them outright to make room 
for more reform-minded appointees, but must instead convince 
the 24-member Supreme Judicial Council to dismiss them.  The 
constitution provides for only a handful of circumstances 
under which prosecutors and other magistrates can be 
dismissed, including criminal malfeasance.  Velchev's desire 
to promote the head of the anti-corruption directorate to 
become a third Deputy CP requires a change in law, pushing 
this proposal to the backburner for the time being. 
 
¶7. (C)  Despite these impediments, Velchev is Bulgaria's best 
hope for convincing Brussels that it is serious about 
fighting organized crime and rooting out corruption.  His 
efforts to spearhead judicial reform and to strip MPs of 
their immunity have been well received by the EU, and 
observers have their fingers crossed that the October report 
will acknowledge that Bulgarians have shown the political 
will to clear the dead wood out of the prosecutorial system. 
For its part, the EU has offered minimal guidance, contending 
on one hand that Bulgaria must take serious steps to curb OC 
and corruption, but on the other hand keeping mum on the 
specific steps that would demonstrate enough progress to win 
its confidence. 
 
---------------------- 
THE MAN AND THE SYSTEM 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Elected by the Supreme Judicial Council and appointed 
by the president, the Chief Prosecutor sits at the top of a 
rigidly hierarchical institution that urgently needs the 
energy and vision that Velchev brings to the job.  The court 
system consists of regional, district, appellate, and 
military courts, as well as the Supreme Cassation Court and 
the Supreme Administrative Court.  The Constitutional Court 
is separate from the rest of the judiciary.  The sole 
educational requirement for judges and prosecutors is the 
Bulgarian equivalent of a bachelor's degree in law.  The 
Prosecution Service staffed almost entirely by prosecutors 
hired under former CP Filchev and highly resistant to change. 
 Only recently have younger ) and presumably less 
conservative ) prosecutors been appointed to the Prosecution 
Service.  Despite the CP's efforts to encourage prosecutors 
to disclose their material assets, only 7-8 of the 1200 
prosecutors have complied thus far. 
 
¶9.  (C)  Public opinion is generally supportive of Velchev, 
who is widely respected as an academician and whose 
idiosyncratic manner and offbeat sense of humor many find 
endearing.  Until his election as Chief Prosecutor, he worked 
as an associate professor in criminal law, heading the 
President's Legal Council and lecturing on criminal law at 
local universities.  His opponents note his lack of 
experience as a prosecutor, his political orientation toward 
 
SOFIA 00000926  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the Socialists, and his family's Communist-Party pedigree 
(Velchev's grandfather was a Politburo member and his father 
was an ambassador to Moscow).  Blunt yet refined, Velchev 
possesses an offhand wit and sarcasm that translate cleanly 
in his flawless English. 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------- 
COMMENT: WHAT VELCHEV NEEDS TO HEAR... 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (C)  A strong message of support from the Attorney 
General and other USG officials will strengthen Velchev, who 
faces institutional as well as political resistance to his 
stated goal of ending the near-impunity enjoyed by crime 
bosses and corrupt politicians in Bulgaria for at least the 
last 15 years.  A long-time academic, Velchev is vulnerable 
to criticism that he lacks real-world experience as a 
prosecutor.  Yet his ability to identify with career 
prosecutors will be essential to changing the existing 
mentality and overcoming internal resistance to the changes 
he seeks.  He is now working to build a personal relationship 
with his staff, although many prosecutors ) particularly 
those in Sofia ) maintain ties with Filchev and a work ethic 
learned during his tenure.  Velchev's ultimate success will 
depend on strengthening morale and allaying prosecutors' 
fears of retaliation once they begin investigating cases more 
aggressively.  He must convince them that the old system is a 
thing of the past ) the task of changing directions in 
midstream and moving toward sustainable reform of this office 
is Herculean, requiring a dedicated leader who can secure 
buy-in from all involved.  Few people doubt Velchev's 
sincerity or his intelligence, but it is still not clear that 
he has the necessary political skill and bureaucratic 
toughness to put Bulgaria's untouchables behind bars.  We 
should emphasize our strong support ) moral and otherwise ) 
for his reform agenda and encourage him to develop alliances 
within the government to smooth the rocky road ahead. 
 
----------------- 
...AND CARRY HOME 
----------------- 
 
¶11. (C) In terms of specific deliverables, we should offer to 
begin negotiations on an updated extradition treaty, which 
would replace the existing treaty that was last amended in 
the 1930s.  The extradition of Bulgarian nationals was 
disallowed until amendments to the Bulgarian constitution 
were passed last year, so this meeting gives us the perfect 
opportunity to initiate talks on the draft treaty.  C-175 
negotiation authority passed the inter-agency clearance 
process and has received final approval from the Department. 
END COMMENT 
 
Beyrle