09SOFIA389
BULGARIA: CLEANING UP MOI
Wed Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO7984
OO RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHSF #0389 1961417
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 151417Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6184
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SOFIA 000389 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO EUR/NCE, INL/AAE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2019 
TAGS: PGOV BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA: CLEANING UP MOI 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Nancy McEldowney for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  Interior Minister designate Tsvetan 
Tsvetanov told Ambassador he wanted to bring major changes to 
the MOI and criminal justice system and welcomed American 
assistance and advice.  He is determined to show progress on 
corruption issues within the first few months of the new 
government and thus to establish credibility both 
domestically and with Bulgaria's international partners.  He 
and the Ambassador discussed ideas for reforms and the 
Ambassador handed him a report prepared by DOJ experts last 
year but never acted on.  Tsvetanov has a track record as an 
honest cop; if his openness and enthusiasm to work with us is 
matched with effective reform of the bloated and tainted 
Ministry, there may be a chance to make real progress.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  On July 13 GERB party chairman and Interior Minister 
designate told the Ambassador that the incoming GERB 
government is planning major reforms at the MOI and in the 
criminal justice system and welcomes any U.S. assistance.  He 
recalled good cooperation with American law enforcement when 
he worked at the MOI as a subordinate to incoming PM Boyko 
Borissov and, referring to himself, said there is "no one 
more pro-U.S."  He noted that the outgoing government had 
sidelined good officers who had trained with Americans, but 
the GERB government will move them up to responsible 
positions. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Tsvetanov said the GERB government would undo some 
of the law enforcement missteps taken by the outgoing 
government.  He focused on the need to de-politicize DANS 
(National Intelligence Agency) and return it to its intended 
intelligence role.  He pointed particularly to problems with 
special advisor Alexei Petrov, who is "a very dangerous man." 
 (Comment: Petrov's known criminal connections made his role 
in DANS highly controversial.  End comment.)  He pledged that 
DANS would again be a reliable partner for the US.  A well 
regarded former DANS Officer, Tsvetan Yochev, is being 
considered to replace current DANS Chief Petko Sertov. 
Tsvetanov emphasized all changes would be made in 
consultation with American and European partners. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Tsvetanov said the new government planned to show 
results within six months.  Ambassador noted the public would 
be looking for clear steps in first 100 days.  She urged him 
to move quickly but also correctly so as not to appear 
partisan.  A good start would be to deal with people who 
embezzled EU money.  Bringing them to justice, after so many 
years of impunity, would have broader positive ramifications 
throughout the country and in Bulgaria's relations with the 
EU. 
 
¶5.  (C)  The Ambassador gave Tsvetanov a paper with findings 
and suggestions from DOJ consultations with the MOI last 
year.  The outgoing government never acted on them. 
Tsvetanov said he would consider the recommendations 
seriously.  On the suggestion for an organized crime strike 
force, Tsvetanov noted GERB had similar ideas.  The new 
government was also considering establishing a panel of 
special prosecutors to handle serious corruption cases, and 
he was interested in the proposal, being prepared by our 
USDOJ advisor, to establish a special panel of judges for 
such cases.  The Ambassador said we could provide a senior 
judge as an advisor to the panel; Tsvetanov welcomed the 
idea.  She also noted the FBI official in charge of 
cooperation with Europe would be in Bulgaria in early August 
and could discuss training and other programs. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Comment:  We had an excellent relationship with 
Tsvetanov during his previous stint in the MOI.  He was both 
eager to cooperate and effective in getting things done.  He 
appears serious about reform and acknowledges the herculean 
task in front of him.  His return to the MOI creates the 
basis for reform to finally begin.  End comment. 
McEldowney