10SOFIA106
BULGARIAN GOVERNMENT MAKES HISTORIC OC BUST
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO1924
OO RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSL RUEHSR
DE RUEHSF #0106/01 0430727
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 120727Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6708
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATEC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SOFIA 000106 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/11/2030 
TAGS: PGOV KCRM KCOR BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIAN GOVERNMENT MAKES HISTORIC OC BUST 
 
REF: A. SOFIA 103 
     ¶B. 09 SOFIA 642 
     ¶C. 09 SOFIA 548 
     ¶D. 09 SOFIA 508 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Warlick for reasons 1.4 (b)/(d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  The Bulgarian public was stunned by the 
February 10 arrest of one of the country's most notorious and 
"untouchable" organized crime figures, Aleksi Petrov, and 
twelve of his associates.  Newspaper articles hailed the 
arrest as the most important in the last 20 years, and 
asserted that Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior 
Tsvetan Tsvetanov has "crossed the Rubicon" by moving against 
one of the most influential organized crime groups, something 
all previous Interior Ministers never would have dared. 
Petrov is estimated to control a business empire with legal 
and illegal operations worth hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 One of Bulgaria's best known oligarchs, Petrov has long been 
considered above the law due to his wealth, political 
influence and background in the Secret Services.  Tsvetanov 
told the Ambassador on February 11 that he was confident the 
police already had sufficient evidence to ensure conviction 
of at least seven members of the gang, including Petrov. 
Prime Minister Borissov also stated publicly that he is 
confident the evidence gathered will hold up in court.  End 
Summary. 
 
Operation Octopus 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  During the night of February 9, police launched 
"Operation Octopus."  Over 20 strip clubs and three other 
businesses owned by Petrov and his associates were searched 
and over one hundred people detained for questioning.  Deputy 
PM Tsvetanov told the Ambassador that police do not intend to 
release at least seven gang members, including Petrov, who 
are at the top of the criminal pyramid.  These seven will be 
charged with extortion, forceful debt collect, prostitution, 
defrauding state-owned industries (including the Kremikovtsi 
steel plant), VAT fraud, trade in influence, money laundering 
and other crimes.  Tsvetanov mentioned that in addition to 
these seven at least four officials inside the Interior 
Ministry are under investigation for cooperation with Petrov 
and his group. 
 
PETROV'S CRIMINAL EMPIRE 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  According to police, Petrov's group has been in 
operation for over 10 years and has used intimidation and 
blackmail to acquire ownership of legitimate businesses. 
Petrov has controlling interest in the largest taxi company 
in Sofia (TAXIS EXPRESS) and is an "advisor" to one of the 
three largest insurance companies in Bulgaria (LEVSKI SPARTAK 
INSURANCE aka LEVINS), receiving a large share of its profit 
each year without clear responsibilities.  Petrov also owns a 
stake in the tabloid newspaper "Weekend" and is the founder 
of a second, "Galleria." 
 
¶4.  (C)  In addition to his public enterprises, police allege 
Petrov controls the largest share in Sofia's escort and 
intimate services businesses, which are known fronts for 
prostitution and trafficking in women.  Tsvetanov told the 
Ambassador that during the raids scores of prostitutes agreed 
to testify to police on Petrov's prostitution ring which is 
estimated to take in 40,000 dollars a night. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Petrov is also accused of racketeering and extortion 
of legitimate companies, forcing them to pay regular fees or 
give up a share of ownership in exchange for protection. 
Tsvetanov said Petrov uses his insurance and taxi companies 
to launder the massive flow of illegal profits. 
 
POLITICAL FALLOUT BEGINS 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)   According to Tsvetanov, Petrov began to gain 
political influence in the earlier part of the decade, 
particularly due to his close association with the former 
Prosecutor General Nikola Filchev.  Petrov was also linked to 
numerous other Socialist Party members in the previous 
government.  In 2008 a leak revealed to the press that Petrov 
had been hired by the State Agency for National Security 
(DANS) as an undercover agent.  Despite an outcry from the 
public and the international community, Petrov was kept on as 
the "political advisor" to the former DANS Chairman.  After 
taking office in 2009, Prime Minister Borissov forced Petrov 
to resign from his position. 
 
¶7.  (C)  While Petrov's arrest is a major political coup for 
Borissov, Tsvetanov and the whole GERB government, hard 
evidence that top figures in the previous government were so 
closely linked to an organized crime figure has thrown the 
opposition Socialist Party into convulsions.  Tsvetanov told 
the Ambassador that in searching Petrov's businesses police 
found numerous secret files that they believe Petrov stole 
from DANS, including one file belonging to the previous 
Socialist Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev.  Rivals inside the 
Socialist Party, such as former Interior Minister Rumen 
Petkov, have called for Stanishev to step down as leader of 
the party.  Politicians from other parties, including some 
frequent critics of Borissov, such as Blue Coalition leader 
Ivan Kostov, have praised Borissov and his government's 
efforts and joined the media in condemning the previous 
government's ineffectiveness and complicity with organized 
crime. 
 
BUT WILL THE CHARGES STICK? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  All of the positive momentum generated by these 
arrests will be lost in an instant should Petrov and his 
associates not end up in jail.  Many in the media, while 
praising the police operation and the political will behind 
it, worry that Petrov will be able to bribe or threaten his 
way to freedom, or that a single procedural error will allow 
him to walk.  PM Borissov, DPM Tsvetanov and Prosecutor 
General Velchev have all stated unequivocally that sufficient 
evidence exists to prevent any of the seven highest-ranking 
criminals from escaping justice.  Tsvetanov said that in just 
hours after Petrov's arrest, victims of blackmail and threats 
of violence have offered to testify against him.  Tsvetanov 
believes additional witnesses will come forward as the police 
continue their investigation and as the reality of Petrov's 
arrest sinks in among the hundreds of people and businesses 
harassed by his organization. 
 
¶9.  (C)  Comment:  The government's decision to move against 
Petrov and his group is a courageous act and emblematic of 
the GERB government's stated commitment to fighting organized 
crime.  News of Petrov's arrest was on the front page of 
nearly every newspaper in the country and has set Sofia 
buzzing.  Most Bulgarians seem shocked that the government 
has the power and political will to go after a figure of 
Petrov's stature.  If Petrov's case ultimately leads to 
conviction it will go down as an arrest of historic 
proportions.  However, two dangers loom large.  First, an 
unsuccessful prosecution, whether due to bribery, extortion 
or on a technicality, would be a major blow to the government 
and intensely demoralizing to the public.  Second, the 
possibility of Petrov's group using or threatening violence 
against Tsvetanov and his staff or the Prosecutor General and 
his staff is very real.  Tsvetanov told the Ambassador that 
all possible measures are being taken to prevent either 
scenario. 
WARLICK