05LIMA2250
OPPOSITION PARTY PROPOSALS AFFECTING PRESIDENT
Thu May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 002250 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/18/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PREL PE
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION PARTY PROPOSALS AFFECTING PRESIDENT 
TOLEDO'S TENURE IN OFFICE OF DOUBTFUL CONSTITUTIONALITY 
 
REF: A. LIMA 2241 
 
     ¶B. LIMA 2222 
     ¶C. LIMA 2054 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶D. 04 LIMA 2699 
     ¶E. 04 LIMA 613 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Alexander Margulies.  Reason:  1.4(b 
/d). 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY:  Congress, on 5/19, is expected to debate 
at least three proposals to sanction President Alejandro 
Toledo for his alleged involvement in fraud in connection 
with the registration of his Peru Posible party for the 2000 
elections.  Most of the proposed sanctions are of doubtful 
constitutionality.  A proposal to vacate the Presidency, 
while within the Constitution's parameters, almost certainly 
lacks the two-thirds vote (81 legislators) required.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U)  The final report of the congressional committee 
investigating allegations that President Alejandro Toledo and 
his Peru Posible party engaged in massive fraud to register 
the party for the 2000 elections ("Villanueva Committee") 
contained three separate recommendations from its three 
opposition members on proposed sanctions to be applied to 
Toledo (Ref C).  Committee Chairman Edgar Villanueva (Peru 
Ahora) urged that Congress vacate the presidency, Xavier 
Barron (Unidad Nacional) suggested that Toledo be prohibited 
from assuming public office for 10 years once his term ends 
on 7/28/06, and Victor Velarde (APRA) opined that the 
President should be suspended from office until criminal 
investigations/proceedings are concluded (which would last 
beyond the end of Toledo's term). 
 
¶3.  (U)  Several Articles in the Peruvian Constitution 
address the impeachment of the President, the suspension of 
the President, vacating the Presidency, and disqualifying the 
President from holding office. 
 
--  Article 117 provides that the President, during his term 
of office, can only be accused for committing certain 
enumerated acts:  treason to the fatherland; impeding 
presidential, parliamentary, regional or municipal elections; 
dissolving Congress for reasons other than those listed 
elsewhere in the Constitution; and for impeding the meeting 
or functioning of the National Electoral Board and other 
electoral system organs. 
 
--  Article 113 provides that the President's office is 
vacated if the President dies; Congress declares his moral or 
physical incapacity; Congress accepts his resignation; if he 
leaves the country without Congress' approval or does not 
return within the period fixed by Congress; and if he is 
destituted after being sanctioned for one of the infractions 
listed in Article 117. 
 
--  Article 114 provides that the President can be suspended 
from office for temporary incapacity declared by Congress, or 
if he is being tried by the judiciary in conformance with 
Article 117. 
 
--  Article 99 provides that it corresponds to the Permanent 
Committee of Congress to accuse the President before the full 
Congress for violating the Constitution and for all crimes 
that he commits in the exercise of his functions and for five 
years after the end of his term. 
 
--  Article 100 provides that it corresponds to the full 
Congress (less the Permanent Committee) to suspend, dismiss, 
or disqualify from holding office for up to ten years  public 
officials. 
 
¶4.  (U)  There has been no/no suggestion that Article 117 
applies to the current situation, as President Toledo is 
not/not accused of any of the activities enumerated in that 
Article. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Article 113 applies to Congressman Villanueva's 
proposal that Congress vacate the Presidency, should a 
sufficient number of legislators conclude that Toledo's 
actions constitute "moral incapacity."  The Constitution, 
however, is silent with respect to the number of votes 
required for such a finding.  The Constitutional Tribunal has 
held that no less than a two-thirds vote is needed (the 
Constitution does state that this is the number required for 
vacating some lesser offices), and Congress passed a 
Legislative Resolution in June 2004 adopting this standard 
(Refs D-E).  Given the inadequacies of the Villanueva 
Committee's investigation and report (Ref C) and the GOP's 
42-member legislative bloc, it is highly unlikely that the 
opposition parties could amass the 81 votes necessary.  APRA 
legislative bloc leader Cesar Zumaeta acknowledged this to 
Polcouns on 5/16, and Unidad Nacional's Barron told the 
Ambassador on 5/18 that no more than 3-6 congressmen would 
vote in favor of a resolution to vacate the Presidency. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Article 114 deals with suspension of the President 
for "temporary incapacity," a term that is not/not further 
defined by the Constitution.  Constitutional experts have 
generally opined that this applies to a temporary physical or 
mental disability, or to a situation in which the President 
has been captured by hostile forces.  APRA representatives 
who have spoken out in favor of applying Article 114 to 
Toledo, have not clearly detailed how the conduct Toledo 
allegedly engaged in can constitute "temporary incapacity." 
Zumaeta, for example, suggested that the uncertainty 
regarding Toledo's guilt pending a criminal investigation and 
trial could constitute a "temporary moral incapacity" 
sufficient to justify the President's suspension.  Most 
commentators, however, have rejected the idea of a 
"temporary" moral incapacity, holding that moral incapacity 
either exists permanently or not at all. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Barron's proposal that Toledo be disqualified from 
office for ten years following the conclusion of his term 
does not/not appear to fall within the scope of Congress' 
powers under Articles 99 and 100.  Those articles provide 
that Congress' authority to disqualify a President from 
holding future office only extends to acts committed while 
the President was in office or for five years after the end 
of his term and Toledo is accused principally for acts 
committed before taking office.  Toledo could conceivably be 
accused of complicity in efforts by GOP and Peru Posible 
officials to obstruct justice by facilitating the temporary 
flight of a key witness (Ref C), but no/no evidence directly 
linking the President to the alleged acts has yet been 
presented. 
 
¶8.  (U)  COMMENT:  The doubtful constitutionality of most of 
the sanctions being advanced by the opposition parties makes 
it likely that they will not/not obtain the necessary level 
of support to be approved by the full Congress on 5/19. 
Opposition leaders recognize this, but are prepared to go 
ahead with voting on the proposed sanctions to make political 
points (Ref A and Septel).  END COMMENT. 
STRUBLE