08DAKAR386
SENEGAL: POLICE CRUSH PROTEST AGAINST HIGH COST OF LIVING
Tue Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO0068
PP RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0386 0921302
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011302Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0267
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MCC WASHDCUNCLAS DAKAR 000386 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI PGOV PREL PINS KDEM ECON SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL: POLICE CRUSH PROTEST AGAINST HIGH COST OF LIVING 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  On March 30, two Senegalese consumer associations 
organized a demonstration against the steady rise of the costs of 
basic commodities and food staples.  Riot police arrested the 
leaders of the two associations and used electric batons, tear gas, 
and riffle butts to forcefully breakup the demonstration.  Among 
others, a female member of parliament from the opposition was beaten 
by police.  The head of the Judiciary Police ordered one of the 
country's four private television channels, Walf TV, to interrupt 
its live coverage of police brutalities.  The channel's tapes with 
the footage of the events,  as well as those of another independent 
channel, Canal Info, was confiscated by the police.  End summary. 
 
Mounting pressure 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) President Abdoulaye Wade's government has been under 
mounting pressure resulting from rising energy and food costs.  Poor 
rains last year  have reduced domestic food supplies, resulting in 
shortages in some rural areas.  To protest the government's handling 
of the situation, farmers planned to hold a demonstration in Dakar 
on March 28 under the leadership of Aliou Dia, General Secretary of 
"Forces Paysans" party, and opposition Member of Parliament. 
However, the demonstration was finally cancelled when President Wade 
announced at the Cabinet meeting the day before the scheduled 
protest that he had decided to earmark 10 billion CFA (approximately 
USD 24 million) for food support to farmers. 
 
¶3.  (U) Tensions resulting from the high-cost of food commodities 
have not been limited to the countryside.  Even in urban centers, 
there are growing complaints that people do not have enough to eat 
and many families can only afford one meal per day.  A fifty kilo 
bag of broken rice (a basic stable) sold for 12,000 CFA not long ago 
and now costs between 15,000 and 17,000 (the equivalent of 20 to 30 
percent increase per bag); the cost of butane gas, cooking oil, 
soap, cement and many other commodities have risen as well.  Rent 
has also risen significantly in Dakar.  The population's frustration 
has been exacerbated by reports of millions of dollars to purchase a 
new plane for President Wade and  millions of dollars (perhaps 
hundreds of millions) spent on the recently completed Organization 
of Islamic States Dakar summit. 
 
Consumers Take to the Street 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) The tension boiled over on March 30 when two Senegalese 
consumer associations organized a peaceful march in demonstration 
against the steady increase in the cost of living.  The Minister of 
the Interior ordered protesters, who did not have a permit to 
demonstrate, to end the demonstration and when they refused, he sent 
in riot police to forcefully put down the protest.  When some 
protesters threw rocks at the police, they responded with tear gas, 
electric batons, and rifle butts. 
 
¶5.  (U) While these events were being broadcast live on television 
by Walf TV, the head of the Judiciary Police ordered the channel to 
interrupt its coverage.  The police then confiscated the footage of 
Walf TV as well as the footage that was taken on the scene by 
another independent channel, Canal Info.  Afterward, the Minister of 
Interior went on the air on government-controlled channel RTS to 
blame the opposition, calling Ousmane Tanor Dieng, head of the 
Socialist Party, a coward and a "bad general." 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment:  The protests and the government's response were 
not a surprise, and are indicative of three worrisome trends. 
First, the rising cost of basic commodities and food staples is 
likely to increase, which, combined with shortages resulting from 
poor rains will likely lead to more protests and unrest.  Second, 
the government's heavy-handed approach to these protests - the 
government has refused permits for all demonstrations against it and 
its policies over the past year -- is likely to increase the 
possibility that future protests will become more violent.  Finally, 
the government has demonstrated a consistent willingness in the past 
year to curb or violate freedom of the press when the Wade 
administration perceives that the media is becoming a threat to the 
president or the administration. 
 
SMITH