08SOFIA192
BULGARIA ROCKED BY INTERIOR MINISTRY SCANDAL
Tue Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO0156
OO RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHSF #0192/01 0921542
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 011542Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4890
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEid: 148101
date: 4/1/2008 15:42
refid: 08SOFIA192
origin: Embassy Sofia
classification: CONFIDENTIAL
destination: 
header:
VZCZCXRO0156
OO RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHSF #0192/01 0921542
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 011542Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4890
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE

----------------- header ends ----------------

C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SOFIA 000192 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/01/2018 
TAGS: PGOV KCRM KCOR BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA ROCKED BY INTERIOR MINISTRY SCANDAL 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John Beyrle for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY: Bulgaria has been shaken by a snowballing 
Interior Ministry scandal that involves top Ministry 
officials and threatens to destabilize the Socialist-led 
government of PM Stanishev.  The high-profile controversy has 
already led to the arrest of two top MOI officials and 
triggered mounting calls for the dismissal of Interior 
Minister Petkov, one of the most influential figures in the 
ruling Socialist Party (BSP).  The scandal has escalated in 
the past week, revealing more and more unsavory ties between 
senior Interior Ministry officials and shadowy businessmen, 
including Minister Petkov's contacts with well-known 
organized crime figures.  The scandal has further blackened 
the government's image at home and Bulgaria's already 
tattered reputation in Brussels, and could lead to Petkov's 
ouster and a cabinet reshuffle.  Now all eyes are on PM 
Stanishev, who is under intense pressure to sack his party's 
most powerful minister.  END SUMMARY 
 
UNSAVORY CONNECTIONS 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The scandal has created by far the greatest 
turbulence in the Ministry of Interior (MOI) since the end of 
the communist period.  It started two weeks ago when 
opposition MP Atanas Atanassov (a former domestic 
intelligence chief) disclosed the contents of an unsigned 
disk with intercepted conversations between senior MOI 
criminal investigators and persons under investigation.  The 
wiretapped conversations implicated the deputy head of the 
MOI's organized crime unit, Ivan Ivanov, in leaking 
information to gray economy businessmen involved with 
manufacture and distribution of alcohol in order to thwart 
investigations against them.  Ivanov's March 18 arrest 
unleashed an avalanche of further revelations within the MOI. 
 A week later, the MOI's former number two, Gen. Ilia Iliev, 
was also detained for abuse of power and obstruction of 
justice while in office.  In the course of Ivanov's 
investigation, according to prosecutors, Iliev was discovered 
to have authorized unlawful wiretappings.  Iliev's arrest 
came four months after he quit the Ministry, claiming he had 
been "tricked" into allowing the issuance of Bulgarian 
identity documents to notorious Serbian drug dealer Budimir 
Kujovich.  The controversy over Iliev's resignation, dubbed 
the "Kujovich affair", made front-page headlines in the local 
press, triggering accusations about MOI officials' protecting 
organized crime figures. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The ongoing investigations against the two 
arrestees, led by the recently established State Agency for 
National Security (DANS), have revealed more and more 
unsavory connections between shadowy businesses and politics. 
 The scandal reached new heights when DANS' Chairman 
confirmed leaked reports of Interior Minister Petkov's own 
meetings with alleged criminals.  Petkov, who was summoned 
twice to testify before Parliament's Domestic Security 
Committee, rejected claims by opposition MPs that he was the 
subject of an  investigation codenamed "the Cigarette 
lighter" (for someone in the Ministry who was tipping off 
criminals about investigations) but admitted having 
"sanctioned" contact with key suspects in special police 
investigations.  According to MP Atanassov, Petkov had met 
with the notorious Galevi brothers, alleged to be among the 
country's drug trafficking bosses.  Another controversial 
figure, Alexei Petrov, a former commando and an insurance 
company owner, purportedly served as the middle man for the 
meeting.  Petkov said the meeting was "necessary in order to 
protect public interests" which, according to media 
speculation, involved brokering a peace deal between warring 
organized crime groups on the eve of Bulgaria's EU accession 
in January 2007.  In a dramatic twist, Petkov also revealed 
that Petrov had actually served as an MOI undercover agent. 
Both the Chairman of DANS and the Prosecutor General told the 
Embassy separately that Petkov's disclosure of this name 
could constitute an indictable offense. 
 
POWERFUL MINISTER UNDER FIRE 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The revelations about Petkov pose a serious test 
for Prime Minister (and Socialist Party Chairman) Sergei 
Stanishev, who has come under increasing pressure to part 
with one of the most influential figures in the government 
and the BSP.  Dismissing Petkov will not be an easy move, 
given his powerful influence within the Socialist apparatus. 
According to party insiders, Petkov's ties with controversial 
businessmen date back from the time when he served as BSP 
deputy chair in charge of party financing and arranged 
funding from shadowy groups, including the organized crime 
group SIC.  Petkov's political skills, coupled with close 
ties to President Georgi Parvanov, have helped him accumulate 
 
SOFIA 00000192  002 OF 003 
 
 
significant authority in the BSP and earn his ministerial 
seat.  Previously called "the Regent" because of his close 
ties with the less-experienced Stanishev, Petkov still enjoys 
strong influence in the party local branches.  Relations 
between Stanishev and Petkov, however, have significantly 
deteriorated since last May when the PM launched a plan to 
bring the domestic intelligence service under the PM as part 
of DANS -- an unconcealed effort to curb Petkov's powers 
without firing him from the government, which would have 
gained the PM a powerful enemy inside the party. 
 
POLITICAL TENSIONS MOUNT 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  In a statement on March 28 the PM put on a brave 
face and said the developments at the MOI could hardly be 
termed "scandal" as they actually helped "clean house," and 
blamed former Generals affiliated with the opposition for 
orchestrating a smear campaign against MOI's top officials. 
At the same time, the PM vowed that "there will be no 
political umbrella over anybody," and pledged that "everyone 
caught in wrongdoing will bear legal responsibility, but on 
the basis of clear evidence by the prosecution, not 
speculation."  Stanishev said he had ordered an investigation 
of the past 10 years of the performance of the MOI's 
anti-organized crime unit, which was most shaken by the 
scandal.  The PM did not mention Petkov, and blasted the 
center-right opposition for seeking to gain political 
dividends from the scandal. 
 
ROLLING HEADS? 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Socialist MPs and party insiders tell us there is 
growing sentiment within the BSP and coalition for parting 
with Petkov, who has become a huge liability for both the 
Socialists and the government.  BSP MP Tatyana Doncheva 
openly called on the PM to get rid of Petkov, "otherwise the 
scandal will snowball and sweep away the whole government." 
An advisor to Stanishev told us the PM himself has been 
seriously considering Petkov's dismissal, either as a 
separate act or as part of a long-planned government 
reshuffle that has been mulled for some time by the ruling 
coalition.  Stanishev's confidant told us the PM planned to 
discuss the matter with the other two party leaders of the 
coalition, which also includes the ethnic Turkish Movement 
for Rights and Freedoms and ex-PM Simeon Saxe-Coburg Gotha's 
NMSS party.  Our contact said Petkov's ouster seemed likely 
but noted the PM's apprehensions that if removed, Petkov may 
seek revenge and destabilize the BSP ahead of the 2009 
general elections. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Stanishev's camp seemed also to be concerned by 
the reaction of President Georgi Parvanov.  Petkov managed 
Parvanov's successful election campaign in 2001 and the two 
are considered close.  Parvanov has appeared uneasy about the 
growing independence of Stanishev, his political protege, and 
has relied strongly on Petkov for enforcing his influence 
within the government.  Nonetheless, the President, who 
enjoys considerable influence within the Socialist ranks, 
broke his silence March 28 to say that the continued MOI 
scandals were seriously damaging the country's image in the 
EU. 
 
RISING EU PRESSURE 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  During his March 28 visit, EU President Barroso 
gave voice to Parvanov's concerns, criticizing Bulgarian 
authorities' tolerance of corruption and organized crime. 
After meeting with PM Stanishev, Barroso commented that "it 
remains a source of frustration that some Bulgarians are 
undermining the reform process."  The EC -- which has already 
frozen some structural funding because of corruption concerns 
-- is due to release in July a report on Sofia's overall 
progress in fighting crime and high-level corruption. 
Barroso said the report will be "fair and objective," but 
strongly warned it was impossible to constantly repeat to 
Bulgaria that "more has to be done in the fight against crime 
and corruption." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9.  (C)  The escalating scandal poses the biggest challenge 
to the Socialist-led government since it took over in 2005. 
The investigation is also the first major test for the new 
domestic intelligence service DANS to prove its political 
independence and effectiveness.  In separate discussions with 
the PM's National Security Advisor and the Prosecutor 
General, the Ambassador stressed the serious erosion of 
confidence the government faces in U.S. and European eyes the 
 
SOFIA 00000192  003 OF 003 
 
 
longer Petkov remains in charge of his compromised ministry. 
Both readily acknowledged that Petkov must go, but stressed 
the need for the PM to first build sufficient support for the 
move within his Socialist Party.  The speed and skill with 
which PM Stanishev manages this will be another indication of 
his independence from President Parvanov, his former mentor, 
as well as his ability to lead the Socialist Party away from 
the web of corrupt relationships that are at the very core of 
the current scandal.  End Comment. 
Beyrle