08STATE41408
WESTERN SAHARA CONSULTATIONS, APRIL 21, 2008
Sat Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1408 1100008
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 190002Z APR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 1389
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 0974
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 4490UNCLAS STATE 041408 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO PBTS AG MO WI
SUBJECT: WESTERN SAHARA CONSULTATIONS, APRIL 21, 2008 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  USUN is instructed to draw 
upon the following elements during Western Sahara 
consultations on April 21, 2008. 
 
Begin Elements. 
 
-We appreciate the Secretary General,s report, and welcome 
the Personal Envoy,s frank assessment of the situation in 
Western Sahara.  We appreciate the dedicated service of the 
Personal Envoy, Special Representative, Force Commander, and 
all MINURSO personnel, often under difficult circumstances. 
The conflict in Western Sahara has endured too long without a 
resolution.  Whatever their view on the conflict, I believe 
that all parties can agree that the consolidation of the 
status quo is not in anyone's interest.  Today I will discuss 
six key issues in the Secretary General,s report, and 
examine his proposals for the way forward in Western Sahara. 
 
 
-First, the U.S. strongly agrees with the view of the SYG and 
his 
Personal Envoy that the momentum from the process of 
negotiations can only be maintained by trying to find a 
way out of the current political impasse through realism 
and a spirit of compromise from both parties. 
 
-To this end, we support the SYG,s call that the parties 
enter into a more intensive and substantive phase of 
negotiations, and we welcome the Personal Envoy,s assessment 
on the way forward. (We support the Envoy,s conclusions, and 
we look forward to the continuation of his efforts to 
facilitate meaningful negotiations between the parties.) 
 
- Second, we are pleased that the Polisario and Morocco 
reiterated 
their commitments to the process of negotiations and to 
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1754 
and 1783 during the fourth round of negotiations in 
Manhasset.  The U.S. welcomes their commitment to continue 
the negotiations, and we urge them to demonstrate flexibility 
and the readiness to negotiate in good faith.  We appreciate 
Morocco,s efforts to advance the process by submitting a 
proposal that could form the basis of future substantive 
negotiations. 
 
 
-Third, the U.S. welcomes the parties, agreement to explore 
the 
establishment of family visits by land routes, in addition 
to the existing program by air.  We also welcome the 
cooperation that has resulted in an increase in the number 
of beneficiaries registered for family visits. 
 
-Fourth, we recognize the parties, cooperation with MINURSO 
and 
the progress that has been made in mine removal, and urge 
the Polisario and Morocco to continue these efforts.  As 
the SYG has emphasized, this is a valuable contribution to 
the 
welfare of all Western Saharans and to the security of the 
Mission. 
 
-Fifth, the U.S. emphasizes that any act of sexual 
exploitation 
or abuse (SEA) is unacceptable, and welcomes the training 
program for MINURSO staff on standards of conduct. 
 
- Finally, we would like to express our appreciation to troop 
contributing countries, and welcome the recent deployment of 
female military observers.  Additionally, we welcome the 
support the AU has provided to the Mission, and we thank and 
commend the efforts of the ICRC, the UNHCR, the FAO, and the 
WFP for their assistance to the Western Saharans. 
 
End Elements. 
RICE