08STATE36051
GUIDANCE FOR UNIIIC CONSULTATIONS, APRIL 8
Mon Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6051 0982324
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 072319Z APR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 1241
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 8145
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 4912
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE IMMEDIATE 1685UNCLAS STATE 036051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC LE SY PREL PTER
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR UNIIIC CONSULTATIONS, APRIL 8 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action message.  USUN may draw from the 
points from para 2 below during consultations on the UN 
International Independent Investigation Commission (Hariri 
assassination) scheduled for April 8. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Begin Points 
 
-- I would like to thank Commissioner Bellemare for his 
briefing and his first report to the Council since he took 
office in January.  We welcome the leadership he has shown so 
far in helping Lebanon find the truth behind these attacks 
and bringing an end to impunity for political assassinations. 
 
-- In any discussion of Lebanon, it is impossible to ignore 
the continuing political crisis.  We are deeply troubled 
that, although the Lebanese seem to have reached consensus on 
a presidential candidate, a minority, backed by Syria and 
Iran, are using extra-constitutional preconditions to block 
the elections.  This must stop. 
 
-- We call yet again on Syria to cease its interference in 
Lebanon and for the democratically-elected members of 
Lebanon,s parliament to be allowed to elect a President in 
accordance with their constitution and without further delay 
or preconditions. 
 
-- Today, I would like to make three specific points about 
the work of the Commission. 
 
-- First, we acknowledge Mr. Bellemare,s cautionary advice 
that terrorist investigations cannot be rushed, and concur 
with his judgment on the importance of the Commission's 
technical assistance to the Lebanese investigations into the 
cases of twenty other assassination attacks.  We also value 
the robust authorities the Commission possesses to seek the 
truth in the Hariri case and others.  We look forward to 
hearing from the Lebanese Government on their views about 
whether the mandate of the UNIIIC should be extended beyond 
its current June 15 expiration and then discussing the issue 
further with Council members. 
 
-- Second, as Mr. Bellemare proceeds with his investigation, 
we urge the UN Secretariat to accelerate steps to ensure that 
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon begins functioning as soon 
as possible.  The lives of Lebanese members of parliament and 
other political leaders are literally on the line.  Since the 
investigation began nearly three years ago, there have been 
at least 11 assassinations or attempted assassinations of 
Lebanese leaders.  This includes four Lebanese MPs who have 
been killed.  Their colleagues -- many of whom have been 
forced to seek refuge by moving into a hotel in Beirut -- now 
live each day in fear.  The loss of life resulting from these 
terrorist attacks has been enormous.  As Mr. Bellemare 
indicated in his report, of the cases he is investigating, a 
total of 61 people have been killed and at least 494 injured. 
 Action against the perpetrators of these vicious terrorist 
attacks is the best deterrent we have to prevent further 
assassinations. 
 
-- Third, we urge all countries to support the integrity of 
the Tribunal and contribute to it financially.  The Tribunal 
must pursue justice wherever its investigation leads.  In 
this regard, we would oppose any effort that might prejudice 
the Tribunal by devising political arrangements meant to 
protect certain parties from prosecution.  In terms of 
financial support, the United States has contributed $14 
million towards the set up and first year of the Tribunal's 
operations, and expects to remain a significant contributor 
for its duration.  We urge countries that have not 
contributed to do so, those that have made pledges to follow 
through quickly on providing those resources, and those that 
have already contributed to advise the Secretary General of 
their intent to continue their support until the Tribunal 
completes its work. 
 
--  In conclusion, we support the efforts of the Commission 
and the Special Tribunal to ensure justice for these crimes 
and to help bring an end to impunity in Lebanon.  We hope 
that we can all work quickly and resolutely enough to deter 
the next attack from taking place. 
 
End Points. 
RICE