04HELSINKI1482
FINNISH PM VANHANEN TELLS VISITING EUR A/S JONES,
Fri Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 HELSINKI 001482 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR A/S A.ELIZABETH JONES, EUR/NB, AND EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2014 
TAGS: PGOV CASC ETRD EU PHUM PREL SMIG AF IZ TU FI RU
SUBJECT: FINNISH PM VANHANEN TELLS VISITING EUR A/S JONES, 
"WE NEED EACH OTHER" 
 
 
Classified By: APAO HELENE KESSLER FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) In a November 9 meeting with Finnish PM Matti 
Vanhanen, visiting EUR 
A/S Jones reassured the Prime Minister of the importance the 
Bush 
Administration places on the transatlantic relationship, 
citing the President's 
references to outreach to Europe and the importance of both 
the EU and NATO 
in his very first statement after winning re-election.  The 
Prime Minister 
confirmed that he would like to visit the US to discuss the 
Finnish EU 
presidency.  PM Vanhanen said Finland opposes any EU 
structured cooperation 
on defense that duplicates NATO.  An EU rapid response force 
is new for Finns 
but a natural outgrowth of their experience as peacekeepers. 
A/S Jones thanked 
the Prime Minister for contributions to Iraq and Afghanistan 
and raised the 
Rogers child-custody case and IPR.  Other issues discussed 
included Turkey and 
Russia.  End Summary. 
 
U.S. Elections 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) PM Vanhanen conveyed congratulations to President 
Bush on his 
reelection and commented on the high number of individuals 
who voted in the 
2004 U.S. elections.  A/S Jones noted U.S. pride in the large 
voter turnout and 
high interest in the issues.  Vanhanen said that the previous 
week's meeting of the 
European Council included extensive discussion about the U.S. 
elections and the 
importance of transatlantic relations. 
 
Iraq/Afghanistan 
---------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) A/S Jones expressed appreciation for Finland's 
active role and 
contributions in Afghanistan and Iraq, saying Finland should 
take great pride in 
the success of the historic elections in Afghanistan.  On 
Iraq, the path to 
improving the situation is through the elections at the end 
of January.  The Iraqis 
need the help of the international community to make free and 
fair elections a 
reality.  The generous funding Finland has offered for 
protection of a UN 
presence in Iraq is important. 
 
Finland's EU Presidency 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) When A/S Jones asked where he would put the emphasis 
in the transatlantic 
relationship, PM Vanhanen answered that Finland has already 
started preparing 
for its EU presidency, in the latter half of 2006.  Its job 
is to lead the EU during 
that half year period when the Constitution Treaty is 
scheduled to take effect, 
working with the EU agenda.  While Finland has a "crisis 
scenario" for that 
period, the Prime Minister stated that "we hope we don't 
inherit all of the open 
issues," such as the WTO negotiations with the U.S.  The EU's 
relations with 
Russia are very important to Finland, but that question must 
be seen in the bigger 
picture of EU-U.S.-Russian relations.  "We need each other," 
the Prime Minister 
emphasized. 
 
EU Defense Cooperation 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) PM Vanhanen pointed out that Finland has underlined, 
during his Prime 
Ministership, that it opposes any EU structured cooperation 
on defense that 
duplicates NATO's role. "When we build crisis management 
capability in 
Europe, it must be with good cooperation with NATO and a good 
link to the 
USA at the same time." 
 
White Paper/EU Rapid Reaction Force 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) A/S Jones told the Prime Minister that the USG was 
very impressed with 
Finland's recently-released White Paper on security policy 
and its references to 
NATO interoperability.  The Prime Minister noted that a new 
question for 
Finland is how to create a rapid reaction force.  Given the 
history of Finland's 
active role in peacekeeping, it is important to take part in 
the ESDP and to start 
cooperation in two rapid reaction battle groups (one with 
Sweden and Norway, and one with 
Germany and the Netherlands).  A/S Jones agreed that this is 
a formula that all of 
us are finding useful. 
 
US-EU Agenda/Turkey 
------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) A/S Jones shared U.S. priorities for the US-EU agenda 
including Iraq, 
Afghanistan, the Middle East Peace Process and EU 
enlargement, which enlarges 
stability in this very important part of the world.  On 
Turkey, she emphasized 
that the U.S. wants to be sure that we keep working with 
Turkey in parallel with the 
EU.  The Prime Minister was quite optimistic about prospects 
for Turkey's 
eventual accession and believed that preparations to start 
negotiations have 
already encouraged big developments in Turkey.  "They are 
ready to work hard." 
Finland's new EU commissioner Olli Rehn, who used to be 
Vanhanen's 
assistant, will have the enlargement portfolio.  PM Vanhanen 
reflected that 
Finland is far enough from Turkey that it can be neutral in 
this matter.   He 
stressed that Turkish membership is very important for 
Finland.  He believed that 
when Turkey becomes a member all open questions, such as the 
Armenia border 
and Cyprus, must be solved at the same time and all parties 
understand that. 
 
Russia 
------ 
 
¶8. (C) PM Vanhanen agreed with A/S Jones that engagement with 
Russia remains 
very important.  This is especially true for Finland, given 
the increasing 
importance of bilateral trade (he projected that in 2010 
Russia would be 
Finland's largest single trade partner).  The Prime Minister 
said the EU must 
hold to a common policy on Russia, and part of that policy 
must be to insist that 
none of the four "common spaces" is agreed until all are 
agreed.  A/S Jones 
welcomed the EU desire to move on all four issues, and not 
just terrorism. 
 
Bilateral Issues: IPR/Rogers/Possible PM Visit 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶9. (C) A/S Jones raised concern that U.S. pharmaceuticals are 
being accorded 
inadequate intellectual property protection under current 
Finnish regulations. 
The Prime Minister confirmed that he has the needed 
information on this issue. 
On the Rogers child custody case, A/S Jones acknowledged 
Finland's adherence 
to the Hague convention,  expressing appreciation that so 
much has been done to 
resolve the issue.  The Prime Minster felt that in these sad 
cases too much was in 
the press; political decision makers should not take part 
since they are questions 
for the courts.  He stressed that Finland is a signatory to 
the Hague convention 
and he hoped the issue will be resolved on the basis of the 
convention. 
¶10. (SBU) A/S Jones said that as we are just getting 
organized for the new 
administration, the Department could seek a decision on the 
possibility of a visit 
to Washington by the Prime Minister. PM Vanhanen confirmed 
that he is very 
ready and willing to visit the U.S. as part of Finland's 
preparations for its 
upcoming EU presidency and stressed that Finland wants to be 
in close contact 
with the U.S. during this time. 
 
¶11. (U) A/S Jones has cleared this cable. 
 
MACK