05HELSINKI8
FINLAND:  2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT
Mon Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT AND TTIC, EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND:  2004 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 245841 
 
¶1.  (U)  This report is keyed to the applicable questions in 
reftel para 15.  The Embassy's summary update has also been 
emailed to John Kincannon and Kiersten McCutchan per reftel 
instructions. 
 
¶2.  (U)  a)  Finland actively supports and participates in 
the European Union's counterterrorism efforts, and in 2004 
participated in a number of EU and OSCE-sponsored events. 
 
b)  Finland is strongly committed to Afghan reconstruction 
and prevention of the resurgence of the Taliban.  Afghanistan 
is a major recipient of Finland's foreign assistance; Finland 
aims to disburse about 10 million Euros in development and 
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan each year. 
Approximately 70 Finnish troops are currently deployed in 
Afghanistan in support of ongoing ISAF operations, and a 
number of Finnish civilian crisis management experts are 
working in Afghanistan as well.  Finland is a member, along 
with the UK and Norway, of a Provincial Reconstruction Team 
in Meymaneh in northern Afghanistan. 
 
Ten Finnish instructors are currently at the police academy 
in Amman training Iraqi police. 
 
In December 2004, Finland signed a bilateral Extradition and 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) with the United States, 
bringing the Finnish-American relationship into conformity 
with the EU-U.S. Mutual Legal assistance Treaty executed in 
¶2003. 
 
c)  In January 2004, the Finnish Security Police dedicated a 
special unit to concentrate solely on fighting terrorism, the 
first of its kind in Finland.  Finland in 2004 pledged 1 
million Euros to help fund a UN Protection Force in Iraq. 
Finland has national authority to freeze terrorist assets. 
The Money Laundering Clearing House performs investigations 
on all individuals suspected of financing 
terrorist acts, including all individuals and entities on 
the UN 1267 sanctions committee's consolidated list. To date 
no Finns have been suspected of financing terrorism and no 
funds of foreign nationals suspected of terrorist financing 
have been located in Finland. In the event that funds are 
found, the assets could be frozen without undue delay for 
five business days. For the funds to remain frozen, a 
criminal investigation must be launched (either in Finland 
or abroad). The funds would remain frozen for the period of 
the investigation. 
 
e)  Finland has implemented regulations that allow it to 
freeze assets without EU or UN approval in cases when another 
government presents a legal request for action or when the 
individual or organization is suspected of having committed 
an offense within Finland's borders.  Finland has also 
amended its criminal code to make it possible to sentence 
leaders of terrorist groups to 15 years in jail, although the 
group has to have actually committed acts of terrorism in 
Finland before investigation or prosecution can begin.  If 
the charge also includes murder, the maximum sentence could 
be life imprisonment.  Finnish law enforcement has the 
authority to intercept wire, oral, and email communications 
with prior judicial approval in cases where national security 
interests are involved.  There is no special magistrate for 
counterterrorism, and the source for such judicial approval 
would depend upon the nature of the case. 
 
h)  Finnish Security Police in 2004 created a special unit 
concentrating solely on fighting terrorism.  Effective July 
1, 2004, the Parliament of Finland enacted legislation in 
support of the International Maritime Organization's 
amendment to the International Convention for the Safety of 
Life at Sea and the International Ship and Port facility 
Security Code.  Finnish authorities confirm that they are 
complying on schedule with the legislation's requirements, 
and that each of Finland's port facilities have submitted 
security plans that have been approved by the Finnish 
Maritime Administration. 
 
j)  Finland currently has about 70 troops inside Afghanistan 
in support of ongoing ISAF operations. 
 
l)  Finland supports the Global War on Terrorism.  However, 
some Finnish officials and most of the general public believe 
the likelihood of a terrorist attack inside Finland to be 
remote. 
 
o)  Finland has a relatively small Muslim community.  The 
Government of Finland monitors some individuals believed to 
have ties to terrorist organizations outside of the country. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Summary for Finland: 
 
Finland actively supports the Global War on Terrorism. 
Finland has implemented regulations that allow it to freeze 
assets without EU or UN approval in cases when another 
government presents a legal request for action or the 
individual or organization is suspected of having committed 
an offense within Finland's borders.  Finland has also 
amended its criminal code to make it possible to sentence 
leaders of terrorist groups to 15 years in jail, although the 
group has to have actually committed acts of terrorism in 
Finland before the investigation and prosecution can begin. 
If the charge also includes murder, the maximum sentence 
could be life imprisonment.  In January 2004, the Finnish 
Security Police also created a special unit concentrating 
solely on fighting terrorism, the first of its kind in 
Finland. 
 
Finland is committed to rebuilding Afghanistan and preventing 
the resurgence of the Taliban.  Approximately 70 Finnish 
troops are currently deployed in Afghanistan in support of 
ongoing ISAF operations, and a number of Finnish civilian 
crisis management experts are working inside Afghanistan as 
well.  Afghanistan is a major recipient of Finland's foreign 
aid, which includes support for the Afghan army and police 
force.  Finland aims to disburse approximately 10 million 
Euros in development and humanitarian assistance to 
Afghanistan each year. 
 
The Finns have ten instructors at the police training academy 
in Amman to help train Iraqi police personnel.  At the 2004 
Doha donors' conference, Finland held one of the two chairs 
set aside for small donors.  Finland pledged 5 million Euros 
in development and humanitarian assistance to Iraq, and a 
further 1 million Euros to help funs a UN Protection Force 
inside Iraq. 
 
Finland is a party to all 12 international conventions and 
protocols relating to terrorism, and has implemented all 
applicable EU legislation against terrorism. 
WEISBERG