05HELSINKI1137
Finland Prepares for EU Presidency and CSD 14 -
Wed Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 001137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS TO EPA (RACHEL SCHMELTZ AND ANDREW FANARA) 
DEPT OF ENERGY FOR RICHARD KARNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG SENV TRGY TSPL XG FI
SUBJECT: Finland Prepares for EU Presidency and CSD 14 - 
Spotlight on Energy 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In preparation for Finland's upcoming 
presidency of the EU, OES representatives Jonathan Margolis 
and Griffin Thompson visited Finland to discuss areas of 
cooperation and to share views on the current cycle of the 
UN Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD). Margolis and 
Thompson encouraged bringing education and innovation to the 
forefront of Finland's EU agenda. They urged their 
counterparts to take a practical and pragmatic approach to 
CSD.  Margolis and Thompson discovered areas of possible 
cooperation on international energy development projects, 
perhaps through the Global Village Energy Partnership. 
Generally, the Finns responded well to these suggestions, 
though they thought that policy (in addition to 
implementation) should be a desired outcome of CSD 14. End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On October 14-18, Special Representative for 
Sustainable Development and OES/PCI Office Director Jonathan 
Margolis and Senior Energy Advisor Griffin Thompson visited 
Finland. They met with Under-Secretary of State for 
Political Affairs Markus Lyra as well as with officials from 
the Ministries of Environment, Foreign Affairs and Trade and 
Industry. Margolis and Thompson shared their views on US 
environmental policy with Finnish journalists. They also 
visited central Finland, where they learned more about 
Finnish innovation and technology and visited a farm 
operated entirely on bio-gas.  This visit highlighted the 
Finnish domestic strengths of education and innovation and 
framed the discussions with the GOF on how these strengths 
can guide future international discussions on energy and 
development, with specific focus on the CSD energy cycle. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In their meeting with U/S Lyra, Margolis and 
Thompson encouraged bringing education and innovation to the 
forefront of Finland's EU agenda--not only through CSD but 
through other channels as well, including UNEP, World Bank, 
UNDP, bilateral discussions and regional development banks. 
Lyra responded favorably, adding that this could also be an 
item on the Transatlantic agenda. Nonetheless, while good 
humouredly recognizing the EU's over-reliance on directives, 
he expressed hope that the US would be "open to discussing 
regulations" as well. 
 
¶4. (SBU) On CSD, Margolis and Thompson urged their MFA and 
MOEN colleagues to see CSD 14/15 as an opportunity to 
implement existing policy, rather than create additional 
guidelines, procedures and documents. In the spirit of UN 
reform, the focus should be on actual projects that improve 
people's lives. Margolis discussed the US position on the 
need to utilize all energy sources including nuclear, coal, 
oil, gas and renewable energy.  Furthermore he pointed out 
how all energy sources are used for specific development 
ends ranging from health to education to economic growth and 
environmental stewardship. He defined his views on the role 
of CSD: raising the profile of issues and bringing together 
actors to provide a set of solutions to developing 
countries. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Finns countered with their view that CSD plays 
an important role in creating policy and that the 
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation required some updating. 
Nevertheless, they expressed willingness to work with the US 
in aggressively pushing forward energy issues in the current 
CSD cycle. They shared information on Finnish energy 
efficiency projects in Kenya and Central America, and 
mentioned that they would be hosting an international energy 
audit conference in September 2006. Margolis encouraged the 
GOF to play an active role in EU-JUSCANZ consultations on 
CSD issues during their EU presidency, perhaps by hosting a 
meeting of respective parties in preparation of CSD-15. 
 
¶6. (U) The sincerity of Finland's commitment to energy 
issues was made clear in a subsequent meeting, when Ministry 
of Trade and Industry officials shared details on their 
national action plan to promote energy efficiency. The plan, 
which is now in its fourteenth year, boasts a (voluntary) 
industry participation rate of 85%, and has resulted in 
modest yet recognizable (2%) annual energy savings. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Thompson suggested that Finland's energy projects 
in Central America and Kenya may complement the activities 
of the Global Village Energy Partnership (GVEP) and 
recommended examining if/how these programs could be 
integrated. Thompson expressed support for the international 
audit conference and said that the US would be willing to 
help Finland identify key participants, particularly 
promising developing countries with the greatest potential 
to benefit from the program. Thompson agreed to discuss this 
further with the Finnish delegation at the Beijing 
International Renewable Energy Conference on November 7th. 
 
¶8. (U) Margolis and Thompson met with local representatives 
from the press.  During the discussion, Margolis articulated 
the US energy policy on technology and fuel source 
diversity, underscoring the range of successes the US has 
demonstrated on energy efficiency programs and lowering 
greenhouse gas intensity through smarter technology choices. 
At the meeting, and in subsequent discussions, the press 
tried to make the linkage between Hurricane Katrina and 
climate change.  Margolis pointed out, with post's support, 
that no climate change expert has made such a connection and 
that the USG focus was and has been on humanitarian 
response. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶9. (SBU) U/S Lyra noted that FM Tuomioja would raise 
environmental issues during his meeting with Secretary Rice 
on November 1st. Given this emphasis on the importance of 
environmental issues in the US-Finnish and perhaps broader 
US-Nordic relationship, it seems likely that the issue will 
be on the US-EU and the G-8 agendas for some time to come, 
and will place high on the agenda of the Finnish EU 
presidency. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The OES visit was well-timed (as Finland begins 
mapping out its presidency agenda) and well-received. Post 
believes (as does host government) that additional visits in 
the period ahead could be invaluable in furthering mutual 
understanding and ensuring a highly-productive and mutually 
beneficial presidency term. Finland's commitment to 
innovation and its vested interest in efficient and clean 
energy technology makes it an ideal potential partner during 
the 2006-7 cycle of CSD. In this regard, the timing of its 
EU presidency next autumn could not be more fortuitous. 
 
HYATT#