06HELSINKI994
SCENESETTER FOR EUR DAS PEKALA'S VISIT TO HELSINKI, OCTOBER
Thu Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO3318
PP RUEHAST
DE RUEHHE #0994/01 2711343
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 281343Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2538
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HELSINKI 000994 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR FOR DAS PEKALA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL OTRA SENV ENRG ECON FI
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR EUR DAS PEKALA'S VISIT TO HELSINKI, OCTOBER 
4 - 6 
 
 
HELSINKI 00000994  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
------------------------ 
Summary and Introduction 
------------------------ 
 
¶1. Half way through its EU Presidency, Finland has proven to be the 
behind-the-scenes negotiator we expected rather than the more 
out-in-front leader we might have preferred.   Often valuing 
consensus above all, the Finns have been unusually content to see 
the Commission take the lead on many issues of transatlantic 
importance including Passenger Name Records (PNR) and the High Level 
Dialogue on Climate Change, Clean Energy and Sustainable 
Development.  This has at times caused friction in our relationship, 
which has been exacerbated by President Halonen's and FM Tuomioja's 
unhelpful statements to the press, especially concerning the Middle 
East. 
 
¶2. The Middle East Crisis has further distracted the Finns from the 
agenda they had hoped to implement during their presidency -- an 
agenda that held the potential to advance US interests and goals in 
many areas, including Darfur, the Middle East, Kosovo, Cuba, Russia, 
Belarus and Asia.  At this point, US goals -- both bilaterally and 
for the EU Presidency -- would be best advanced were the GOF return 
to that stated agenda.  We should continue to support Finnish 
efforts to work quietly behind the scenes to facilitate U.S. - EU 
cooperation, while recognizing that Finland will be reluctant to 
embrace U.S. initiatives that could put it on a collision course 
with counterpart EU governments or the Brussels bureaucracy.  (End 
Summary) 
 
------------------ 
While You're Here... 
------------------ 
 
¶3. While the bulk of your time will be spent at the two-day Chief of 
Mission program, we have scheduled meetings with Political Director 
Pilvi-Sisko Vierros-Villeneuve and DG for the Department of the 
Americas and Asia Elina Kalkku.  We have also scheduled some 
in-house events with Embassy staff and an on-the-record press event. 
 During your visit we recommend you: 
 
--thank Finnish interlocutors for the role they played on Lebanon 
and Iran and encourage continued constructive engagement with the 
U.S. going forward; 
 
--welcome Finnish participation in NATO operations - particularly 
notable given that Finland is not a NATO member; 
 
--encourage Finnish efforts to promote democracy in Russia, Belarus, 
Ukraine and the Caucuses; 
 
--thank the Finns for working effectively to ensure that the HLD 
achieves an appropriate balance between energy and environment. 
 
---------------------------- 
Middle East/Iran/Afghanistan 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. Despite his occasionally unhelpful comments in the media, FM 
Tuomioja actually played an important behind-the-scenes role by 
supporting the French negotiations with the U.S. that produced UNSCR 
1701; by pressing larger EU member states to make significant troop 
contributions; and by pressing domestically for a Finnish 
contribution of 240 troops.  He delivered tough messages to Syria 
and Iran, warning them not to act as "spoilers" of the peace 
process.  The Finns have also maintained a hard yet constructive 
line on Iran, and they remain supportive of UNSC sanctions if Iran 
does not halt enrichment and come to the negotiating table. 
Although not a member of the coalition in Iraq, Finland has 
supported EU efforts there and sent a trainer to Jordan to train 
Iraqi police. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
The HLD on Climate Change, Clean Energy and Sustainable Development 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶5. The U.S. and EU have struggled to shape the agenda of the first 
High Level Dialogue on Climate Change, Clean Energy and Sustainable 
Development.  The U.S. has pushed for a meeting that would seek to 
find synergies between energy policy goals and actions on addressing 
climate change, while the Commission has resisted this approach, 
preferring the more traditional, yet often unhelpful discussion that 
has characterized climate change talks in the past.  Finland 
supports our approach, but ever mindful of it what it believes is 
its duty to suppress national goals in support of EU coordination, 
it has pressed quietly behind the scenes, and at times has seemed 
bullied by the Commission.  You will want to welcome the co-chair 
role they have assigned their Minister of Trade and Industry, and 
encourage them to facilitate high-level German Ministry of Energy 
participation in order to empower fresh perspectives on this issue. 
 
 
HELSINKI 00000994  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
------------------------- 
Peacekeeping and NATO/PfP 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. Although not a NATO member (and most likely not to embrace 
membership in the near future), the GOF is very proud of its close 
cooperation with NATO through PfP and its substantial participation 
in NATO operations.  We recommend that you tell the Finns that 
Washington recognizes and appreciates the Finnish tendency to "punch 
above its weight" in international peacekeeping operations.  Finland 
has some 350 troops under NATO command in Kosovo and another 100 
ISAF troops in Afghanistan.  It has declined our request to donate 
lethal weapons to Afghanistan, citing "legal considerations."  Its 
other commitments include EU operations in Bosnia, and soon, 
Lebanon.  Although a Finnish officer was killed in Lebanon during 
the recent conflict, notably, almost no one in the Finnish 
government, opposition, or media used this as an excuse to oppose 
GOF efforts to send 240 troops to the enhanced UNIFIL operation. 
Portions of the GOF appear interested in the evolution of the 
"enhanced PfP" proposal that will be discussed in Riga. 
 
------------------- 
Democracy Promotion 
------------------- 
 
¶7. In the past, the Finns played a key role in helping the Baltic 
states make the transition and necessary reforms for EU and NATO 
membership.  Now, they are beginning to turn their attention further 
eastward.  While promoting democracy in Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and 
the Caucuses is more challenging  than the Baltics were, we are 
encouraged by several signs, including Finnish support for NGOs in 
Russia; political support for opposition candidates and civil 
society in Belarus; and President Halonen's contacts with 
pro-democracy leaders in Georgia and Ukraine.  Your encouragement of 
these efforts - and expressions of our high hopes for the upcoming 
EU-Ukraine Summit and EU Head of State informal (which Putin will 
attend as a guest) will help keep the GOF involved in advancing the 
Frontiers of Freedom. 
 
WARE