07HELSINKI636
CHIEF OF THE FINNISH DEFENSE FORCES MEETING WITH
Fri Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHE #0636/01 2291351
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 171351Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3678
INFO RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 4106
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 4811C O N F I D E N T I A L HELSINKI 000636 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/15/2017 
TAGS: PREL MARR GL FI
SUBJECT: CHIEF OF THE FINNISH DEFENSE FORCES MEETING WITH 
RUSSIAN ARMY CHIEF OF STAFF 
 
Classified By: DAO JOY SHASTEEN FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D) 
 
 
 
SUMMARY AND INTRODUCTION 
------------------------ 
¶1. (C) ADM Juhani Kaskeala, Chief of the Finnish Defense 
Forces (CHOD), briefed the Ambassador on his recent trip 
to Russia, where he met with the Russian Army Chief of 
Staff (and Deputy Defense Minister) Yuri Baluyevsky. 
Kaskeala and Baluyevsky discussed, inter alia, the US 
missile defense initiative in Poland and the Czech 
Republic; Kosovo; a Russian offer of defense sales to 
Finland; NATO and Iraq.  ADM Kaskeala stated that his 
discussions with the Russian Army Chief were cordial and 
frank; unlike the previous Army Chief, Colonel-General 
Baluyevsky was "encouraging and not dictatorial."  The 
Finnish CHOD also discussed a recent visit to Greenland 
and his satisfaction with the newly proposed Finnish 
defense budget.  End summary. 
 
Russia 
------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) The CHOD stated that he gave a verbal 
invitation to the Russian Army Chief to join the Nordic 
Defense Chiefs' meeting this year.  The Russian Army 
Chief was not able to accept this year's invitation, but 
said that he would look forward to next year. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The CHOD also invited the Army chief to send 
Russian officers to the command and control exercises 
that Finland conducts for peacekeeper. The CHOD stated 
that this type of training would improve the Russian 
view of what NATO and peacekeeping are about and would 
be of more value than simply having troop exchanges. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The CHOD invited the Russian Army chief to 
further their dialogue on creating a recognized Maritime 
picture of the Gulf of Finland that can be used by both 
the civilian and military sectors in tracking the 
traffic in the Gulf of Finland. 
 
¶5. (C) The CHOD offered the Russian military 
opportunities to attend the Finnish National Defence 
University as both students and instructors.  The CHOD 
thought it would be a great asset to the NDU student to 
learn both the Finnish and Russian view of the Winter 
and Continuation Wars (WWII) in Finland.  The CHOD also 
discussed the possibility of having junior officer 
exchanges at the company grade-level, envisioning the 
Finnish and Russian captains of two companies of Finnish 
or Russian soldiers working together and the importance 
of that experience for both. (Marshal Mannerheim who led 
Finland through the WWII years had training in the 
Tsarist military system; this experience served him well 
 
SIPDIS 
in conducting campaigns against Russian forces.)  The 
CHOD underscored for the Ambassador that the emphasis 
would be on showing Russian officers that physical abuse 
and bullying are not the best means to train good 
soldiers.  Finnish military training would then serve as 
an example of how a democracy trains its military forces. 
 
¶6. (C) The CHOD noted that the average Russian officer 
exhibited more pride in his unit than the last time he 
(the CHOD) visited (pre 2004).  He said the units he saw 
had clean and functioning infrastructure and that the 
officers voiced strong support for President Putin, whom 
the Russian officer corps sees as the main person making 
this revival of the Russian military happen.  Colonel 
General Baluyevsky stated that their renewal plan is 
going forward as scheduled beginning with infrastructure 
improvements, then concentrating on recruiting and 
 
keeping quality people and finally focusing on equipment 
acquisition. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Russian Army Chief then asked ADM Kaskeala 
if the Finnish Defense Force would be interested in 
buying equipment from Russia.  The CHOD stated that 
Finland would be fine with Russian equipment, if:  it 
meets NATO standards and as long as the Russian defense 
industry followed the appropriate Finnish and EU rules 
on defense equipment buying, i.e. the Finnish government 
first looks for a Finnish company to fill the 
requirement, then EU companies, then it goes to third 
parties. 
 
¶8. (C) The conversation also touched on Kosovo, with 
Kaskeala asking Baluyevsky if he truly believed that 
independence for Kosovo would serve as a "domino" for 
other areas in conflict.  When the Russian confirmed 
that was his belief, Kaskeala pursued the line of 
inquiry further, asking whether the "domino theory" 
would hold if Kosovo grew tired of waiting and 
ultimately declared itself independent.  Kaskeala 
expressed his doubt that such a step by Kosovo would 
cause other "domino countries" to follow suit.  In the 
end, the CHOD commented that the two flag officers 
agreed to disagree on this issue. 
 
¶9. (C) Colonel-General Baluyevsky asked ADM Kaseala's 
opinion of Iraq.  The CHOD stated that he was 
pessimistic, that conditions appeared to be that a 
full civil war which should not have intervention (on 
either side) from an outside source. Both felt, said 
the CHOD, that there was not a "military only" solution. 
 
¶10. (C) The two military leaders also discussed the 
European Missile Defense system.  After the CHOD neatly 
laid out the NATO Military Committee chairman's 
argument on having the system in place in Europe the 
Russian Army Chief stated that the Russian position on 
this is a geopolitical and not a military one. 
 
¶11. (C) The CHOD ended his comments to the Ambassador 
by saying that he thought that the Russian officer 
corps saw itself rising back to the level of a better 
trained and equipped group of professionals and that 
recent examples of the Russian military reaching out 
beyond its borders, such as the TU 95 fly-by of Guam 
and the Russian submarine "flag-planting" in the Artic, 
were part of the exercise of Russian military capability 
echoing the past "glory" of a stronger, better funded 
force. 
 
Budget 
------------------------- 
¶12. (C) The CHOD expressed some satisfaction with what 
he expects the Finnish government's 2009 budget program 
-- slated for announcement in early fall --- will 
contain for the armed forces.  He stated that a defense 
budget plus-up proposal of eight percent appears likely 
which would allow the MOD to obtain 18 Hawk trainers 
from Switzerland; to conduct the necessary reserve 
training for next year; and to continue EU Battlegroup 
support.  He commented that the budget process is going 
much more smoothly this year with the MOD, Finance 
Minister and Prime Minister all in agreement. 
 
Greenland 
------------------------- 
¶13. (C) The CHOD discussed his recent visit to Greenland 
where he got a chance to see the retreating ice shelf 
and the formation of new icebergs.  He said that he, the 
Danish CHOD and the German CHOD were there when the 
Russian submarine "planted" the Russian flag capsule. 
He remarked the Russians' action prompted a series of 
phone calls and conversations within the Danish and 
German Ministries of Defense.  However, from the Finnish 
point of view, the flag-planting was clearly for 
domestic Russian public consumption and not a cause for 
enormous concern. 
HYATT