04ISTANBUL1062
TURKEY'S FIRST TIP VICTIM SHELTER:  SECRETARY
Fri Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 001062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S FIRST TIP VICTIM SHELTER:  SECRETARY 
POWELL PARTICIPATES IN SIGNING CEREMONY 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 03705 
     ¶B. ANKARA 01233 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Secretary Powell and FM Gul witnessed the 
signing of a protocol that will lead to the opening of 
Turkey's first shelter for trafficking in persons victims 
later this month.  The signing ceremony, which attracted 
significant attention and publicity, publicly committed the 
Turkish government and the Istanbul Municipality to support 
this initiative.  Although a modest step in Turkey's 
fledgling efforts to combat TIP, the shelter and the enhanced 
cooperation between Turkish authorities and NGOs represent a 
sea change in official attitudes on this issue.  USG pressure 
has helped focus GOT attention on its anti-TIP programs, but 
tight budgets and competing priorities will likely impede the 
long-term progress that can only come from substantial 
investments in training, assistance, and public education. 
End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
TIP Shelter Signing Ceremony 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On June 29 Secretary Powell witnessed the signing of a 
protocol between the Istanbul Municipality and Turkish NGO 
Human Resources Development Foundation (HRDF)  setting the 
stage for the opening of Turkey's first-ever shelter for 
victims of trafficking in persons.  The Secretary, in 
Istanbul for the NATO Summit, made remarks at the signing 
ceremony, along with Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul.  The 
event put the Municipality's support for the shelter on the 
public record, as it committed itself to provide a property 
to house the program.  The municipality's contribution, a 
result at least in part of USG pressure and subsequent MFA 
and Ministry of Interior intervention, marks an important 
milestone in GOT anti-trafficking protection efforts. 
 
¶3.  The presence of the Secretary and FM Gul at the signing 
ceremony attracted widespread media attention (Ref A), and 
was an excellent opportunity for public education about the 
trafficking in persons issue in Turkey.  The Secretary 
pointed out that the protection of human liberty and dignity 
is part of NATO's mandate, and that NATO countries had 
developed the first ever anti-trafficking policy by an 
Alliance.  FM Gul stated that Turkey is committed to the 
worldwide effort against trafficking; Turkey's legal 
framework already reflects this and now the country is taking 
concrete measures to implement these laws.  Efforts by the 
American-Turkish Council have resulted in contributions from 
American companies toward the shelter's operating costs, and 
two local representatives of Altria/Philip Morris were on 
hand to present a check for $45,000 to HRDF.  Municipality 
officials, HRDF board members, the Istanbul representative of 
the International Organization on Migration (IOM) and 
numerous journalists also attended the event. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
GOT-NGO Anti-TIP Cooperation Improving 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The GOT (Ministry of Interior) signed agreements in the 
last several months with HRDF and IOM to cooperate on a 
number of anti-TIP efforts (Ref B, post's submission to 2004 
TIP report).  Turkish police, upon identifying potential TIP 
victims when carrying out raids, now contact HRDF and IOM so 
that these organizations can provide medical and legal 
assistance.  IOM Istanbul rep Murat Kalkan told us recently 
that the police alerted them to 20 TIP cases in the first two 
months following conclusion of their agreement this spring 
(all involved Ukrainian and Moldovan women in Adana, Ankara, 
and Istanbul).  HRDF Executive Director Demet Gural confirmed 
they are also enjoying good cooperation with police officials 
in this regard.  To date, however, there has been no place 
for TIP victims to stay and await assistance, and too often 
victims have been forced to leave the country before 
receiving the help they need.  According to Gural, the new 
shelter facility, due to open later this month, will be able 
to accommodate 12-15 women.  The municipality has paid a 
year's rent in advance for the facility, which will be housed 
-- at least for its first year of existence -- in a duplex 
apartment in Istanbul.  The municipality is also covering all 
utilities.  HRDF will be seeking a larger, more permanent, 
state-owned property to house the shelter starting in its 
second year of operation. 
 
¶5.  The shelter is partially furnished, and one of HRDF's 
founding members has donated additional furniture and kitchen 
appliances to meet its immediate needs.  Embassy Ankara has 
organized a clothes and supplies drive that will provide 
additional resources to the shelter.  HRDF's project 
coordinator, Dr. Muhtar Cokar, will work along with 
psychotherapist Serra Akkaya and legal advisor Hasan Kemal 
Elban in implementing the project.  HRDF is currently 
recruiting for a full-time, tri-lingual (Turkish, Russian, 
Moldovan) "cultural mediator" who will live in the shelter 
and staff the shelter's hotline.  The shelter will be 
equipped with security cameras, purchased with a portion of 
the funds contributed by Philip Morris.  As soon as the 
cultural mediator is identified, the shelter will be open for 
business; HRDF staff estimates that all will be in place by 
the end of July. 
 
---------------- 
Regional Efforts 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  On a separate note, HRDF is involved in a September 
conference on border trafficking of minors scheduled to take 
place in Edirne (on the Turkish border with Bulgaria).  The 
conference is designed for Turkish and Bulgarian NGOs and law 
enforcement agencies, but HRDF is looking for funding to 
bring Moldovan participants as well.  AMCONGEN Istanbul has 
been in touch with AMEMB Chisinau regarding possible funding 
sources.  This type of regional cooperation among NGOs seems 
to be the norm for HRDF.  When visiting HRDF in May, two 
visiting Moldovan NGO representatives were on their way back 
home via Istanbul after having been in Dubai assisting in the 
repatriation of a Moldovan TIP victim.  From July 16-30, 
HRDF's Armenian NGO partner, Hope and Help, is due to visit 
Istanbul, Ankara, Trabzon, Hopa, Rize and Antalya.  In 
Istanbul, Hope and Help will meet with Gural and AMCONGEN TIP 
officer.  The NGO will then meet with MFA TIP officials in 
Ankara.  At each of their stops, Hope and Help 
representatives have scheduled meetings with partner NGOs, 
Georgian and Russian Consulate officials, TIP officers from 
the Turkish National Police, and Armenian victims of 
trafficking. 
ARNETT