06ISTANBUL733
CONSUL GENERAL OUTREACH TO BURSA, TURKEY
Mon May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ISTANBUL 000733 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PGOV TU
SUBJECT: CONSUL GENERAL OUTREACH TO BURSA, TURKEY 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The Consul General traveled May 2-3, 2006 to 
Bursa -- Turkey,s fourth largest city and one of its most 
dynamic commercial centers with important textile and 
automobile manufacturing  -- to address a conference on 
globalization and entrepreneurship.  In addition to meeting 
with the Governor and Mayor and speaking to the press, CG 
Jones met with representatives of U.S. firms in the region, 
visited the American Corner, spoke with local TV and print 
media, and met with academics from Bursa,s Uludag 
University.  End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
Local Politicians 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) With Governor Canpolat, the CG discussed Bursa,s 
economic growth, the environmental challenges it faces, and 
the U.S. commercial presence.  The Governor complained that 
Turkish business people traveling to the U.S. should be 
treated in the same way as U.S. business people traveling to 
Turkey.  The CG replied that Turkish business people are 
welcome in the U.S., and offered to send representatives from 
the consular section to Bursa to explain and clarify visa 
procedures. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In a wide-ranging meeting with local AKP Mayor Sahin 
(a graduate of Baghdad University), the CG noted Cargill,s 
contribution to the local economy and encouraged U.S. 
participation in Bursa,s light-rail project.  She also noted 
earlier EXIM bank financial offerings for California-based 
Earth Tech company participation in the project.  The Mayor 
deferred to the Treasury on the matter of project funding, 
but generally welcomed U.S. participation and asked about 
larger U.S. involvement in the region. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Commercial and Academic Contacts 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Prior to meeting with local officials, the CG lunched 
with Galip Sukaya, Managing Director of Earth Tech, a leading 
U.S. company in the region and manager of the Bursa 
light-rail project.  In subsequent press interviews with 
local TV and print media, Jones emphasized the importance of 
such economic ties between U.S. firms and Bursa.  In addition 
to responding to a series of questions, the CG highlighted 
Cargill's contribution to economic growth in the region, 
expressed interest in further developing the commercial 
relationship between Turkey and the U.S., and mentioned the 
Fulbright program.  She also met with leading academics from 
Uludag University, and discussed the broader context of 
U.S.-Turkey relations. 
 
-------------------- 
Outreach and Message 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The highlight of the visit was a speech on 
globalization and entrepreneurship at the Bursa Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry,s "4th Conference on 
Entrepreneurship."  Before an audience of around 400-500 
business people, press, and students (future entrepreneurs), 
the CG described how the benefits of globalization exceed its 
costs, and how Turkey would benefit by continuing to open its 
business sectors to outside investment and expertise.  Other 
speakers noted how the success of their firms underscores 
Turkey's positive economic conjuncture, with one panelist 
commenting that Turkey's economy has grown by 30% over the 
last five years.  Follow-on questions from the audience were 
all directed at the CG, who reiterated the U.S. position on 
E.U. accession and the possibility of Turkish entrepreneurial 
development in times of turbulence in neighboring Iraq and 
Iran.  During the conference, the CG visited the American 
Corner, also housed in the Bursa Chamber of Commerce, and 
spoke with its Coordinator on how to expand outreach 
operations. 
JONES