08ISTANBUL439
AHMADINEJAD IN ISTANBUL
Sat Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO2176
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIT #0439/01 2290835
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 160835Z AUG 08
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8389
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISTANBUL 000439 
 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; BERLIN FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; BAKU FOR XXXXXXXXXXXX; 
DUBAI FOR IRPO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/15/2023 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS KNNP TU IR
SUBJECT: AHMADINEJAD IN ISTANBUL 
 
REF: (A) ANKARA 1465 AND PREVIOUS (B) ISTANBUL 152 
 
Classified By: Acting Principal Officer Sandra Oudkirk; Reason 1.5 (d) 
 
 ¶1.  (C) Summary:  Iranian President Ahmadinejad led an 
Iranian delegation to Istanbul August 14-15 for a bilateral 
"working visit."  Five agreements -- on security cooperation, 
the environment, transportation, tourism, and archives -- 
were signed, but observers said these were not likely to 
contain significant new substance.  No agreement on 
hydrocarbon cooperation was inked, but both sides pledged to 
pursue further talks based on the July 2007 energy MOU.  A 
meeting of Turkish and Iranian commercial representatives was 
reportedly canceled at the last minute by Iran, to the 
Turkish side's consternation.  Press coverage of the visit 
centered on the August 14 joint presidential press conference 
-- which one journalist attending characterized as largely 
content-free excepting remarks from President Gul on the 
nuclear issue  -- and the traffic paralysis caused by 
Ahmadinejad's motorcade.  We heard several anecdotes 
underscoring the Iranian delegation's disorganized approach 
to the visit. 
 
¶2.  (C) Asked what this visit means for Turkey-Iran 
relations, our contacts agreed that the GOT allowed the visit 
to occur (while severely limiting the visit's substance) not 
out of any warmth for the Iranian regime but to carefully 
balance its common interests with Tehran  -- e.g. regional 
stability and fighting local terrorism -- with the concerns 
it shares with the U.S. and EU about the Iranian regime. We 
believe this visit illustrated the GOT's belief that it can 
help moderate Iranian behavior not only by supporting UNSC 
sanctions and pressing for nuclear compliance, but also by 
pursuing careful diplomatic, economic, commercial, and 
cultural engagement as well.  The GOT took a risk in allowing 
the visit, and is likely to be relieved that it is now over. 
End summary and comment. 
 
Short on substance, "scrounging for agreements to sign" 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad led an 
Iranian delegation to Istanbul August 14-15 for a bilateral 
"working visit" with the GOT, the first visit by an Iranian 
president to Turkey since 1996.  Ahmadinejad was accompanied 
by Iranian FM Mottaki, Energy Minister Parviz Fattah , and 
Petroleum Minister Gholam-hossein Nozari.  They met with 
President Gul, Prime Minister Erdogan, Foreign Minister 
Babacan, and State Minister (Treasury) Simsek.  All official 
meetings took place at Istanbul's Ciragan Palace. 
 
¶4.  (C) No formal energy agreement was signed, despite press 
speculation that the two sides might use the occasion to 
complete a formal agreement on hydrocarbon cooperation that 
would have finalized a July 2007 MOU, in which Turkey had 
pledged to invest some 3.5 billion USD in Iran's natural gas 
industry and import over 20 billion cubic meters (bcm) of 
natural gas from the South Pars field.  Press reports and 
local observers suggested that the lack of a signed deal on 
hydrocarbon cooperation was the result of combination of 
factors including new demands from Iran on gas pricing, and a 
desire by the GOT not to run afoul of USG concerns that 
inking such a deal would both weaken the Iranian regime's 
international isolation and force the USG to review whether 
such a deal could trigger provisions of the USG's Iran 
Sanctions Act.  That said, Turkish and Iranian officials 
publicly underscored their intention to "continue and deepen" 
bilateral energy cooperation. 
 
¶5.  (C) Five bilateral agreements were signed, pledging 
Turkey and Iran to enhanced bilateral cooperation on: 
combating smuggling, organized crime, and terrorism; 
environmental protection; improving transportation links; 
promoting tourism; and providing for cooperation and 
exchanges between Turkey's and Iran's National Libraries. 
(Comment:  The texts of the agreements have not yet been made 
public.)  A western correspondent based in Istanbul, who 
until recently was based in Tehran, commented that "clearly 
both sides had to scrounge around for these agreements" and 
predicted the agreements would most likely include "very 
little that has not already been agreed or even implemented" 
between the two countries. 
 
¶6.  (C) The Turkey-Iran Business Council, which operates 
under the auspices of Turkey's Foreign Economic Relations 
Board (DEIK), was scheduled to meet August 15 on the margins 
of the official meetings at the Ciragan Palace Hotel, to 
finalize an agenda for the August 25-27 "8th Joint Economic 
Commission Meeting," to be held in Tehran (ref B).  According 
a contact who works for DEIK, however, the Iranian commercial 
delegation canceled at the last minute.  "The two Presidents 
and Foreign Ministers, as well as Business Council chairmen, 
were supposed to give remarks, but the event simply did not 
happen.  Foreign Minister Babacan was quite upset." 
According to our contact, DEIK Board of Directors Chairman 
Rifat Hisarciklioglu was prepared in his remarks to call on 
Iran to import more Turkish goods (comment: over 80% of the 
total bilateral trade is Turkish import of Iranian natural 
gas), criticize the GOI for imposing "unfair" tariffs on 
Turkish goods (e.g., a 46% tariff on hazelnuts, as well as 
significant tariffs on Turkish clothing and furniture), urge 
Iran to modernize the "IT infrastructure" of its banking 
industry to allow for better Turkish-Iran banking 
cooperation; and stop imposing a fuel tax on Turkish truckers 
entering Iran.  According to Hisarciklioglu's (undelivered) 
remarks, Turkey plans to raise these concerns at the Economic 
Cooperation Organization (ECO) Summit in Pakistan in 
November.  Our DEIK contact summarized the Turkish side's 
frustrations with the Iranian commercial team's no-show this 
way:  "Iran seems to care more about the appearance of warm 
commercial relations with Turkey, than actually taking real 
steps to deepen those relations." 
 
Paralyzed Traffic, Press Conference Tedium, Ciragan Palace 
Tension 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Local Turkish media coverage of the visit focused 
on the August 14 joint Presidential press conference, and on 
the widespread traffic paralysis confronting Istanbul drivers 
resulting from highway closures to facilitate Ahmadinejad's 
motorcade.  Several Turks commented to us that Ahmadinejad 
appeared "calmer and more intelligent" at the press 
conference than they had expected, and were pleased that he 
was able to offer basic courtesies in Turkish. 
 
¶8.  (C) These same local observers, as well at least one 
reporter covering the August 14 press conference, however, 
found Ahmadinejad's remarks to be disappointingly 
"content-free."  This was a consequence, the reporter 
asserted, of a poorly-managed press conference in which 
Ahmadinejad was allowed "to ramble on at length about the 
virtues of Iran's contributions to mankind" and thus limit 
the number of questions posed to him, in what was already an 
event truncated by its two-hour late start time.  One 
exception was the nuclear issue.  On that, President Gul 
struck a carefully balanced note, noting that Turkey favors a 
diplomatic solution in which Iran addresses the concerns of 
the international community, but also emphasizing Turkey's 
support for Iran's right to peaceful nuclear power. 
Ahmadinejad responded that on Iran "appreciates any proposals 
from our friends," adding that Iran would continue to support 
"the talks in Geneva." 
 
¶9.  (C) Ahmadinejad's schedule remained fluid even after 
arrival in Istanbul, with several events canceled or 
rescheduled.  "His aides seemed at wit's end", a 
correspondent following the delegation all day on August 14 
confided to us, sensing that the delegation was "flying by 
the seat of its pants."  One visiting USG official staying at 
the same hotel (remarkably, on the same floor) as Ahmadinejad 
described a chaotic atmosphere in the hotel lobby, noting 
that she was approached in the lobby by an Iranian official 
(comment: we think it was Iran's new Ambassador to Turkey, 
judging by the description), mistaking the USG official for a 
western reporter and asking her if she had any questions to 
ask him.  Similarly, a correspondent who spent August 14 at 
the Ciragan Palace Hotel described members of the Iranian 
delegation as "constantly appearing to get lost inside the 
palace complex, running around waving papers and yelling at 
each other."  She said the Turkish side's tension and dismay 
at the Iranian delegation's "unnerving" behavior was 
palpable. 
 
What does it mean for Turkey-Iran relations? 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (C) According to Can Buharali, a former Turkish diplomat 
who served in Iran and now works with the Istanbul-based 
"Center for Economics and Policy Studies" (EDAM), the GOT 
allowed this visit to proceed out of a sense of "neighborly 
obligation" and to advance commercial and cultural links with 
Iran, rather than as a signal of warmth towards the Iranian 
government.  "Of course Turkey does not want to see a nuclear 
Iran.  Turkey's leaders have the same concerns you do about 
Ahmadinejad and the regime, but they also have confidence in 
their ability to influence Iran more effectively through 
commerce and engagement than through sanctions or isolation." 
 Buharali reviewed how Turkey's relations with Iran have 
"deepened and expanded" in the past five years in such areas 
as commerce, culture, tourism, and energy cooperation. 
Additionally, the GOT and GOI "closely share common concerns 
regarding terrorism, narcotic traffic from Afghanistan, and 
stability in Iraq."  Unfortunately, he noted, this growing 
Turkish influence with Iran has not been sufficient to 
persuade Iran's leadership to change course on its nuclear 
program, "leaving Mr. Erdogan and Mr. Gul with a very 
difficult decision in coming months whether they can join the 
U.S. and the EU in levying tougher economic sanctions on 
Iran.  It is a decision they would rather not face." 
 
¶11.  (C) A Tehran-based political analyst told Istanbul's 
Iran Watcher that Iran, for its part, "has no illusions" 
about why Turkey allowed this "working level Summit" to 
happen.  "Ahmadinejad and Gul publicly proclaim their mutual 
admiration, and present a happy picture talking to each other 
warmly (in Arabic)", but "Iran knows Turkey needs its natural 
gas, especially as Russia finds itself more isolated because 
of Georgia.  Iran thinks Turkey needs Iran more than Iran 
needs Turkey."  He predicted that if the U.S., EU, and others 
pursue further measures to isolate the regime, Iran will 
correspondingly increase its own commercial- and 
energy-oriented diplomacy with Turkey.  Similarly, an 
Istanbul-based western news correspondent was told August 13 
by a press aide to Ahmadinejad that "Turkey knows that Iran 
and Turkey are natural partners, and that if Turkey wants to 
accomplish anything regionally it needs Iran's help."  The 
press aide added, in reference to Ahmadinejad's visit to 
Istanbul, that "if it upsets America and Israel, that's just 
icing on the cake."  The correspondent himself predicted that 
the visit would bolster Ahmadinejad's domestic political 
standing as Iranian politicians maneuver for next year's 
presidential elections. 
 
¶12.  (C) The Director of Bahcesehir University's Strategic 
Research Center, Dr. Ercan Citlioglu, a strong secularist 
with long-standing ties to the Turkish military, criticized 
the GOT for "underestimating the diplomatic manipulations" of 
the Iranian regime.  He urged that the USG not misinterpret 
Ahmadinejad's visit as signaling "anything close to a 
high-water mark" in bilateral relations, and felt the GOT had 
given in unnecessarily to Iranian pressure to allow the 
visit.  "Turkey and Iran remain wary neighbors."  The GOT, 
however, "thinks it can replicate its success" with the 
Syria-Israeli track by positioning itself as "an intermediary 
or honest broker" between Washington and Tehran. "The problem 
is, instead Erdogan and Gul are playing into Iran's hands as 
the Iranians try to bide their time on the nuclear front and 
weaken international consensus on further sanctions." He 
concluded that even though the bilateral agreements signed 
during this very were insubstantial, "now the Turkish 
government will be much more constrained against supporting 
further sanctions on Iran." 
 
Comment 
------ 
 
¶13.  (C) Most observers agree that the GOT took a risk in 
finally acquiescing to Ahmadinejad's visit, given Iran's 
recent refusal to reply constructively to the P5 1's revised 
offer in June, and what the press portrayed as pressure from 
the U.S. and others against any significant deliverables. 
Ultimately, most observers felt this visit reflected the 
GOT's desire, realistic or not, to balance the concerns it 
shares about Iran with most in the international community, 
and the common interests it shares with its largest and most 
unpredictable neighbor.  The overriding feeling among Turkish 
opinion-makers upon the conclusion of the Ahmadinejad visit 
is likely to be relief:  Relief that he didn't generate any 
new controversies or spout off any new, ill-advised public 
remarks, and relief that the GOT managed to "stay on the 
balance beam" by pulling off the visit without (yet) signing 
new agreements with Iran that would have angered Washington 
or undercut the current sanctions regime on Iran.  We tend to 
agree with the EDAM analyst's paragraph 10 remark that what 
this visit really illustrated was the GOT's belief that it 
can help moderate Iranian behavior not only by supporting 
UNSC sanctions and pressing for nuclear compliance, but also 
by pursuing careful diplomatic, economic, commercial, and 
cultural engagement as well.  As this expert told us, "that's 
just the Turkish way." 
OUDKIRK