05BASRAH150
ENCOURAGING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND STABILITY IN DHI QAR ON
Sat Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Basrah
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BASRAH 000150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM EAID PGOV PINS ECON IZ ECON
SUBJECT: ENCOURAGING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND STABILITY IN DHI QAR ON 
THE EVE OF THE ELECTIONS 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY:  On December 12, Ambassador Khalilzad 
announced to the Dhi Qar Governor and Provincial Council (PC) 
the approval of $7.0 million in assistance for critical 
reconstruction projects in the water and electric power sectors 
and the building of several new roads.  The projects will help 
create jobs and stabilize the environment in the province.  In 
his meetings with local officials and his visits to project 
sites managed by the Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), the 
Ambassador emphasized the importance of economic development, 
the need for local government to use the powers granted under 
the new constitution, and the significance of working with the 
Coalition to build government capacity in the province and 
throughout Iraq.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Visits to Project Sites 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 ¶2.  (U)  On December 12, the Ambassador visited the Nasiriyah 
Prison project site and the Al Zahra School.  Two hundred 
construction workers are building the prison with a 1200 
prisoner capacity.  The Al Zahra school has six classrooms for 
elementary students.  The Ambassador, REO Staff, and members of 
the press also flew over two USACE projects:  the Nasiriyah 
Maternity and Children's hospital site and the Nasiriyah water 
treatment facility.  Between 250-300 workers are building the 
hospital, and another 600-800 are constructing the water 
treatment plant. 
 
Meeting With Dhi Qar Governor 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  During his meeting with Dhi Qar Governor Azziz 
Kadhaum Alawan, the Ambassador announced approving the $7.0 
million allotment of $7.0 million for projects designated as 
priorities by the Dhi Qar Provincial Reconstruction and 
Development Council (PRDC).  The Ambassador said these projects 
will expand the infrastructure and improve the quality of life 
in Nasiriyah through the creation of critically needed jobs. 
 
¶4. (U)  The Ambassador underscored both the critical importance 
of the December 15 national elections for the stability of Iraq 
and the need to encourage all groups to participate in them. 
When asked by the Ambassador about clashes that had taken place 
between SCIRI and Jaysh Al-Madhi militants in Nasiriyah, the 
Governor replied that all the political parties and factions in 
the region are working together to ensure a secure environment 
for the upcoming elections. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The Ambassador noted that Dhi Qar has resources such 
as oil that have not yet been exploited and an agricultural 
potential that can sustain economic growth and create jobs. 
Iraq is going through a major transition, he said, but the new 
constitution gives much authority to the provinces, which should 
help them to pursue economic development.  The Ambassador 
informed the governor that the U.S. Embassy will be standing up 
Provincial Reconstruction Teams to help the provincial 
authorities establish budgets and economic development plans to 
address the needs of the people.  The Governor welcomed this 
initiative and said that he would fully support it. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  In his interview with the Italian national TV 
station, the Ambassador said that although the United States is 
committed to helping rebuild Iraq, ultimately it is the 
responsibility of the Iraqi people to rebuild Iraq. The 
Ambassador called upon the media to provide a balanced coverage 
of events that highlight the success of Iraq's political process. 
 
Dhi Qar PRDC Projects 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  In his meeting with Provincial Council (PC) chairman 
Ihassan Talib, PC Reconstruction Committee chairman Thajeel 
Kareem Aboud, and PC Security Committee chairman Thajeel Kareem 
Aboud, the Ambassador again mentioned the reconstruction 
projects for Dhi Qar province.  The Ambassador remarked that 
this funding for roads and water treatment will encourage 
economic development and political stability in the province. 
Members of the PC raised several proposals including additional 
bridges, water treatment and development projects to be funded 
in the future.  Ambassador instructed PC members to send their 
requests to the Basrah REO, who in turn would take appropriate 
action. The PC chairman thanked the Ambassador and expressed the 
PC's desire to work closely with the USG on future development 
initiatives in Dhi Qar. 
 
Comment 
------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (U)  COMMENT:  This timely first visit to Dhi Qar by the 
Ambassador to reinforce the USG's commitment to economic 
development in the South may encourage more Iraqis to become 
stakeholders in their own development and democratic processes. 
In his discussions with the Governor and the Provincial Council 
members, the Ambassador reaffirmed USG willingness to support 
development in the province, noting however that primary 
responsibility for rebuilding Dhi Qar and using the province's 
extensive natural resources for the benefit of the people 
squarely falls on the shoulders of the local officials.  END 
COMMENT. 
GROSS