05BASRAH154
PROJECT MONEY JUMP-STARTS PRDCS IN MAYSAN AND DHI QAR
Thu Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BASRAH 000154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON EAID IZ UN
SUBJECT: PROJECT MONEY JUMP-STARTS PRDCS IN MAYSAN AND DHI QAR 
 
REF: BASRAH 139, BASRAH 150 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The Provincial Reconstruction and Development 
Committees (PRDC) in Maysan and Dhi Qar provinces met on 
December 19 and 20.  Demonstrations over fuel price increases in 
both provinces threatened to disrupt the meetings, but 
Provincial Council members prevailed in making the meeting take 
place.  The approval of $7.9 and $7 million respectively in 
projects for the two provinces was well received.  This influx 
of project money has jump-started the stalled PRDC process in 
these two southern provinces (reftel A).  End Summary. 
 
Maysan PRDC Meeting, December 19 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶2.  On December 19, REO PolOff and IRMO attended the Maysan PRDC 
meeting in Al-Amarah.  Originally planned to take place in the 
Pink Palace in town, the meeting had to be relocated to Camp Abu 
Naji when a demonstration of about 100 people in front of the 
Pink Palace over fuel price increases forced the military convoy 
transporting the international donors to turn back.  Long lines 
of cars and trucks waiting at fuel stations were evident as the 
convoy made its way through town and back to the camp.  Despite 
the obstacles, several members of the Maysan Provincial Council 
turned up at Camp Abu Naji so that the PRDC meeting could take 
place.  Also in attendance were representatives from USAID, Army 
Corps of Engineers, the UN, DFID, and British officers from Camp 
Abu Naji. 
 
¶3.  The Maysan Provincial Council members received the IRMO's 
announcement of $7.9 million USD for roads, electricity, and 
water projects with satisfaction.  REO IRMO explained that the 
rest of the $10 million was being kept in a contingency fund to 
cover unexpected costs.  If any money remained after the 
projects were completed, this money would be turned over again 
to the PRDC for use in other prioritized projects.  In order to 
begin project implementation, the Maysan Provincial Council 
members agreed to approach the rest of the PRDC members to 
secure the necessary verification letter on proceeding with the 
projects selected by the National Embassy Team (NET) for 
funding. 
 
¶4.  British officers encouraged the Maysan PRDC members to 
develop a public outreach strategy to communicate projects and 
their benefits to the public.  Maysan officials countered that 
this was already being done to some degree by word-of-mouth, and 
that they were reluctant to advertise projects that were not yet 
completed because they did not want to put themselves in the 
potential embarrassing position of not being able to deliver on 
their promises.  Nevertheless, at the end of the meeting, the 
Maysan officials agreed to begin developing ways to communicate 
project benefits to the public. 
 
Dhi Qar PRDC Meeting, December 20 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶5.  On December 20, REO PolOff and IRMO attended the Dhi Qar 
PRDC meeting in Nasiriyah at the Nasiriyah power plant.  Many 
PRDC members were unable to attend the meeting because fuel 
demonstrations in town blocked roads, making transportation to 
the power plant difficult.  In addition, many Provincial Council 
members were engaged in an emergency session to deal with the 
political unrest caused by the fuel price increases.  Provincial 
Council Reconstruction Chairman Engineer Thajeel Kareem Ubeed 
attended and chaired the meeting.  Also in attendance were 
representatives from USAID, Army Corps of Engineers, the UN, 
DFID, and Italian officials from Camp Mittica. 
 
¶6.  REO IRMO confirmed Ambassador Khalilzad's December 12 
announcement that $7 million USD had been approved by the NET 
(reftel B) for four roads and one electricity project.  Engineer 
Thajeel said that he would like to switch out one of the 
approved projects for one on the unapproved list because the 
project had been promised to the people in that area.  IRMO 
responded that switching out projects was possible and outlined 
the procedures for doing so.  Engineer Thajeel agreed to supply 
the necessary documentation. 
 
¶7.  COMMENT:  Both Provincial Councils and donor organizations 
overcame significant hurdles in order to submit acceptable lists 
of prioritized projects to the NET.  The political crisis caused 
by the fuel price increases, traffic snarled by cars lined up 
for fuel, and angry crowds did not prevent Provincial Council 
members from attending the PRDC meetings and proceeding with 
project implementation.  The announcement of funds for 
infrastructure projects sparked renewed interest in the PRDC, 
moving forward reconstruction and development efforts in these 
two southern provinces.  END COMMENT. 
 
GROSS