06BASRAH175
BASRAH'S DATE PALMS PROJECT OFFERS JOBS, POSSIBILITY OF
Sat Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO4593
PP RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0175 3362002
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 022002Z DEC 06
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0488
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0508UNCLAS BASRAH 000175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAGR ETRD ETRA IZ
SUBJECT: BASRAH'S DATE PALMS PROJECT OFFERS JOBS, POSSIBILITY OF 
DEVELOPMENT 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable was cleared by PRT Basrah. 
 
¶2.  (U) SUMMARY:  The Basrah provincial government has begun 
implementation of a $10 million project to restore the date palm 
plantations of Basrah, creating 2,000 immediate jobs.  The 
director of the Basrah Date Palm Research Center, Mohammed A. 
Hameed, told poloff November 26 that about 140,000 offshoots are 
being planted on approximately 1250 hectares of land owned by 
about 1,000 farming families.  He said because individual 
farmers own the plantations, the farmers have economic 
incentives to maintain them.  The date palms create a 
microclimate that is conducive to cultivating a variety of 
fruits and vegetables and raising livestock, according to 
Hameed.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3.  (U) On November 26 the director of the Basrah Date Palm 
Research Center, Mohammed A. Hameed, told poloff that the Basrah 
provincial government has begun implementing a $10 million 
project to restore Basrah's date palm plantations, once one of 
the world's leading producers of dates.  The director stated 
that 63,000 palm offshoots were planted in 625 hectares of land 
in October and early November and that a second phase of 
planting of about 77,000 offshoots is expected to take place 
from February to August 2007 in another 625 hectares.  With maps 
and diagrams, Hameed showed that the planting areas are all near 
Basrah, adjacent to the Shatt al-Arab River or one of its 
tributaries.  According to Hameed, the soil preparation and 
irrigation canal repair tasks have created about 2,000 jobs, 
which are filled mainly by young, unemployed men from Basrah and 
retired soldiers. 
 
¶4.  (U) Hameed described how the date palm offshoots are planted 
in privately owned plots inhabited by about 1,000 farming 
families, who receive training in the use of fertilizer and 
pesticides to maintain the plantations.  He said that since 
individual farmers own the plantations, the farmers have 
economic incentives to maintain them, unlike many other 
infrastructure projects that have fallen into disrepair in Iraq. 
 He added that the provincial government's agriculture office 
employs experts to support the local farming community's needs, 
another sign that the date palm restoration project will be 
self-sustaining.  The palm trees will require four to five years 
to produce marketable fruit and offshoots.  In the meantime, 
Hameed said, the repaired irrigation system will allow farmers 
to plant other fruits and vegetables, such as tomatoes, 
cucumbers, alfalfa and corn, to supplement their incomes. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Danish agricultural adviser Ole Jepsen, a member of the 
Basrah Provincial Reconstruction Team is considered the 
godfather of the date palm restoration project.  Jepsen, through 
long months of work was able to bring together government, 
scientific and business groups in order to make the date palm 
project a success.  Included in these groups were Veterinary 
State Company and Basrah Agricultural College which gave insight 
to the process in which the date palm plantations create 
microclimates that are conducive to growing high value fruits 
and vegetables and raising livestock and fodder crops.  In 
meetings with poloff, Jepsen described how he saw possible 
spinoff industries from the date palm plantations, such as date 
processing and packaging at market requirements and meat 
processing.  Danish engineer Niels Elsnab, who supervised and 
oversaw the construction of irrigation sluices and culverts in 
the fields around Basrah, stated that authorizations were needed 
from the government ministries including the Water Resources 
Ministry (WRM) due to the irrigation canals that siphon water 
directly from rivers.  In addition, Elsnab told poloff that 
cooperation and coordination was required between the WRM, which 
has jurisdiction over main canals, the Agriculture Ministry, 
which controls secondary irrigation systems watering public 
lands, and the Basrah Provincial Council, which handles issues 
related to the irrigation of private lands. 
 
¶6.  (U) Comment.  The date palm restoration project's creation 
of 2,000 jobs in a city awash with unemployed youths holds the 
potential to play a key role in the long-term development of the 
local economy.  Before the Iran-Iraq war, 30 million date palms 
grew around this city.  Saddam ordered the many of the 
plantations hacked down during that conflict to create fields of 
fire for his artillery.  The date palm project is a welcome 
developmental sign in a city often noted for only its violence 
and economic stagnation.  End comment. 
 
GASTALDO