08BASRAH53
BASRAH JOURNALISTS ON SECURITY, RECONSTRUCTION AND
Mon Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO9205
PP RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHBC #0053/01 1541858
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 021858Z JUN 08
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0340
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0757
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0794UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BASRAH 000053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID PGOV IZ IR
SUBJECT: BASRAH JOURNALISTS ON SECURITY, RECONSTRUCTION AND 
ELECTIONS 
 
BASRAH 00000053  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: REO Director and Public Affairs officer met with a 
series of journalists from print and broadcast media in April 
and May.  Their views were not uniform but remarkably similar, 
with many common questions about U.S. policy, positions, and 
actions. There is concern that Basrah, because of its proximity 
to Iran, could be affected if the U.S. takes military action 
against Iran. Another issue is what reporters describe as the 
"invisibility of reconstruction in the city." When these 
journalists spoke of human rights, they focus on meeting basic 
physical needs rather than personal freedoms.  At the end of 
each meeting, journalists role-played asking Ambassador Crocker 
questions. Their questions ranged from how much influence the 
U.S. exercises over the prime minister to why U.S. forces are in 
southern Iraq. 
Charge of the Knights: Wait and See 
----------------------------------- 
¶2. The collective view of the journalists was that the success 
of the Charge of Knights (COK) military offensive by the Iraqi 
Army has removed the noose around the neck of this city of 
almost three million, but the potential for the hangman 
returning remains. Today Basra is relatively secure. There are 
weddings in public. Families are in the parks. There is less 
oppression of women's dress standards. Students feel more 
comfortable at the university. Before COK only religious music 
was sold; now stores sell popular music. Weapons, however, are 
still in the city. Borders areas are open. It was pointed out 
that before COK many crimes were committed by police 
intelligence. Unlike the Army, which was well received by the 
people, the police continue to pose a threat to the security of 
Basra. One reporter believes "You can kick them out the door but 
they will come back through the window."  A new police chief has 
been named and the hope is that he will reform the force. Until 
that happens, people are in a "wait and see" mood. 
Iranian Influence in Basrah 
--------------------------- 
¶3. The journalists said that Basrawis worry about undue Iranian 
influence and potential U.S. conflict with Iran. The border 
between Iran and Basrah is long, porous and generally unguarded. 
There is a flow of goods from Iran into Basrah, with Iranian 
produce dominating the markets. During the March/April COK, 
weapons and supplies with Iranian markings were discovered 
throughout the city.  Widespread reports circulated about 
militia leaders fleeing to Iran as Iraqi forces (with Coalition 
help) locked the city down. Because of Basrah's heavy losses 
during the Iran-Iraq war, women make up 66% of Basrah's 
population; concern for women and other civilians, and 
remembrance of that war's devastation led one journalist to ask 
whether Iraq would be the battlespace for a U.S. war with Iran. 
Invisible Reconstruction 
------------------------ 
¶4. According to State's recently released brochure "Aiding 
Iraq," almost $2.4 billion has been spent on Basrah Province. 
The footnote to this entry says this amount represents only 
projects in the Iraq Reconstruction Management System. The REO 
has distributed this brochure to all of its contacts.  Glancing 
it over, journalists wanted to know where the money had gone. 
The people can't see the projects, they say.  No building has 
the sign "Built with U.S. funds."  What people see in many areas 
of the city is wastewater in the streets, tap water they cannot 
drink, and mountains of garbage. The journalists were not averse 
to U.S. branding of projects; REO officers noted to them in the 
meetings that security considerations had made it difficult to 
brand some projects, and for others it was important that 
projects had an Iraqi face. 
Human Rights Vary 
----------------- 
¶5. The definition of human rights appeared to vary between many 
Basrawis and Americans. America sees human rights carved in 
stone, one reporter said, but Basrawis see it as meeting basic 
needs. Men and women do not have equal human rights in Basrah; 
women are denied freedoms. Last month a young woman's father and 
brothers killed her because of her friendship with a British 
soldier. The father was released without charges. Where is the 
civil law, people ask?  Unfortunately even with civil law, many 
people will be governed by tribal social and cultural 
traditions. Is a social revolution for women possible in Iraq? 
One female reporter said maybe we could share power; after all, 
women work in banks. 
Champion Saddam and Elections 
----------------------------- 
¶6. To counter the dominant political parties, reporters suggest 
U.S. and British support liberal candidates. The consensus is 
that religious parties will lose ground this election because 
people have lost faith in their ability to deliver basic 
services. Unless strong independent candidates emerge, people 
will turn to the tribal system for leadership. There is a 
feeling the central government has already turned to the tribes. 
This "feeds the beast," one reporter said. It was pointed out 
Arabic people admire champions. Even Saddam was one. Tribal 
leaders want to be today's champions. With so many illiterate 
 
BASRAH 00000053  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
voters, the fear is people will be told by the tribes who to 
vote for. It will take generations to educate people about the 
concepts of elections and representative government, noted a 
reporter. 
Ask Ambassador Crocker 
---------------------- 
¶7. What would you ask Ambassador Crocker? This question 
generated many responses: 
- What influence do you have on the GOI Prime Minister? Does he 
say what you want him to say? Is he a puppet? 
- When will the Ambassador disarm the citizens... because people 
will never express their opinion while surrounded by guns. 
- What are U.S. forces doing in Basrah?  Why don't they publish 
press releases? Is there censorship? We know U.S. forces are 
embedded with the Iraqi Army. 
- An American officer was killed in Basrah. What was his role? 
- The British will leave soon; what is the U.S. vision for 
Basrah? 
¶8. COMMENT: Some of these questions require a strategic 
communication plan stating USG policy in southern Iraq, 
especially in regard to U.S. troops and reconstruction. A 
comprehensive public communication plan is underway, for 
example, with regard to development of the Umm Qasr port.  We 
found the Basrawi journalists take their work seriously; more 
Iraq journalists have been murdered the last 16 years than in 
any other country, and Basrah has had a significant share. With 
the exception of reconstruction, the journalists' general 
perception of the U.S. was positive. REO has a start on 
understanding Basrah media perceptions and questions. We propose 
to use this understanding to initiate regular press conferences 
with the media, starting with June 3. 
HOWARD