09BASRAH29
BASRAH: OLD CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS ADD TO NEW PROVINCIAL
Sun May 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO6841
RR RUEHBC
DE RUEHBC #0029 1511539
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311539Z MAY 09
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0873
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0450
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0910UNCLAS BASRAH 000029 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EFIN IZ
SUBJECT: BASRAH: OLD CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS ADD TO NEW PROVINCIAL 
GOVERNMENT'S FINANCIAL WOES 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The $201 million in GOI Accelerated 
Reconstruction Development Program (ARDP) funds allocated to 
Basra for 2009 will fall far short of the province's obligations 
for 2008. The new governor's decision to honor without further 
review the contractual obligations made by the previous 
Provincial Council has created an additional debt of $290 
million. The government's decision, viewed as an effort to build 
faith in local government institutions, may adversely affect 
reconstruction and development plans. End summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Basra Budget Shortfall 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) In 2008, the Basra Provincial Government had nearly 
$680 million in obligations for various reconstruction and 
development projects. This sum included unspent portions of 2007 
ARDP funds, the emergency budget from Operation 
Charge-of-the-Knights, and supplemental appropriations from oil 
revenues provided late 2008. The provincial government executed 
this entire budget, a demonstration of its capacity for drawing 
up contracts and making tender announcements under existing 
guidelines. Not all obligated funds were disbursed, however; 
outstanding obligations from 2008 amount to about $290 million. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Unspent obligated funds will create a budget shortfall 
in Basra due to the lack of a provision in the budget law to 
roll unspent portions of the 2008 budget into 2009. (Although 
there is an exception for contracts with unliquidated letters of 
credit requiring no additional cash outlay, it will have little 
impact on Basra.) Provinces such as Basra that failed to fully 
implement priority projects and disburse funds in the previous 
year were particularly affected by the lack of roll-over. 
Basra's problems will be exacerbated further by the cut in ARDP 
funds. The $201 million ARDP allocation represents 62 percent of 
last year's total - a $123 million reduction. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Shiltagh's inherited debt is largely due to last-minute 
wrangling by the outgoing provincial government, which 
re-submitted the validated list of projects for funding against 
the 2009 ARDP allocation before the new government was seated. 
After taking office and considering the former Provincial 
Council's recommendations, Governor Shiltagh announced his 
intention to honor the previous administration's obligations. 
Consequently, the new administration's priorities regarding new 
projects will have to wait until additional resources are 
available. 
 
--------------- 
Comment 
--------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The current budget shortfall is not unique to Basra. 
The inability to apply unspent 2008 funds to this year's budget 
has had profound consequences across the country. Although 
reconstruction momentum has stalled, local governments can 
economize by improving resource management and at the same time 
allow ample opportunity to start working on the new Provincial 
Development Strategy and aligning their PDS in the overall GOI's 
national development goals. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment, continued: Governor Shiltagh's decision to 
continue all contracts surprised some local observers who 
believe many of the ARDP projects were poorly thought out, 
politically motivated, or both. The governor's lack of criticism 
for his predecessor and his refusal to take political advantage 
of the situation by developing new projects appear to follow the 
same strategy taken by new Maliki-affiliated governors in Dhi 
Qar and Maysan. This move, combined with designation of lesser 
Basra provincial executive positions for parties excluded from 
the governing coalition but prominent in the previous PC (i.e. 
ISCI, Sadrists) may reflect inter-Shi'a reconciliation efforts 
that are part of a larger political strategy directed by Prime 
Minister Maliki, who has close ties with the governor and 
Provincial Council. End comment. 
 
BOCCHETTI