06SANJOSE92
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DAVID LINDWALL, WHA A/DAS
Fri Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0092/01 0131556
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131556Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4014
INFO RUEHBE/AMEMBASSY BELIZE 0766
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 3051UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA CS
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DAVID LINDWALL, WHA A/DAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 6138 
 
¶1. Embassy San Jose warmly welcomes and is pleased to grant 
country clearance for David Lindwall, Acting Deputy Assistant 
Secretary for Western Hemisphere Affairs, who will be in 
 
SIPDIS 
Costa Rica from January 16-18, 2006.  The purpose of this 
trip is to consult with Embassy and host government 
officials. 
 
¶2.  Control Officer: POC is Robert Copley, Political Officer, 
who can be reached at the office (506)519-2253 or fax 
(506)519-2364.  The Embassy after-hours emergency phone 
number is (506)220-3127. 
 
¶3.  Upon arrival in country all TDY visitors are to make 
contact with their Embassy Control Officer for information 
regarding a security briefing. 
 
¶4.  Accommodations:  Mr. Lindwall has accepted the invitation 
to stay at Ambassador Langdale's residence.  The per diem 
rate for San Jose is $104.00 for lodging, and $67.00 M&IE. 
 
¶5. Transportation:   Mr. Lindwall will be met at the airport 
by Robert Copley, Control Officer.  Embassy vehicle will be 
provided. 
 
¶6.  Public Affairs:  Please note that the Public Affairs 
Office is the Embassy's designated point of contact with the 
press.  If visitors have been scheduled for press events by 
local partner organizations or others, please inform the 
Embassy's Public Affairs Office.  Should   visitors be 
approached by the press with questions or a request for an 
interview, they should refer the press to the Embassy Public 
Affairs Office.  In short, post requests that visitors not 
speak with the press before consulting with the Public 
Affairs office (506)519-2441. 
 
¶7. Travel documents/Threat assessment/Local conditions: All 
official visitors must travel with passports, preferably 
official or diplomatic.  Without these documents, travelers 
lack official status in the eyes of the Costa Rican 
Government.  However, no repeat no visa is necessary. 
 
During this time of heightened security alerts, all travelers 
should consult the Department's website for the latest public 
announcement or other safety notices at www.usembassy.or.cr 
or www.usembassy.or.cr/osac.html. 
 
Costa Rica is currently rated as a "high" crime threat post. 
The increasing use of violence during the commission of a 
street crime is a threat to all visitors.  Travelers are 
urged to exercise caution, as in any large city.  Local law 
enforcement agencies are not up to U.S. standards and have 
limited capabilities.  Jewelry should not be worn on the 
streets.  Large amounts of cash should not be displayed.  The 
downtown area of San Jose should be avoided at night because 
of the increase of criminal activity that occurs in this 
area. 
 
Credit card fraud and credit card "number skimming" is a 
rapidly growing crime.  Visitors should avoid using debit 
cards for point-of-sale purchases, as a skimmed number can be 
used to clean out an account.  Visitors should check their 
credit card accounts frequently. 
 
Visitors are advised to avoid unofficial moneychangers who 
may offer better rates but who often trade in counterfeit 
currency.  The present rate of exchange is approximately 496 
Costa Rican colones to one dollar.  Accommodation exchange is 
available at a comparable rate at the airport. 
 
Visitors should exercise caution if they will be driving in 
Costa Rica.  The combination of poor road conditions, erratic 
driving, and pedestrian and animal traffic on the roads make 
driving very treacherous.  Costa Rica has one of the highest 
accident rates per automobile in the world.  The Embassy 
strongly recommends against driving outside of the San Jose 
area at night.  Vehicles should not be left unattended or 
packages left visible inside them. 
Costa Rica is an earthquake zone and periodically experiences 
significant tremors. 
 
Visitors should be careful not to eat peanuts or products 
made from peanuts grown in Costa Rica because they may harbor 
aflatoxin, which is suspected in the causation of liver 
cancer. 
 
¶8. Laptops:  Please be advised that State Department 
regulations prohibit installation or use of privately-owned 
computers in any State Department building.  Visitors must 
notify the Regional Security Office in advance if they intend 
to use U.S. Government-owned portable computers in the 
Chancery. 
 
LANGDALE