08ANKARA1264
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6439
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1264/01 1961424
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141424Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6840
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9024
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4470
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3076
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6725
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6558
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3139
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001264 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JULY 14, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Prosecutor to Disclose 'Ergenekon' Indictment Monday 
All news outlets report on Monday, prosecutor Zekeriya Oz is 
expected to submit his indictment in the 13-month 'Ergenekon' 
investigation to court.  Chief Prosecutor Aykut Cengiz Engin and 
Deputy Chief Prosecutor Turan Colakkadi are expected to forward the 
indictment today.  The indictment, which mentions four separate 
military takeover attempts since 2003, contains charges against 85 
suspects, 48 of them already in custody.  Papers say the indictment 
would include evidence provided by 20 "secret witnesses" whose 
identities are not disclosed to assure their safety.  Papers also 
claim that the prosecutor will prepare an additional indictment for 
retired generals Sener Eruygur and Hursit Tolon, as well as others 
suspects arrested in recent operations. 
 
The media speculated that the indictment would tie notorious, 
politically motivated attacks to Erenekon, including the attack on 
the Council of State (Danistay), the murder of Armenian-Turkish 
editor Hrant Dink and the slaying of three Christian Bible 
publishers in Malatya.  Conservative-nationalist Bugun says 
prosecutors in charge of the Ergenekon investigation have asked the 
military General Staff (TGS) to allow legal action against active 
military officers supposedly linked to the illegal network. 
 
US Istanbul Consulate Attack Investigation Continues 
All papers over the weekend and today report twelve suspects have 
been taken into custody in connection with last week's attack on the 
US Consulate in Istanbul.  Four of the suspects were taken to court 
for further proceedings and one suspect, Dursun Patan, was formally 
arrested.  Patan claimed Erhan Kargin, a suspect killed during the 
attack, used to tell everybody in his neighborhood that he would 
attack Israeli and American targets in Turkey.  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman says suspects detained in connection with the attack fingered 
Kargin as the mastermind and that he had been visited by "some state 
officials" indicating a connection to the "deep state."  Papers also 
claim he received training in Afghanistan and returned to Turkey in 
¶2007.  Another suspect, unregistered taxi driver Cebrail 
Kosanarslan, said he was not involved in the attack, but was simply 
forced by the attackers to drive them to the Consulate.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet, however, reports Kosanarslan washed his car immediately 
after the attack, probably to hide critical evidence.  Mainstream 
Milliyet writes in "Consulate Suspect Has Been a Human Shield," that 
another of the detainees, Resat Anli, "had traveled to Syria and 
Iran and had served as a human shield against a possible attack by 
the US on Iran." 
 
Papers over the weekend reported President Bush phoned President 
Abdullah Gul to express his deepest condolences to the families of 
Turkish police officers who died defending the US Consulate in 
Istanbul.  The Turkish President's Office said Bush expressed 
gratitude for the Turkish police officers' defence of the Consulate. 
 
Saturday's papers featured US Consul General Sharon Wiener's visit 
to the policeman injured in the attack, Osman Dagli.  She presented 
him with a bouquet of lilium which symbolize trust, according to 
media reports.  Saturday's papers carried Ambassador Ross Wilson's 
remarks that US security officials did not intervene in the attack 
because they were not carrying arms during that particular time of 
the day. 
 
The Mediterranean Union Summit 
All papers:  Prime Minister Erdogan Sunday attend the Union for 
Mediterranean summit in Paris.  Mainstream Milliyet reports that 
during a 40 minute meeting with French President Sarkozy, PM Erdogan 
suggested that France should act responsibly during its EU term 
presidency, and invited Sarkozy to Turkey.  Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak writes that on the closure case against the AKP, Sarkozy said 
that the EU expects the court decision to be in line with democratic 
and rule of law principles.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries 
 
ANKARA 00001264  002 OF 003 
 
 
Israeli PM Ehud Olmert's comments at the summit that Israel and the 
Syrians have never been closer to making peace. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Med Union 
 
"The Mediterranean Union and Turkey" 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah (7/14):  "The Med Union has 
given French President Sarkozy an important political gain.  The 
French leader managed to bring Syrian and Israeli leaders around the 
same table, and this achievement is important to his ambition of 
being a leader in the European Union.  Until now, French power in 
the Middle East has been insignificant poor; therefore, the 
Olmert-Assad meeting at the Mediterranean Summit has paved the way 
for Paris's presence in the region.  Whether or not France 
ultimately succeeds depends on a few factors.  First of all, the 
White House administration will determine whether France will be 
given a role as a Middle East player.  Secondly the French 
administration has to get it over its 'Turkey complex' and accept 
Ankara as its helper in the Middle East.  Eventually, I hope France 
will accept Turkey as a reality in the Middle East and also will act 
appropriately as far as the Turkey-EU process is concerned." 
 
"Erdogan and Assad Saved Sarkozy's Image" 
Semih Idiz commented in mainstream Milliyet (7/14): "After Germany's 
intervention in the Med Union process, the project could no longer 
be an absolute French power game in Mediterranean.  So, even though 
the current Med Union project is not what Sarkozy had in mind, he 
had to steal the show anyway.  Given the participation level, as 
well as the lack of enthusiasm, it looks like the Med Union did not 
have a strong start.  There is still no clarity about the ultimate 
goal of the project.  Israel looks like the only strong supporter, 
which is enough reason for the Arabs to become suspicious.   Sarkozy 
was hoping to arrange a summit between Syria and Israel as a follow 
up to the Turkish-led Syria-Israel talks.  The summit did not take 
place. However, Sarkozy still managed to save his image, and for 
that, he should thank Turkey.  Turkey's participation to the meeting 
was very significant because, without Turkey, there wouldn't be any 
'Mediterranean union.'  The Med Union project is not an empty idea, 
and can be important if cooperation among Mediterranean countries 
can be established.  Yet Turkey, given its rising political profile 
in the region, has a better chance for success than France." 
 
PKK Threatens Germany 
Liberal Radikal reports that after abducting three Germans last 
week, the PKK now has threatened to attack German economic 
interests.  In a statement sent to Firat News Agency the terrorist 
organization said, "The Turkish and German governments should 
prepare to sacrifice their economic interests for the Kurds fight 
for independence.  We have the power to inflict heavy blows on 
Germany's economic interests in Turkey."  PKK reiterated its threat 
regarding the abducted three Germans saying that "the Germans will 
not be released until after Germany's stance against the PKK 
changes.  Angela Merkel is the only person we'll talk to on this 
issue." 
 
Poll: 63 Percent Oppose AKP's Closure 
Weekend Milliyet, Vatan, Bugun and Monday Cumhuriyet report on 
Metropoll public opinion research company poll that shows the 
distribution of votes among political parties would be as follows if 
elections were held today:  AKP 40.4 percent, CHP 14.4, MHP 7.6, DP 
1.1, DTP 1.0, GP 0.6, Others 3.6, Indecisive 13.6, Will not vote 
2.5, and No answer 5.7. 
 
Sixty-three percent of those interviewed opposed a possible closure 
of the AKP.  Forty-four percent said they would vote for a party 
backed by Erdogan if the AKP is closed.  Metropoll is a company 
known to be close to the ruling AKP.  The survey conducted on June 
26-27 canvassed the views of 1557 people in 26 Turkish provinces. 
 
TV News: 
 
ANKARA 00001264  003 OF 003 
 
 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan, accompanied by six cabinet ministers, will 
travel to Lefkosa on July 18 to meet Turkish Cypriot leaders, 
opposition party leaders and NGO representatives.  Erdogan will join 
July 20 celebrations held to celebrate the founding of Turkish 
Cyprus. 
 
- Two PKK terrorists have been killed by security forces in the 
eastern province of Tunceli. 
 
- Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP will hold a convention on July 20 
to pick a new party leader. 
 
International News 
 
- Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said Israel and Palestine have 
"never been this close" to a peace deal. 
 
- The British government is to sponsor a theological board of 
leading imams and Muslim women in an attempt to refute the ideology 
of violent extremists. 
 
- About 5,400 residents are evacuated in Osaka, Japan as army 
experts dispose of a large unexploded bomb believed to have been 
dropped by the US military during World War II. 
 
 WILSON