08ANKARA1193
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7218
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1193/01 1831234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011234Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6708
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8993
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4408
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3048
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6699
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6529
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3110
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, JULY 1, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Ambassador Wilson Comments on PJAK 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Yeni Safak, Zaman:  During the opening 
ceremony of "Innovative and Entrepreneur Youth Project," journalists 
asked U.S. Ambassador Ross Wilson about Seymour Hersh's latest story 
in the "New Yorker." Wilson said, "The U.S. does not cooperate with 
PJAK.  We have no relations with PJAK.  We see PJAK as a terrorist 
organization."  When asked about PM Erdogan's trip to Iraq, 
Ambassador Wilson called the visit "a positive step for Turkish 
-Iraqi relations." 
 
French FM Kouchner Praises Turkish Military for its Role in 
Democracy 
All papers:  France takes over the EU term presidency today. 
Speaking to European Journalists, French Foreign Minister Bernard 
Kouchner said that "the AKP closure case might have an impact on the 
EU negotiations, however, this is Turkey's internal issue and Turkey 
should find a solution to this issue itself.  PM Erdogan is a wise 
politician.  I am sure he will find a solution to this issue.  So 
far, military played a very important role in Turkey.  The Turkish 
military played an important role in democracy and undertook a great 
role in separating the government affairs from the mosque and 
religion.  This should not be forgotten."  Kouchner added that 
during France's presidency, two or three chapters will be opened up 
with Turkey. 
 
Turkey Prepares for Concluding Arguments in the AKP's Closure Case 
Today, Chief Prosecutor Yalcinkaya will present his closing remarks 
on the case to close the AKP.  On Thursday, the AKP will present its 
closing remarks.  The Turkish press has exhausted this subject in 
the past few months, but today's media wraps up their respective 
expectations.  Columnist Mehmet Barlas of mainstream Sabah notes, 
"There is only one way out for Turkey.  Every political actor and 
every law must be in accordance with EU membership."  In addition, 
Barlas notes, "We can return to our target of joining the 
civilization of modernity, democracy, and reality even if the party 
is closed."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes in "Today, the 
Google Case Will Be Presented," Yalcinkaya presents a case "based on 
evidence collected from Google and not from legitimate legal 
sources."  Leftist Taraf calls the closure of the AKP, "The Calamity 
Awaiting Turkey."  Columnist Ismet Berkan of liberal Radikal writes, 
"The closure case has poisoned the atmosphere," as this issue has 
even "pitted childhood friends against each other," and "divided the 
beds of husbands and wives."  Rusen Cakir of mainstream Vatan 
writes, "If the AKP is closed, secularism could be weakened, the AKP 
will not be dissolved, the party replacing the AKP could win more 
than 50% of the vote, and Erdogan could emerge empowered as a result 
of the closure case." 
 
Breaking News - 49 Additional Ergenekon Detentions 
In a story breaking mid-morning today, mainstream NTV reports that 
at least 49 people, including leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
journalist Mustafa Balbay, two retired four star generals and the 
Chairman of the Ankara Chamber of Commerce, were detained in 
connection to the ongoing Ergenekon investigation.  Tulin Daloglu 
has previously described Ergenekon in the Washington Times as, "An 
ultra-nationalist gang accused of inciting anti-democratic 
activities and seeking to engineer a coup against Turkey's 
Islamist-rooted government."  Mainstream Hurriyet's website reports 
the timing of these arrests is "interesting" in that the news broke 
around the time the Chief Prosecutor Yalcinkaya began his concluding 
oral arguments in the closure case against the AKP, the ruling party 
accused of having Islamist roots. 
 
Tuzmen: Lots of Things to be Done in Iraq 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports Turkey's State Minister for 
Economy, Kursad Tuzmen, told the press after wrapping up contacts in 
Baghdad that Iraq could recover if it makes "good and fast" use of 
its resources.  "For the first time, a foreign delegation held a 
 
ANKARA 00001193  002 OF 003 
 
 
meeting outside the Green Zone in Baghdad, and Iraq received this 
message," Tuzmen said.  Tuzmen also said the Turkish delegation 
proposed the establishment of a joint industrial zone in Ovakoy 
along the Turkey-Iraq border. 
 
Australia's Downer New UN Cyprus Envoy 
Mainstream Hurriyet, leftist Taraf, Islamist Yeni Safak, and liberal 
Radikal report the former Australian Foreign Minister Alexander 
Downer is expected to be assigned the next UN special envoy for 
Cyprus.  The Greek Cypriot administration, however, said Monday that 
the appointment of a UN envoy for Cyprus depends on the launch of 
direct talks between the sides on the divided island, according to 
papers. 
 
Socialist International to Send Delegation to Turkey on CHP 
Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report in the 
first day of the Socialist International (SI) meetings in Athens, no 
statement was issued against Turkey's main opposition party CHP. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman claims SI put Turkey under "monitoring," and 
would send a four-member delegation to inspect the "anti-democratic" 
charges against the CHP.  The paper also says CHP leader Deniz 
Baykal, deputy chair of SI, was not nominated for the post again. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports at the meetings on Monday, 
the northern Iraq Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) was given full 
membership and the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) consultative 
membership.  Iraqi President Jalal Talabani was assigned deputy 
chair of SI, according to papers. 
 
 
Cartoon in July 1st's leftist Taraf. 
"The Socialist International" placard is broken into two.  The "CHP" 
tag is pinned on the piece reading "National." 
 
Cartoon in July 1st's mainstream Hurriyet: 
CHP leader Deniz Baykal, at the "Ayas Mulberry Festival," says: 
"Let's call the mulberry a symbol of socialism!"  Background: 
Baykal refused to join Socialist International's summit in Athens 
this week and instead attended a mulberry festival in Ayas. Press 
speculate Baykal did not attend the SI meeting because the CHP's 
stance on the closure case has angered a number of SI members in 
Europe. 
 
Editorial Commentary on U.S/Iraq; North Korea/Iran 
 
"Bush's Incompetence" 
Fikret Ertan wrote in Islamist leaning Zaman (7/1): "The Bush 
administration made very serious and critical mistakes in the 
aftermath of the 2003 invasion of Iraq.  Paul Bremer was appointed 
by President Bush as the second 'occupational governor' after 
General Garner. Bremer can easily symbolize America's fiasco in 
Iraq.  General Tommy Franks, who served in Iraq alongside Bremer, is 
now testifying in an ongoing military investigation and is facing 
serious criticism.  In addition, an important study about the Iraq 
war has been released by the Institute for Military and Combat 
Studies, an organization belonging to the American army.   The study 
detailed the incompetence of the Americans during the 2003 invasion 
and the ensuing occupation of Iraq. Interestingly enough, the key 
figures of this period, such as Paul Bremer, General Franks and 
former CIA Director George Tenet were all awarded the 'Medal of 
Liberty' by the Bush administration due to their 'successes' in 
Iraq.  Normally, America does not reward incompetence.  However, the 
Bush administration managed to do such a thing." 
 
"Nuclear Ambition" 
Yilmaz Oztuna wrote in conservative Turkiye (7/1): "The people of 
North Korea are among the world's poorest and they continue to 
suffer from hunger.  The contrast between North Korea and South 
Korea is black-and-white, though they are neighbors of the same race 
and speak the same language.  While North Korea is ruled by 'liberal 
communism' even though these two terms are an oxymoron, South Korea 
 
ANKARA 00001193  003 OF 003 
 
 
shines as one of the wealthiest nations in the world.  Despite its 
extreme poverty, North Korea developed nuclear weapons by enriching 
plutonium.   Recently, the North Korean government announced its 
intention to abandon its nuclear efforts and destroyed a nuclear 
facility.  In exchange, North Korea hopes to be taken off the United 
States' list of rogue countries.  Meanwhile, Iran is one of the 
world greatest civilizations.  Currently, its nuclear ambition is 
not serving to its own benefit.  If Iran makes a similar move and 
abandons its nuclear ambition, and if the U.S. takes Iran off its 
blacklist, not only Tehran but all of its neighbors, particularly 
Turkey, will take a deep relaxing breath." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Luxembourg's Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn spoke to the press 
after meeting his Turkish counterpart Ali Babacan in Ankara. 
Asselborn said, "If the Constitutional Court rules to ban the AKP, 
it will not end Turkey's EU accession process." 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan met with Anti-Defamation League (ADL) 
director Abraham Foxman on Monday.  The 1-hour meeting was closed to 
press. 
 
- The Turkish Statistics Institute announced Turkey's economy grew 
by 6.6 percent in the first three months of this year. 
 
International News 
 
- Malaysian opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim ended his one-day refuge 
at the Turkish ambassador's residence in Kuala Lumpur on Monday. 
Turkey's Foreign Ministry announced efforts to find a solution to 
the situation were successful, thanks to the close cooperation 
between Turkey and Malaysia. 
 
- Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov will pay an official visit 
to Turkey July 2 to meet his Turkish counterpart Ali Babacan, 
President Abdullah Gul and PM Erdogan. 
 
- France assumes the rotating EU Presidency as of Tuesday. 
 
WILSON