08ANKARA1337
ERGENEKON INDICTMENT STILL MURKY BUT PROCESS ALONE
Fri Jul 25 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6236
PP RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHAK #1337/01 2071342
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 251342Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6952
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 1288
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TU
RUEUITH/TLO ANKARA TU
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5//
RHMFISS/39ABG CP INCIRLIK AB TU
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/425ABG IZMIR TU//CC//
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/15/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PREL TU
SUBJECT: ERGENEKON INDICTMENT STILL MURKY BUT PROCESS ALONE 
IS SIGNIFICANT 
 
REF: A. ISTANBUL 380 
     ¶B. ANKARA 1217 
     ¶C. 07 ANKARA 1112 
     ¶D. ANKARA 502 
     ¶E. ANKARA 213 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Ross Wilson for reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1. (C)  SUMMARY.  Istanbul's Heavy Penal Court decided July 
25 to accept the indictment filed in the Ergenekon case and 
proceed to prosecution (ref A).  The 2,500 page indictment 
has clarified little about the case.  Some Turks see the 
indictment as a courageous step toward bringing Turkey's 
state and society under the rule of law, purging corrupt 
elements and laying the groundwork for greater public 
accountability.  Others see a politically manipulated 
investigation targeting opponents of the ruling Justice and 
Development Party (AKP) and designed to protect AKP from 
closure (ref B).  An additional 26 suspects were detained 
July 23.  Whatever the outcome, the unprecedented arrest of 
senior retired military officers accused of serious crimes 
against the government -- and the military's acquiescence -- 
may play an important role in deterring future coup plotters 
and weaken the iron grip of traditional "Deep State" elites 
on Turkey's state institutions.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Initial Reactions: Hope and Dismissiveness 
------------------------------------------ 
¶2. (C) The media's portrayal of the Ergenekon case as a 
Kemalists-versus-AKP battle distracts from the 
investigation's significance as a judicial effort to tackle 
one of Turkey's untouchable subjects by exposing an alleged 
crime network with military links.  Some liberal contacts 
hope the case represents a "Clean Hands" process that will 
hold the traditional state elites accountable for their 
conduct.  Former Ozal-era State Minister Hasan Celal Guzel 
calls Ergenekon the most important case in the Republic's 
history because the judiciary is questioning whether the 
military may act with the impunity it has enjoyed in the 
past.  Ankara University professor Baskin Oran argues that 
for the first time, people may be tried for planning a coup 
and the implicit immunity of the generals may be lifted. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Arrayed against the prosecutor's efforts is a 
variety of status quo interests, many unwilling to concede 
that "patriotic" retired generals may have gone too far. 
Eray Akdag of TUSIAD (Turkish Businessmen's and 
Industrialists Association) emphasized to us his doubts about 
the substance of the indictment.  Other critics focused on 
the lack of due process in holding suspects without charge 
for extended periods, and ridiculed the twenty "secret" 
witnesses cited in support of the allegations and the vague 
ties to other unsolved crimes.  Some opponents accuse the 
prosecutor of redefining "terrorism" to make the Ergenekon 
charges fit that crime (ref A).  A Republican People's Party 
(CHP) statement belittled the indictment, saying the 
"mountain gave birth to a mouse."  CHP's Atilla Kart accused 
the government of interfering in the legal process and using 
"politicized law enforcement" (i.e. the Turkish National 
Police) against its opponents. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Despite the heated debate and an additional 26 
arrests on July 23, the country remains calm.  Ayhan Bilgen, 
former chairman of human rights NGO Mazlum-Der, told us he 
believes social pressure is necessary to stiffen the resolve 
of the judiciary to examine those with powerful state 
connections but sees no potential for civilian unrest. 
Rallies calling for respect for democracy and a new 
constitution drew tens of thousands in Bursa, Samsun and 
Malatya; Hak-Is labor President Salim Uslu addressed the 
crowd in Bursa, which was allowed to carry only Turkish 
flags. Another, organized by anti-coup political parties and 
NGOs, is planned for July 26 in Ankara.  In response, the 
Ataturkist Thought Association (ADD) held an "Ataturk and 
Democracy" rally in Kadikoy (Istanbul).  ADD Vice Chairman 
Professor Sina Aksin calls the Ergenekon case an effort to 
pressure Ataturkist people; Turkey Youth Union founding 
president Adnan Turkkan claims the case was "patented by the 
US."  Turkish Academics' Association president contends the 
 
ANKARA 00001337  002 OF 003 
 
 
indictment's real goal is "to erase Mustafa Kemal Ataturk 
from history."  Rallies nominally "in support of the 
judiciary" touted by ultra-nationalist media figure Tuncay 
Ozkan have attracted extremely low turnout; the July 7 
kickoff events drew only a few hundred people. 
 
A Chance for Accountability? 
---------------------------- 
¶5. (C) The case targets what many liberals describe as the 
most concrete manifestation of Turkey's "Deep State" in 
recent years, and seeks to link the Ergenekon gang to 
specific crimes, some going back more than a decade.   The 
indictment reportedly contains evidence linking Ergenekon to 
the 2006 attack on the High Administrative Court (Danistay) 
which killed one judge and wounded others, renewing questions 
surrounding the convicted shooter, a disgruntled Islamist 
lawyer.  Former Mayor of Diyarbakir's Sur municipality 
Abdullah Demirtas told us the indictment could also shed 
light on unsolved incidents such as Susurluk and Semdinli, 
which pointed to murky ties between members of the state 
establishment and criminals.  Both cases evaporated without 
serious legal consequences for those allegedly involved. 
 
¶6. (C) Many hope that legal and public scrutiny of the 
Ergenekon crimes will open much-needed opportunities for 
greater transparency and democracy.  Turkey's recent 
economic, social and political changes are shifting the power 
balance away from an entrenched elite resistant to change. 
The fact the military acquiesced to the arrest of two retired 
four-star generals is in itself important.  Former MP Nazli 
Ilicak cautioned that formal institutional change remains a 
necessary step: as long as the military has the duty of 
protecting and guarding the Republic, Turkey will not be able 
to prevent the next Ergenekon-style interference.  Ankara 
University Professor Tayfun Altay told us he wishes Turkey 
could carry out a more orderly and decent process of 
democratization.  The Ergenekon precedent could ultimately 
raise public demand for greater accountability by the ruling 
AKP concerning dubious public financing, sales and tenders, 
inappropriate government pressure and questionable enrichment 
of party members. 
 
Hurdles Along the Way 
--------------------- 
¶7. (C) Significant challenges will undercut the prosecutor's 
ability to see this case through.  The arrests of prominent 
individuals show the alleged gang may extend high into elite 
institutions.  Samil Tayyar, author of "Operation Ergenekon" 
and other books on the Deep State, claims there are three top 
witnesses in the case whose yet-to-be-revealed involvement 
would shock the nation.  With charges of terrorism, 
incitement to uprising, and political assassination, the 
stakes for the accused -- and the judiciary -- are high.  The 
prosecutor reportedly has received threats and key witnesses 
are likely at risk.  Tayyar said he too has had death threats 
since publishing his Ergenekon book, and now receives police 
protection.  Professor Baskin Oran worries there will be 
disputes over whether military or civilian courts have 
jurisdiction; this and other technicalities may cause the 
case to drag on for years without a clear-cut result, as in 
previous investigations. 
 
¶8. (C) The biggest obstacle may be inertia.  The Ergenekon 
case will be tried in a judicial system that views defense of 
the Kemalist order as its paramount mission, above and beyond 
the written law (refs C-E).  Previous bold prosecutors who 
have looked too closely into the state's dirty laundry have 
found themselves sidelined or disbarred.  The Istanbul public 
prosecutor's resolve, critical to getting the case this far, 
will need to remain strong as the investigation proceeds. 
His reportedly "frequent" meetings with Prime Minister 
Erdogan have played a role in keeping the case alive, but 
have left both the prosecutor and the charges against 
Ergenekon open to allegations of political manipulation. 
 
¶9. (C)  By arguing in the indictment that Ergenekon members 
disingenuously used Ataturk's Kemalist principles as a guise 
for retaining power, the prosecutor is trying to persuade 
patriotic Turks the suspects are subversive criminals rather 
 
ANKARA 00001337  003 OF 003 
 
 
than national heroes.  He will need an iron-clad case to make 
the charges stick but the case has already had some effect. 
A senior AKP journalist predicts that while the evidence may 
not support convictions, a clear political signal has been 
sent that such anti-democratic behavior is no longer 
acceptable.  Perhaps this will be the case. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
WILSON