08ANKARA1217
TURKEY: COUP THWARTED OR REVENGE TAKEN?
Mon Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0879
PP RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHAK #1217/01 1891126
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 071126Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6760
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4437
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC//J-3/J-5//
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU//TCH//
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEUITH/TLO ANKARA TU
RUEHAK/USDAO ANKARA TUC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001217 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/06/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: COUP THWARTED OR REVENGE TAKEN? 
 
REF: ANKARA 1194 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Daniel O'Grady for reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  As the shock wanes over the July 1 detention 
of over 20 people, including two senior retired military 
officers, in connection with the year-old Ergenekon 
investigation (reftel), most Turks view the developments as a 
worrisome escalation of the struggle between Kemalist 
ultranationalists and supporters of the Islam-oriented ruling 
Justice and Development Party (AKP).  In Ankara's 
supercharged atmosphere, Turks are awaiting release of the 
Ergenekon indictment before deciding whether the suspects, 
some held without formal charges for months, were determined 
coup plotters or pawns in the ongoing battle for political 
control.  Many predict the detentions, portrayed by much of 
the media as AKP's revenge, make the party's closure more 
likely.  A solid indictment will bolster government claims 
the judiciary has thwarted a dangerous conspiracy to topple 
Turkey's democratically elected government; a weak case will 
fuel accusations that police state tactics were used 
unjustifiably against AKP opponents in retaliation for the 
pending closure case.  While some view the Ergenekon suspects 
as a disgruntled group of AKP antagonists with more will than 
means to enact a coup, others portray the investigation as a 
bold effort to eliminate illegal gangs that have long 
obstructed Turkey's democratization.  Either scenario would 
burnish AKP's image, both as intended coup victim and 
courageous defender of Turkey's democracy.  If, however, the 
outcome is a flimsy indictment and a clumsy judicial process, 
it will discredit AKP and Erdogan, and disappoint those 
hoping Ergenekon is not just another reckless ploy in 
Turkey's political power struggle.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The move by Istanbul prosecutors to detain senior 
military officials (among others) allegedly implicated in a 
coup conspiracy is hailed by many as a rare attempt to hold 
coup plotters responsible.  "We have today's coup plotters 
because past coup leaders have not been tried," stated Sacit 
Kayasir, disbarred in 2000 for pursuing charges against 1980 
coup leader General Kenan Evren.  All sides have called for 
respect for the judicial process, though many are concerned 
that charges hve yet to be filed against any of the 49 
suspects detained during five previous raids since July 2007. 
 AKP Vice Chairman Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat agreed those 
detained should have a fair trial, and urged the prosecutor 
to speed up the legal process.  AKP Whip Nihat Ergin told us 
the indictment has been delayed because the case is so 
complicated; three prosecutors have reviewed over six million 
pages of evidence linking this investigation to old, unsolved 
crimes.  "The indictment will clarify for the public that 
this is about a criminal organization," Ergin said.  An 
indictment, rumored to be 2500 pages, may be filed this week, 
once recently seized evidence is incorporated, according to 
Ergin.  Two retired generals and the Ankara Chamber of 
Commerce president, all detained July 1, were arrested after 
questioning over the weekend and are being held for trial, 
reportedly for establishing an organizing designed to provoke 
the public to revolt against the government. 
 
¶3. (U) AKP leaders deny any link between the recent 
detentions and the AKP closure case, maintaining Turkey's 
independent judiciary moved against the Ergenekon suspects to 
prevent them from launching a plan to create chaos and 
overthrow the AKP government.  That the high-profile 
detentions occured during the chief prosecutor's July 1 oral 
arguments in the AKP closure case (septel), minimizing press 
coverage of the court session, was a coincidence, they 
contend.  Cumhuriyet columnist Cuneyet Arcayurek disagreed, 
stating, "It is in no way a coincidence such things are 
happening when the closure case is being heard at the 
constitutional court."  Whether or not a link exists, senior 
AKP MP Murat Mercan told us he expects the Ergenekon 
investigation will negatively impact the closure case, 
particularly because some media are depicting the Ergenekon 
suspects as defenders of the secular Republic.  Despite PM 
Erdogan's previous claim that the closure case was filed to 
curb the government's determination to pursue the Ergenekon 
investigation, many view the detentions as AKP's effort to 
suppress its adversaries.  AKP opponents were quick to 
criticize Firat's call to respect the judiciary's 
independence, pointing to AKP efforts to press the US, EU and 
others to influence the constitutional court in the closure 
 
ANKARA 00001217  002 OF 002 
 
 
case.  "I can only laugh at this statement," NTV News' Rusen 
Caker reportedly said, adding, "They made all possible 
interventions." 
 
¶4. (U) While also noting the arrests coincided with the chief 
prosecutor's closure case oral argument, far-right 
Nationalist Action Party (MHP) leader Devlet Bahceli urged 
his party group to await the outcome of the Ergenekon legal 
process.  "There are groups trying to create chaos in 
Turkey," he said, adding that it is in Turkey's best 
interests to remain cool-headed regarding the investigation. 
Bahceli blamed AKP and the PM for not tackling Turkey's 
issues with common sense and risking the country's future for 
Erdogan's "whims and obsessions." 
 
¶5. (U) Erdogan's comments at AKP's July 1 parliamentary party 
group meeting were defiant without directly addressing the 
Ergenekon investigation or the closure case.  He emphasized 
AKP is the only address for a change in Turkey's politics, 
for Turkey's integration with the modern world and its full 
membership in the EU.  Those who resist EU membership and 
standards cannot tolerate Turkey moving toward 
democratization and cannot accept the will of the people, he 
said.  Turkey will develop despite all hurdles before it, 
Erdogan pledged, adding AKP will strive for democracy, 
justice and law.  "We have to work hard and act with common 
sense," he told AKP MPs. 
 
¶6. (U) Land Forces Commander (and likely future Chief of 
Defense) General Basbug also urged Turks to be responsible, 
"imperturbable" and cautious.  President Gul echoed the call, 
saying he has been working to reduce the tensions and ensure 
Turkey emerges from the crisis even stronger.  In contrast, 
opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) leader Deniz 
Baykal charged the detentions stem from Erdogan's personal 
ambitions and indicated Turkey is drifting away from 
democracy and rule of law.  "This process has been going on 
for a year without an indictment.  Is this possible in a 
state of law?" Baykal asked, warning that a society of fear 
is being created in Turkey.  Baykal claimed the investiagtion 
is politically motivated and accused Erdogan of being the 
Ergenekon investigators' "spokesman" for announcing the 
investigation would end soon.  AKP's Firat retorted that 
Baykal was acting as the Ergenekon suspects' lawyer. "Baykal 
is trying to make it look like the suspects were detained 
because of their opposition to the government and not because 
of having participated in an illegal organization resorting 
to methods outside the law," Firat said. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: Most Turks agree if the Ergenekon suspects 
are guilty, they should be punished.  But they want to see 
the indictment before deciding whether or not this is a 
genuine effort to crack down on illegal organizations or 
ultranationalists within the state ready to take the law into 
their own hands.  Given the failure of previous attempts to 
hold coup plotters accountable, the prosecutor will need the 
government's continued backing and strong political will to 
see the prosecutions through to convictions, a process that 
could take years.  Even if Ergenekon is only a house-cleaning 
of a disaffected few, the case could, if handled responsibly, 
strengthen Turkey's democractic process by demonstrating no 
one is above the law.  Such an outcome, accomplished with the 
cooperation (however grudging) of the judiciary and military, 
could be the government's most important reform to date. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turk ey 
 
WILSON