08BAGHDAD2131
COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT - M1A1 MAIN BATTLE TANKS
Wed Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2131/01 1910735
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 090735Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8221
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS BAGHDAD 002131 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO NEA/I, PM/RSAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MASS MARR PREL IZ
SUBJECT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT - M1A1 MAIN BATTLE TANKS 
FOR THE IRAQI ARMY 
 
¶1.    (U) This is an action request, please see paragraph 13. 
 
¶2.     (SBU) SUMMARY:  The U.S Embassy Country Team has 
reviewed and concurs with the Letter of Request (LOR) from 
the Government of Iraq (GOI) for the equipping of four 
regiments of the Iraqi Army (IA) with an export version of 
the M1A1 main battle tank (MBT) via Foreign Military Sales 
(FMS). Each regiment will have 35 MBTs and the IA will retain 
an addition 20 MBTs for national reserve (total sale is 160 
MBTs). These armored units are included in the Ministry of 
Defense (MOD) Force Modernization Plan which will transform 
Iraqi Security Forces (ISF) from a limited counter-insurgency 
force into a more robust self-defense force over the next 
decade. The GOI will use this equipment to provide for its 
own security and defend against the insurgent threat. The 
plan includes provisions for equipping, training, and basing 
and will have a significant positive impact on the 
improvement of the Iraqi Armed Forces. With the expansion of 
the ISF, these tanks will enhance the Iraqis' ability to 
identify and confront known threats, thereby reducing the 
requirement for direct Coalition Force (CF) engagement. End 
Summary. 
 
Security Goals 
-------------- 
 
3.(SBU) This purchase supports the modernization and 
generation of four armored IA units or regiments with 35 
tanks each, plus a national logistics reserve of 20 tanks. 
Additionally, since these armored units themselves are not 
all encompassing, they will require the assistance of motor 
transport regiments and third and fourth line maintenance 
facilities to move long distances and to fix, repair, or 
replace equipment.  The four regiments will be assigned to 
existing Iraqi Army divisions to be identified at a later 
date.  The Iraqi Armed Forces (ISF) are projected to 
integrate the acquisition of this equipment with trained 
personnel after 2009 in order to offset U.S. and Coalition 
Force (CF) requirements.  The Embassy Country Team supports a 
full and immediate release of the required equipment, and the 
building of facilities and ranges; as well as any required 
training for officers, non-commissioned officers and soldiers 
to establish these organizations and operate this equipment. 
 
Justification 
------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The generation and fielding of these units will 
enhance Iraq's development of a force capable of assuming the 
lead role in internal offensive and defensive missions, 
securing the nation of Iraq, ensuring the security of the 
Iraqi population, and countering the existing insurgency. 
Regarding the latter, the MBT's considerable armor protects 
against the small arms and light weapons most commonly 
available to the insurgent forces, including rocket propelled 
grenades.  With this armored protection, MBTs help a combined 
arms team to outmatch insurgents decisively.  The MBT's main 
gun and assortment of machine guns provide shock effect and 
firepower for the combined arms team.  MBTs and infantry are 
mutually supporting in the urban combat that has been typical 
of counterinsurgency operations in Iraq. In a recent example, 
MNF-I employed MBTs to protect construction crews building 
security walls in Sadr City from sniper and RPG threats. 
 
CENTCOM Concurrence 
------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Combatant Commander,s (CENTCOM) assessment and 
concurrence will be provided separately. 
 
Anticipated Reaction from Neighbors 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Country Team does not anticipate that the 
development of these new units will adversely affect the 
regional balance of power with neighboring nations or cause 
negative reactions from other nations. This is based, in 
part, by the current estimate of MBTs in the region, shown 
below: 
 
Turkey - 4132 
Israel - 3800 
Iran - 1822 
Saudi Arabia - 915 (of which 315 M1A2 and 73 M1A1) 
Jordan - 835 
Kuwait - 218 (of which 218 M1A2) 
Iraq - 160 (after this proposed sale) 
 
Technology Accountability and Responsibility 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Iraq has demonstrated both the intent and ability to 
protect sensitive and classified military technology since 
working with U.S. and Coalition Forces.  The Foreign 
Assistance Act, Section 505 agreement, signed by the GOI on 
24 July 2004, demonstrates Iraq,s commitment to protect 
grant defense articles and technology similar to our 
standards. We will continue to monitor the GOI on their 
protection of sensitive U.S. Government (USG) technology in 
order to provide long-term security cooperation with Iraq. 
We will obtain all necessary formal agreements with the GOI 
before transferring any sensitive equipment or technology. 
We will also continue to carry out a robust Enhanced End-Use 
Monitoring (EEUM) program for equipping these armored units. 
The Country Team understands that the following technologies 
are classified or considered sensitive: 
 
   - Base Vehicle: M1A1 Abrams with Situational Awareness 
(SA) Package 
   - Exportable version 2nd Generation Forward Looking 
Infrared (FLIR) Gunners Primary Sight and Commander's 
Integrated Thermal Viewer 
   - Non-Depleted Uranium Export Special Armor in sealed 
modules and serialized removable subassemblies 
   - Selected releasable Tank Urban Survivability Kit (TUSK) 
components 
   - Ammunition: 120mm APFSDS Tungsten and 120mm M830A1 HEAT 
 
 
Iraq's Political Importance in the Region 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) A stable, democratically-elected Iraqi government, 
capable of protecting its people and sovereignty while 
remaining at peace with its neighbors is one of the USG,s 
highest priority foreign policy objectives. The establishment 
and implementation of these force modernization units will 
facilitate progress towards that goal by increasing the Iraqi 
Army's ability to provide security and other key military 
operations against anti-Iraqi forces, while significantly 
reducing the risk to itself and others. 
 
Source of Financing and Economic Impact 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) This purchase will be financed by the GOI with Iraqi 
national funds.  The cost is estimated at $2.0 Billion 
dollars  CY2009 funds (as rough order of magnitude). We do 
not envision that USG approval of this technology release 
will in any way adversely affect either Iraqi or USG 
programmed funding. There is no significant economic impact 
based upon our analysis processes in anticipation of these 
critical FMS cases. 
 
Relevant Human Rights Considerations 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) There are no human rights considerations that would 
preclude the release of this equipment to the Iraqi military. 
 
End Use Monitoring 
------------------ 
 
¶11. (SBU) Sensitive items identified and described in 
paragraph 7 are subject to end user monitoring as agreed upon 
between host nation and the multi-national coalition forces 
and alignment with the security assistance office policy and 
procedures guidance. 
 
Country Team Assessment 
----------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) The Country Team recommends the United States 
Government approve the establishment of the four (4) force 
modernization units and field 160 M1A1 main battle tanks. 
 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Embassy Country Team requests the Department 
engage with the Deputy Secretary of the Army for Defense 
Export Cooperation and other relevant offices to approve the 
full and immediate release the creation and generation of the 
four (4 force modernization units authenticated and signed by 
the Iraqi Minister of Defense. 
CROCKER