08BEIJING2795
JULY 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SUDAN, DIAOYU ISLANDS, IVORY
Thu Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0272
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2795/01 1992254
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 172254Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8652
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002795 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY PHUM CH
SUBJECT: JULY 17 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SUDAN, DIAOYU ISLANDS, IVORY 
IMPORTS, TAIWAN ARMS SALES, IRAN 
 
¶1.  Key points at the July 17 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- China is willing to exchange views with "relevant countries" who 
seek to avoid the indictment of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir if 
Sudan hands over other war criminals. 
 
-- China holds that it has "indisputable sovereignty" over the 
Diaoyu islands, and seeks to work with Japan to solve the dispute 
over the islands. 
 
-- Asked to comment on NGO condemnation regarding a recent report 
that a UN panel will allow China to import African ivory, the 
spokesman said that China has implemented strict laws against 
illegal smuggling and sales of animal products, including ivory. 
 
-- Asked about reports that the U.S. will suspend arms sales to 
Taiwan, the spokesman urged the U.S. to "honor the principles of the 
three joint communiqus and not do anything to undermine China-US 
military relations." 
 
-- China welcomes the U.S. decision to send U/S Burns to the meeting 
between the EU High Representative Javier Solana and Iranian Chief 
Nuclear Negotiator Saeed Jalili in Geneva July 19. 
 
Darfur 
------ 
 
¶2. Asked whether China will support members of the UN Security 
Council seeking to avoid the indictment of Sudanese President Omar 
al-Bashir if Sudan hands over other war criminals, spokesman Liu 
Jianchao said that China is concerned about the situation in Darfur 
and that the situation "should not be complicated by this move." 
Countries have differing views on this topic and "relevant 
countries" are discussing how to move ahead. China is willing to 
exchange views on this issue and has one purpose, "to safeguard 
peace and stability in Sudan and realize peace, stability and 
development of the Darfur region." 
 
China - Japan Dispute over Diaoyu Islands 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. China holds that it has "indisputable sovereignty" over the 
Diaoyu islands, said Liu.  China wants to work with Japan to solve 
the dispute over the islands and negotiate to find a resolution. In 
response to questions regarding reports that at least four Japanese 
textbooks claim the islands are Japanese territory, Liu said he had 
not seen any of the textbooks, but if they claim that the Diaoyu 
islands belong to Japan then it demonstrates that "Japan and China 
have differing positions on this issue." 
 
UN Panel agrees to allow China to import Africa ivory 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶4. Asked about the condemnation coming from NGOs regarding a recent 
report that a UN panel will allow China to import African ivory, Liu 
said that NGOs should report the truth and not incorrectly accuse 
China of wrongdoing.  The Chinese government wants to protect 
wildlife, including elephants, and has released a series of laws and 
regulations to stop illegal smuggling and the sale of illegal 
wildlife products.  These laws have had "obvious results" and sales 
have "plummeted remarkably," Liu said. 
 
¶5.  Asked about a report that two Chinese women were detained and 
questioned in the Nairobi airport with over 30 pieces of illegal 
ivory, the spokesman said he had just read the relevant report and 
would have to check the details before making a statement.  It is 
the position of the Chinese government to crack down on the illegal 
smuggling and sale of ivory. 
 
Arms Sales to Taiwan 
-------------------- 
 
¶6. Asked about reports that the U.S. will suspend arms sales to 
Taiwan, Liu said China has reiterated its position many times on 
U.S. arms sales to Taiwan and will closely follow the developments. 
China urges the U.S. to "honor the principles of the three joint 
communiqus, in particular the August 27 joint communiqu, and not 
do anything to undermine China-US military relations." 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. Asked to comment on the U.S. decision to send U/S Burns to the 
meeting between the EU High Representative Javier Solana and Iranian 
Chief Nuclear Negotiator Saeed Jalili in Geneva July 19, Liu said 
that China welcomes the U.S. decision.  China has always wanted a 
peaceful resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue through diplomatic 
negotiation and hopes that relevant parties will "resume 
negotiations, enhance efforts and show flexibility" toward the 
long-term resolution of the issue. 
 
Veto against Sanctions for Zimbabwe 
 
BEIJING 00002795  002 OF 002 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Regarding U.S. displeasure with China's veto against sanctions 
for Zimbabwe, the spokesman said that China has clarified its 
position on the issue and the U.S. is clearly aware of China's 
position.  It is "natural that we have different positions," the 
spokesman said. 
 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶9. Asked about the possibility of the continuation of Xix-Party 
Talks in the coming week, the spokesman said that some countries 
have proposed holding a Six-Party Ministerial meeting on the 
sidelines of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF).  China and the relevant 
parties are consulting with one another on those proposals, but no 
details have been finalized. 
 
Dialogue with the Dalai Lama Envoy 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked about reports that the Dalai Lama envoy sees no point in 
continuing dialogue with Beijing, the spokesman told reporters to 
refer the question to the relevant authorities of the Central 
Government.  The government, Liu said, is sincere in its attempts to 
negotiate with the Dalai side and he wondered "the reason why" the 
Dalai envoy would make such comments. 
 
ROK Tourist shot in DPRK 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. Asked to comment on a report that a South Korean tourist was 
shot dead in the DPRK and whether China would support the ROK in 
asking for international support for an independent investigation of 
the incident, Liu said that he had read the relevant reports and 
hopes that the ROK and DPRK will seek a proper resolution through 
dialogue that will not affect the improvement of their bilateral 
relationship. 
 
Terrorism in China 
------------------ 
 
¶12. Asked whether weapons or plots were discovered when authorities 
broke up 12 terrorist cells this year in China, Liu said he did not 
have specific details of the incidents and those questions should be 
referred to the relevant authorities.  China's position remains that 
those engaged in terrorist activities shall be punished by law. 
 
Chinese FM Yang to visit Singapore, Tajikistan and U.S. 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶13. Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi will attend a Minister's 
meeting of ASEAN plus China at the invitation of Singapore's Prime 
Minister Lee Hsien Loong from July 22 - 30.  Asked who will 
accompany Yang to the ASEAN meeting, Liu said that the decision has 
not been made, but usually the officials responsible for the 
relevant departments of regional affairs accompany Yang. 
 
¶14. Yang will also attend a meeting and pay an official visit to 
Tajikistan at the invitation of Tajik Foreign Minister Hamrokhon 
Zarifi. Following those meetings, Yang will visit the United States, 
at the invitation of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. When asked 
the exact date of the visit to the United States, the spokesman said 
he did not have the specific agenda, but "believed" Yang would be in 
the U.S. around July 28. 
 
Chinese Assistant Foreign Minister Liu to visit Geneva 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶15. Chinese Assistant Foreign Minister Liu Jieyi, together with the 
political Director Generals of the U.S., Russia, UK, Germany and 
France, will attend a meeting between the EU High Representative 
Javier Solana and Iranian Chief Nuclear Negotiator Saeed Jalili in 
Geneva July 19. 
 
 
RANDT