08BOGOTA2674
COLOMBIA'S JUNGLAS -- ANTINARCOTICS POLICE WITH AN
Thu Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #2674/01 2062104
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 242104Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3755
INFO RHEHOND/DIR ONDCP WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL//SCJ2/SCJ3/SCJ5//
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHDC
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 9062
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0096
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 7074UNCLAS BOGOTA 002674 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INL/LP AND WHA/AND 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PGOV PREL KCRM PTER MX EC AF CO
SUBJECT:  COLOMBIA'S JUNGLAS -- ANTINARCOTICS POLICE WITH AN 
INTERNATIONAL IMPACT 
 
REFTEL: BOGOTA 1988 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  While recent GOC success liberating the hostages 
has persuasively demonstrated the enormous operational strides made 
by Colombian Army intelligence forces, GOC Special Forces 
proficiency extends beyond the Colombian Army.  The Narcotics 
Affairs Section (NAS) Bogota-supported elite Jungla units (Colombian 
Antinarcotics Police Commandos) employ dedicated intelligence 
support and helicopters to interdict large quantities of illegal 
narcotics and destroy drug production facilities throughout 
Colombia.  The Junglas are often the force of choice for GOC and USG 
authorities seeking to capture High Value Targets (HVT), such as 
narcotrafficking and guerrilla leaders.  The Junglas have also 
deployed to help protect high-risk manual eradication operations. 
USG-supported Jungla international training courses and mobile 
training teams enhance the professionalization of regional neighbors 
and important U.S. partners, including Afghanistan and Mexico.  The 
high degree of self-reliance and superb Jungla training regimen make 
the Junglas one of the Embassy's most effective and nationalized 
programs.  END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
Internationally Recognized Professionals 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (SBU) Widely considered to be among the finest Special Forces 
units in Latin America, over a dozen Colombian and foreign 
newspapers, magazines, and television programs have profiled the 
Junglas in the last year alone.  The Junglas consist of 500 
specially selected and trained policemen divided into three regional 
companies (Bogota, Santa Marta, and Tulua) and at each location are 
supported by Colombian Antinarcotics Police (DIRAN in Spanish) 
assigned aircraft.  Jungla tactical equipment, much of it supplied 
by NAS as part of Plan Colombia, has provided them a distinct 
tactical advantage over narcoterrorist threats.  Jungla individual 
equipment models those used by U.S. Army Special Forces soldiers, 
and includes latest generation weapon systems, encrypted 
communications, and protective equipment to enhance survivability. 
Jungla personnel also undergo regular human rights training and 
vetting, both as part of local courses and U.S. training. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Intelligence and Air Mobility 
Key to Mission Success 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Intelligence and air mobility (See Reftel) are key to 
successful Junglas operations.  The Junglas depend heavily on Drug 
Enforcement Administration (DEA) and DIRAN- provided intelligence, 
as well as NAS-supported police aviation assets, to identify and 
reach otherwise inaccessible narcotics targets.  Intelligence 
officers work closely with the Junglas to screen informants and 
analyze intelligence to locate cocaine hydrochloride (HCl) labs 
hidden under jungle canopy and typically holding at least $500,000 
USD in infrastructure investment, plus large quantities of cocaine. 
Although informants are the most reliable method for locating these 
remote targets, the DIRAN's C-26 Intelligence Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance (ISR) fixed-wing aircraft also contribute 
significantly to Jungla operations.  This aircraft, equipped with 
infrared and communications intercept equipment, helps develop 
intelligence prior to each operation.  DIRAN's Air Intelligence 
Analysis Center then uses C-26 generated information to develop 
target packages for the Junglas.  During operations, well trained 
police helicopter pilots deliver Junglas to the target while the 
C-26 serves as an airborne command and control aircraft. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Record Interdiction Successes at 2008 Midpoint 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Jungla units have grown in both strength and effectiveness 
in recent years.  In 2007, they achieved their highest interdiction 
numbers to date as they destroyed 62 HCl labs and 821 base labs, 
while also seizing over 28 metric tons of cocaine and 11 metric tons 
of marijuana.  While 2007 showed very good results, the Junglas may 
do even better in 2008.  To date, the Junglas have: 1) more than 
doubled 2007 seizures of marijuana to a current total of 25 metric 
tons; 2) equaled last year's total cocaine seizures of 28 metric 
 
tons; and 3) destroyed over 800 combined HCl and base labs.  These 
impressive accomplishments put the Junglas on track to far exceed 
previous year interdiction results. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
The Force of Choice for High Profile Missions 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The specialized training, high alert status and inherent 
air mobility assets of the Junglas make them a natural choice for 
time-sensitive and complex HVT missions, as well as for protecting 
vulnerable manual eradicators.  Their efforts have helped lead to 
the capture of leaders of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia 
(FARC), National Liberation Army (ELN), Self-Defense Forces of 
Colombia (AUC), and other major narcotrafficking groups in recent 
years.  The Junglas often execute these HVT missions jointly with 
the Colombian military, and in particular the Colombian Air Force. 
As the GOC has increased its emphasis on manual eradication, 
narcoterrorist groups have similarly raised their efforts to counter 
these operations with mines, small arms, and mortar fire.  When 
manual eradication efforts in Caucasia, Antioquia were struggling 
due to repeated guerrilla attacks in February 2008, the Junglas 
deployed to improve the local security situation - a task they 
successfully accomplished - but at a cost of two Junglas killed and 
five wounded. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Training for Success and Assisting U.S. Partners 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (SBU) A fifty-man Jungla instructor cadre augmented by a small 
team of U.S. Army Special Forces personnel run the 18-week Jungla 
training program.  The program focuses on improving Jungla advanced 
skills and incorporating new technologies and lessons learned from 
around the world into the training.  Jungla instructors are drawn 
from experienced members of the operational companies and can 
receive assignments for up to five years before returning to the 
operational units.  Specialized training in the course includes 
small arms employment, drug lab destruction, night operations, small 
unit tactics, demolitions, and medical training.  Selected Jungla 
personnel also receive advanced training at the Western Hemisphere 
Institute for Security Cooperation (WHINSEC) at Fort Benning, 
Georgia and at the Inter-American Air Forces Academy (IAAFA), in San 
Antonio, Texas.  Beginning in 2007, the Jungla School opened its 
doors to international students, training to date 70 students from 
eleven Latin American countries and Afghanistan.  In 2006 and 2007, 
the Junglas sent Mobile Training Teams (MTTs) to work with 
U.S.-sponsored Narcotics Interdiction Units in Kabul, Afghanistan 
and Baeza, Ecuador.  The Mexico Police Academy is currently hosting 
a nine-man Jungla Instructor MTT that is training 60 Mexican 
policemen through August 2008 in Jalisco. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
A Bright Future 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The Jungla Program is one of NAS's most "sustainably 
nationalized" programs.  USG assistance channels through a single 
Department of State field advisor who directly works with Colombian 
National Police commanders to coordinate training, operational 
assistance, and logistical support.  Jungla training is led by their 
own instructors, operational missions are planned and conducted by 
their host nation chain of command, and the increasing frequency of 
joint operations allows the GOC to leverage different service 
capabilities to accomplish complex missions in the most efficient 
and effective manner.  While USG logistical support is still present 
and essential, its importance will diminish as the GOC assumes 
increasing responsibility for these functions in the years to come. 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) COMMENT:  The Jungla program directly compliments the 
overall USG antinarcotics effort in Colombia, including aerial 
eradication, manual eradication, and air bridge denial.  NAS Bogota 
expects to deliver three more upgraded C-26s to DIRAN within the 
next year.  The many Jungla contributions to antinarcotics efforts, 
both in Colombia and on the international scene, demonstrate the 
high return that this sustained USG investment continues to yield. 
 
BROWNFIELD