08KHARTOUM969
DARFURI MILLIONAIRE PHILANTHROPIST DISCUSSES MODEL
Tue Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7170
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0969/01 1831143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011143Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1200
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000969 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, S/CRS, SE WILLIAMSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PREF PHUM SU
SUBJECT: DARFURI MILLIONAIRE PHILANTHROPIST DISCUSSES MODEL 
VILLAGES, DARFUR CONFERENCE, AND FORCED ALLEGIANCE TO NCP 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  On June 27, Darfuri millionaire entrepreneur 
Sadiq Adam Abdullah (aka Sadiq Widaa') told poloff in London that 
his successful investment in his hometown of Kalimendo, North Darfur 
can serve as a model for development in all of Darfur.  Widaa' 
encouraged the CDA and USAID Mission Director to visit this region 
with his support, though he cautioned, "the Government will not want 
you to go, as they want to take credit for everything - they don't 
want you to see what is possible."  Widaa' also discussed his active 
involvement with Darfur's rebel, civil society, and janjaweed 
leaders, proposing to host an independent conference for 100 of them 
in London in three to four months.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  BIONOTE:  Real estate developer and entrepreneur Sadiq 
Widaa' is one of the wealthiest businessmen to come from Darfur.  He 
resides in London where he oversees a number of businesses and 
substantial properties, including Curzon Place Properties.  He also 
has investments in France, Switzerland, Dubai, Egypt and Sudan. 
Widaa' met with CDA Fernandez in his last visit to Sudan in July 
¶2007.  Shortly after on July 31, local newspapers reported that 
Widaa' pledged his allegiance to the National Congress Party, 
something Widaa' states he was forced into by leaders of the regime 
such as Presidential Advisor Dr. Nafie Ali Nafie. 
 
KALIMENDO AS A MODEL FOR DARFUR 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶3.  (U)  Widaa' stated that he invested approximately 15 million USD 
in Kalimendo in health, education, agricultural, and general 
infrastructure projects.  According to Widaa', despite many 
logistical and governmental hurdles, the project has succeeded and 
Kalimendo can serve as an example for the wider region.  For 
example, Widaa' noted that he drilled over ten wells in the region, 
which have supplemented rain fed agriculture and changed the way 
people live and work.  Widaa' argued that there are areas stable 
enough for similar development in other parts of Darfur and stated 
that poverty is one of the core causes of the conflict.  Without 
looking past immediate humanitarian aid to development, the conflict 
will never be resolved, said Widaa'. Poloff questioned whether 
disproportionate development could skew the settling patterns of 
returning IDPS, encourage banditry, and attract rebels.  Widaa' 
responded that while these are all possibilities, these phenomena 
have not occurred in Kalimendo and should not be taken as an excuse 
not to develop parts of Darfur. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Widaa' requested that the USAID Mission Director and CDA 
visit Kalimendo as soon as possible, promising that he could help 
provide helicopter transport.  He said he would not be able to 
return to Darfur in the near future as "there are some political 
problems that prevent me from traveling there for now."  He stated 
that "The GoS will not want you to see Kalimendo as it is an example 
of how Darfur's problems might be solved." He added, "the Government 
wants to take credit for everything and they will not want you to 
see what is possible." 
 
THREATENED BY THE REGIME 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶5.  (SBU)  Widaa' stated that he is not "a political man," and that 
the GoS is scared of wealthy individuals from Darfur.  According to 
Widaa', the government "co-opted my work and Dr. Nafie and others in 
the regime forced me to pledge my allegiance to them, threatening 
that otherwise they would destroy my investment." Widaa' stated that 
Sudan will never be stable if "it remains in the shadow of the NCP." 
 
 
FOCUS ON UNIFICATION, SAYS "FRIEND OF THE MOVEMENTS" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶6.  Widaa' stated that he is "a friend of the movements" who sees a 
real possibility of unifying the rebels soon.  (Note:  Some 
observers have accused Widaa' of funding rebel movements.  End 
Note.)  He stated that he was in Abuja during the DPA negotiations 
and sees a real change in the environment between then and now. 
Widaa' stated that he believes that the U.S. can play an important 
role in unifying the movements.  Widaa' added that although he has 
respect for the movements, he believes that most of their leaders 
are not qualified to be political leaders, and need to be told that. 
 
 
POSSIBLE DARFUR CONFERENCE IN LONDON 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶7. (SBU)  Widaa' said that he continues to be in communication with 
many of Darfur's important political players.  He stated that he 
hosted a large dinner for many prominent Sudanese rebel leaders on 
June 26 and that he will continue to try to be a productive force in 
the region.  He said that he plans to organize a conference for 
approximately 100 Darfur civil society representatives, rebel 
leaders, and Arab militiamen in three to four months in London. The 
government will not be invited to participate in this first meeting, 
stated Widaa'. Poloff raised the logistical and financial 
 
KHARTOUM 00000969  002 OF 002 
 
 
constraints of such a large conference, and stated that the AU/UN 
and international community could be valuable partners in such an 
endeavor.  Widaa' said that the question of money should not be an 
issue, but that he would appreciate the involvement of the U.S. and 
the new chief mediator.  Widaa' said that this initiative should be 
carried out in a very discrete way "as the GoS will try to undermine 
it."  Widaa' stated that he is worried about the position of Minni 
Minnawi.  "I know that some of the rebel leaders are rejoicing about 
Minni's move, but this is not a victory for them. If Minni goes 
back, that brings us back to the very beginning of this mess.  This 
will encourage the movements and make them think that they can 
actually topple the government," stated Widaa'. Widaa' also said 
that he has been in communication with Abdul Wahid and Khalil 
Ibrahim, describing Ibrahim as "stuck in a tough place." 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - - 
¶8.  (SBU)  Widaa' is a paradoxical figure. In the same breath he 
appears comfortable describing exclusive London properties and 
Darfur's wells.  He commands deals worth millions, but struggled 
ordering coffee with his extremely limited command of English. He 
has publicly sworn to support the government, but privately condemns 
the regime. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  If he actually follows through on his grandiose plans, a 
private Darfur conference hosted, paid for, and organized by Widaa' 
could be useful if done sooner, rather than later.  This initiative 
outside of Sudan could provide the rare opportunity of bringing the 
rebels and some of the community leaders they supposedly represent 
face to face, possibly in the presence of international observers. 
The timing may also be appropriate as it may take several months for 
the new chief mediator to get up and running. All of this, of 
course, should be conducted in coordination with the AU/UN, but 
would probably be more effective as an independent conference apart 
from official mediation efforts.  Widaa' does not appear to 
understand the intricacies of the international community's 
involvement in Sudan nor the larger questions of political 
maneuvering that will be required for any final resolution to 
Darfur's problems.  Nonetheless, Widaa's nonpartisan, pragmatic, and 
"can-do" approach to Darfur is refreshing and should be encouraged, 
especially if he is willing to bankroll independent initiatives that 
have the advantage of coming from a Darfuri rather than the 
international community. 
 
FERNANDEZ