08MEXICO2184
U/S JEFFERY'S VISIT TO MEXICO: THANK YOU FOR
Wed Jul 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXRO9180
PP RUEHCD RUEHGD RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG RUEHNL RUEHRD RUEHRS RUEHTM
DE RUEHME #2184/01 1981645
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 161645Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2584
INFO RUEHXC/ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MEXICO 002184 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR E UNDER SECRETARY JEFFERY 
STATE FOR WHA/FO FOR TOM SHANNON 
STATE FOR WHA/MEX FOR LIZ WOLFSON 
STATE FOR WHA/EPSC 
STATE FOR EB/ESC MCMANUS AND IZZO 
USDOC FOR 4320/ITA/MAC/WH/ONAFTA/GWORD 
USDOC FOR ITS/TD/ENERGY DIVISION 
TREASURY FOR IA (RACHEL JARPE AND LUYEN TRAN) 
DOE FOR INTL AFFAIRS ALOCKWOOD, AND GWARD 
STATE PASS USTR FOR EISSENSTAT/MELLE/SHIGETOMI 
STATE PASS FEDERAL RESERVE (ANDREA RAFFO) 
NSC FOR RICHARD MILES, DAN FISK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/15/2018 
TAGS: ECON ENRG PREL MX
SUBJECT: U/S JEFFERY'S VISIT TO MEXICO: THANK YOU FOR 
SILENCE ON ENERGY DEBATE; BIOFUEL QUESTIONS 
 
Classified By: A/DCM ISIAH PARNELL FOR REASONS 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: U/S Jeffery visited Mexico City on July 
10-11 where he met with officials from the Mexican 
Secretariats of Finance (Hacienda), Agriculture (SAGARPA), 
and Energy (SENER), as well as the head of Petroleos 
Mexicanos (PEMEX), the state oil company.  Energy and 
biofuels were the key topics during the visit.  Mexican 
interlocutors expressed their gratitude that the USG has 
refrained from commenting on Mexico's energy reform proposal. 
 They were also candid in their evaluation of Pemex's 
challenges and oil production.  They conveyed their 
displeasure with current USG biofuel policy and the diverting 
of corn for energy while food prices are so high, though 
conceded that the high prices encourage rural investment. U/S 
Jeffery also had an opportunity to meet with business 
leaders, Bank of Mexico officials, and analysts to discuss 
the current global economic situation and the effect on the 
Mexican economy.  END SUMMARY 
 
Mexicans: Thank You For Not Commenting on Energy Reform 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Jesus Reyes Heroles, Director General for Pemex, was 
one of several officials to express his gratitude that the 
USG has kept out of the current energy debate.  He explained 
that energy discussions are extremely political given 
historic sensitivities and the "sovereignty chip" that many 
Mexicans have regarding oil and Pemex.  He said that the lack 
of public comments from both the USG and the Mexican private 
sector have made it easier to negotiate with the opposition. 
SENER U/S for Energy Planning and Technological Development, 
Jordy Herrera, commented that "the best way to help in energy 
reform is to leave (Mexican) Congressmen alone". Herrera said 
that the PRI party will be having their national assembly on 
August 23rd, which will give the Calderon Administration a 
better idea of whether/how its energy reform proposal will 
prosper.  Herrera remained optimistic that the reform would 
ultimately pass, though uncertain of its final form. 
 
Pemex, Energy Reform, and Oil Production 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Reyes Heroles said that Pemex officials see the 
ongoing debate on energy reform as positive, since it makes 
the public more aware of Pemex's vulnerable situation.  He 
said that he would be satisfied with the modest reform that 
changes corporate governance (through the addition of 
independent members to the board of directors) and grants the 
freedom to budget and contract debt without having to jump 
through the bureaucratic hoops mandated by the current Public 
Works Law and without Hacienda's approval.  In addition to 
the reform, he said that he is also making an effort to 
change the company's image as well as train and improve its 
human capital.  He noted that the previous administration did 
not leave any projects in the works, and due to lack of 
pipelines, gasoline is being moved increasingly by costly and 
inefficient trucks.  He noted that no new refineries have 
been built in 16 years and expressed his frustration at the 
slow pace of Pemex development and likened it to "watching 
good opportunities pass by". He said that with such 
second-rate performance it is very difficult for Pemex to 
compete in the global market. 
 
¶4.  (C) With regard to oil production, Reyes Heroles 
explained that technical problems and terrorist attacks have 
had a negative impact on production in the past year. He said 
that although the problems have been resolved, it is unlikely 
that Pemex will achieve its goal of 3 million barrels per day 
(bpd) for 2008.  He stressed, however, that the goal will 
remain 3 million bpd to encourage increased production for 
the remainder of the year.  SENER's Herrera also commented on 
oil production, saying it will likely reach only 2.7 million 
bpd because Cantarell is declining faster than expected and 
new sources have not been found as quickly.  He said that 
Cantarell production is expected to decline by 50% in the 
next 4-5 years and then stabilize. 
 
¶5. (C) Herrera also commented on the issue of Mexican 
subsidies.  He admitted that they were untenable because the 
high cost of shipping fuel around the country is making it 
hard for the GOM to meet demand at current prices and 
consumption levels.  Despite this, he felt that in the short 
term the GOM will not eliminate the subsidies due to 
inflationary concerns. 
 
¶6. (C) Both Reyes Heroles and Herrera admitted that pipeline 
security is a problem.  Reyes Heroles said that it would take 
approximately 3 years to have a system that is less 
vulnerable to attacks whereas Herrera said "There is no way 
we can protect facilities.  We don't have the money or the 
capabilities."  Herrera explained that the GOM is not 
accustomed to attacks like those of last summer and while the 
Interior Ministry had a plan, it involved the use of military 
assets and would have been too expensive.  Also, the lack of 
coordination between federal, state, and local authorities 
compounds the problem.  He said that they are developing 
technology that by next year will hopefully provide 
assistance and that Mexicans have been working with DHS and 
DOE on critical infrastructure protection.  They are waiting 
until the end of the energy reform debate to move on to the 
next stage of cooperation involving a visit by Mexican Energy 
Secretary Georgina Kessel to the U.S. to discuss technology 
sharing. 
 
Biofuels a Hot Topic 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Biofuels, specifically USG support for production of 
corn-based ethanol, was raised at every meeting attended by 
U/S Jeffery.  SAGAPRA U/S for Agriculture, Francisco Lopez 
Tostado, expressed his concern that current U.S. biofuel 
policy will contribute to a further rise in food prices 
through its effect on supply.  He also worried that Mexico's 
supply of grain, which relies heavily on imports from the 
U.S., is being determined in part by a policy that the GOM 
has no ability to influence.  Reyes Heroles questioned the 
environmental benefits of ethanol.  He referenced studies 
that showed that ethanol did not provide as much of an 
environmental gain as previously thought. 
 
¶8. (C) The officials also noted that Mexico has its own 
biofuels law, passed in October 2007. Tostado noted that the 
law restricts corn-based ethanol production.  He said that 
Mexico is looking into sugar-based or 2nd and 3rd generation 
production methods.  He added that Mexico's biofuel system is 
geared toward managing surpluses, not competing with market 
demand.  Hacienda Secretary Agustin Carstens noted the 
challenges associated with biofuel development in Mexico 
caused by the lack of agricultural productivity and the 
politicization of agriculture policy.  SENER's Herrera 
explained that Mexico is looking for biofuels that will not 
use corn or imports and that sugar is problematic because 
prices are set by law.  He said that they are looking into 
using algae or jatropha for biofuels, including diesel.  They 
will start with a target of 2% ethanol content in gasoline in 
the major metropolitan markets of Guadalajara, Monterrey, and 
Mexico City by 2010 and then evaluate their progress. 
Herrera noted that Mexico will host the 2nd annual 
international conference on biofuels next year. 
 
High Food Prices Can Be Positive 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) In meetings with both Hacienda and SAGARPA, Carstens 
and Lopez Tostado noted that, while high food prices pose a 
problem, they also provide a production incentive and 
encourage greater investment in rural agriculture, something 
that has been missing in Mexico.  Tostado said that the GOM 
is trying to take advantage of current prices for the benefit 
of the producer, while at the same time providing some 
protection to the consumer.  He said that Mexico is expanding 
production but is not currently able to meet its own demand. 
He feels that technology will be important in increasing 
production and solving the current food price problems.  He 
discussed a proposal by regional Agriculture Ministers that 
would call for technology sharing via the FAO. 
 
BOM Officials, Analyst Discuss Mexican Economic Outlook 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶10.  (C) U/S Jeffery met with officials from the Bank of 
Mexico (BOM), including Deputy Governor Guillermo Guemez. 
Guemez said that Mexico's economic outlook is similar to the 
rest of the world except that the rise in food prices affects 
Mexico more acutely due to high poverty levels here.  He 
further said that, while inflation is currently around 5%, it 
would be closer to 8% but for the subsidies on gas and 
diesel.  Guemez noted that recent exchange rate fluctuations 
have benefited Mexico in U.S. markets because Mexican goods 
generally compete with imported goods from countries whose 
currencies have appreciated more quickly versus the dollar. 
He also commented that while growth in remittances has 
declined, the decline is false in that the recent increases 
were due to better data capturing. Guemez said that Mexico 
has a good opportunity now that high oil prices are cutting 
into China's competitive edge, but Mexico could miss the 
opportunity unless it deals with issues such as 
infrastructure and border wait 
times. 
 
¶10. (C) Analysts echoed the sentiments of BOM officials and 
provided a lively discussion on the prospects of energy 
reform, inflation and growth, and the overall success of the 
Calderon Administration thus far. They felt that the energy 
reform proposal, like other Calderon economic initiatives, 
was weak.  Rogelio Ramirez de la O, a former economic advisor 
to failed leftist presidential candidate Andres Manuel Lopez 
Obrador, felt that parts of the reform, specifically the 
additional independent advisor, would make Pemex less, not 
more, effective.  The analysts agreed that Calderon did not 
fully utilize his political capital and his plurality in the 
Senate to pass stronger reforms and thereby wasted an 
important opportunity to improve competitiveness during his 
presidency.  The analysts believed that the BOM will raise 
interest rates in the near future to counter inflation, 
though Sergio Luna Martinez, an economist at Banamex, 
predicted that the BOM will wait another month before doing 
so.  The analysts agreed with Rogelio Ramirez's assertion 
that the economic situation is currently very volatile and it 
will be difficult for the next 12-18 months. 
 
AmCham Raises Energy and Competitiveness Issues 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Members of the AmCham stated that their main issue 
is energy costs.  They also asked about alternative energy 
sources and USG plans to cope with high oil prices. 
Competitiveness was an important topic for the group, and the 
U/S, along with Embassy officials present, spoke about the 
current steps being taken to facilitate border trade in light 
of the need for heightened security at the border. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
12 (C) U/S Jeffery's visit touched on two politically 
sensitive issues in Mexico, energy and corn.  As repeatedly 
noted by the top Mexican officials during the visit, the 
biggest contribution the USG can make to the Calderon 
government's energy reform proposal is to stay out of the 
picture for the next few months as the congressional debates 
and mark-ups move toward a possible final vote.  Seven 
decades after the big foreign companies were kicked out and 
the oil industry nationalized, this subject still evokes a 
highly emotional nationalistic response across a large swath 
of the Mexican public and polity.  We cannot over-emphasize 
the probable negative reaction of any USG interventions - no 
matter how well-reasoned or intentioned - on this subject 
during this period.  Officials also clearly expressed their 
worry over USG subsidies for corn-based ethanol and the 
effect on corn exports to Mexico.  Somewhat surprisingly, the 
salmonella threat did not come up in meetings except when 
Tostado commented that our bilateral relationship is strong 
enough to overcome such health issues. 
Visit Mexico City's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/mexicocity and the North American 
Partnership Blog at http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/nap / 
GARZA