08PRETORIA1619
UNHCR MOVES SAG FORWARD ON ASSISTING ZIMBABWE
Thu Jul 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSA #1619/01 2061552
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241552Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5185
INFO RUEHOR/AMEMBASSY GABORONE 5307
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE 3690
RUEHLS/AMEMBASSY LUSAKA 3660
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 5904
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1265UNCLAS PRETORIA 001619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PREF SF
SUBJECT: UNHCR MOVES SAG FORWARD ON ASSISTING ZIMBABWE 
 
REFUGEES 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 74571 
     ¶B. PRETORIA 1397 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Press statements by the United Nations High 
Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) called attention to 
Zimbabweans fleeing to South Africa in growing numbers, some 
in whole family units and some with injuries from violence. 
UNHCR renewed appeals to the SAG to suspend deportations, 
give access to asylum seekers, provide registration 
documents, and fulfill its duties of care to refugees.  The 
Department of Home Affairs (DHA) responded with several 
positive steps, including creation of a refugee reception 
center near the Zimbabwe border and measures to facilitate 
asylum.  UNHCR Regional Rep Sanda Kimbimbi appreciated U.S. 
concern on these points but cautioned a demarche to the SAG 
would likely backfire.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Worrying Trends in Refugee Flows 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Press statements by the UNHCR in Geneva and Pretoria on 
July 11 called attention to growing numbers of Zimbabweans 
fleeing to SA, and to changing patterns in those flows.  On 
July 16 Regional Representative Sanda Kimbimbi explained to 
poloffs that UNHCR staff had monitored border posts as well 
as illegal transit routes over the past several months of the 
Zimbabwean electoral crisis.  Refugee flows had lately risen 
markedly, to 3,000-4,000 a week at a Johannesburg reception 
center.  Increasingly large groups were also gathering 
informally without shelter or assistance at Musina, just 
within the SA border.  Alongside the usual flow of adult 
males traveling alone seeking work, the profile now included 
more families, injured victims of violence, and persons 
seeking asylum.  The new dynamic was one of movement from a 
threat, rather than toward an opportunity.  Kimbimbi said, 
"People are now leaving Zimbabwe not by choice, but because 
they are forced to -- some by violence and threats, others by 
hardship and for their very survival." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
UNHCR to SAG: Suspend Deportation, Assist Asylum 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  In its July 11 statements and briefings to the SAG, 
UNHCR reiterated longtime appeals to the Department of Home 
Affairs (DHA) -- to suspend deportations, give greater access 
to the asylum application process, and issue refugees with 
official documents to avert detention.  UNHCR sources 
estimated SAG had deported 17,000 Zimbabweans in a 40-day 
period, and suspending these returns during that country's 
ongoing political crisis was UNHCR's top priority.  (Note: on 
the day of our meeting with UNHCR, Post received credible 
reports that DHA officers continued to deport Zimbabweans in 
significant numbers.)  In private meetings with senior DHA 
officials, UNHCR requested unfettered access to refugee 
reception centers, to identify and assist asylum candidates. 
Kimbimbi also warned DHA that its systems lacked capacity to 
handle new high volumes, and he advised that border offices 
were failing in their duty to screen deportees for asylum 
applicants. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  We summarized to Kimbimbi the Department's demarche 
cable (ref A) echoing and endorsing UNHCR concerns.  While 
Kimbimbi and his colleague Yusuf Hassan thanked the USG for 
its support, they felt the demarche would be 
counterproductive in the current negative climate of SAG-USG 
opposition over Zimbabwe in the Security Council.  More 
importantly, SAG had begun to take positive steps to heed 
importantly, SAG had begun to take positive steps to heed 
UNHCR's appeals, and Kimbimbi wanted to give these advances 
time to show results. 
 
-------------------------------- 
DHA Responds: Five Steps Forward 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Spurred by UNHCR field reports and a personal expression 
of concern from the High Commissioner, high-level DHA 
officials paid a flurry of visits to border areas on July 12 
and 13, resulting in several significant commitments to 
rectify treatment of Zimbabweans there: 
 
 
-- On July 16 DHA opened a refugee reception office at Musina 
(ten kilometers inside SA), sparing Zimbabweans the long 
journey to Pretoria and relieving long queues in the capital. 
 
-- DHA's deportation form has been modified to include an 
advisory of the right to apply for asylum, with a check box 
for aspiring migrants to indicate their wish to initiate an 
application with DHA. 
 
-- UNHCR will have full access to DHA centers, unannounced 
and unescorted, to identify and assist asylum candidates. 
This access will also extend to the two local NGOs who act as 
UNHCR's implementing partners in SA. 
 
-- Interviews of Zimbabweans by SAG intelligence agencies are 
henceforth suspended. 
 
-- To provide targeted attention to unaccompanied minors, 
especially very vulnerable girls, a new committee was due to 
meet on July 17 to coordinate responses by the Department of 
Social Development, police, immigration, and UNHCR. 
 
------------------------------------ 
'Contingency Plan' Still in Progress 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  In case of a massive influx of Zimbabwean refugees, UNHCR 
was pressing the SAG to get Contingency Plan preparations 
(ref B) back on track.  Promises made in April, for site 
clearance by the Army and utilities installation by the 
Department of Public Works, were unfulfilled.  DHA and 
National Disaster Management Center (NDMC) promised on July 
11 to reenergize these efforts and to revisit the site with 
UNHCR on July 23.  Kimbimbi lamented that UNHCR's $ 10 
million appeal for contingency preparations and supply stocks 
had received negligible support from donors. 
 
-----------------------------Q--------- 
IDPs: Reintegration Imminent (With Risks) 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Kimbimbi confirmed the SAG still planned to shut down by 
mid-August its shelter sites for victims displaced by May's 
xenophobic attacks.  Acknowledging that a large-scale return 
of foreigners to their former settlements could spark renewed 
violence, he added, "Of course, we hope not... but the 
question on reintegration is: what alternative is there?" 
SAG's standing policy affirms free movement and favors 
dispersion of new arrivals.  Explicitly against camps, the 
SAG dodged the notion in May until security considerations 
compelled their creation, and it then found them problematic 
to manage.  Increasing flows from Zimbabwe, especially if 
coupled with renewed tensions in townships, however, could 
renew pressure on the SAG to respond more quickly and once 
again resort to temporary shelter camps. 
 
 
BOST