08RIODEJANEIRO180
Petrobras Workers To Launch 5-Day Strike in Campos Basin,
Fri Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
VZCZCXRO5217
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHRI #0180 1931923
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111923Z JUL 08
FM AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4544
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0885
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 5169
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3441
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS RIO DE JANEIRO 000180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET EINV BR
SUBJECT: Petrobras Workers To Launch 5-Day Strike in Campos Basin, 
Nationwide Strike Under Consideration 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Workers for Brazil's oil giant Petrobras will begin a 
five-day strike in the Campos Basin on July 14.  The employees are 
demanding additional compensation for travel days used to depart oil 
platforms after 14-day shifts.  Separately, the oil workers union is 
considering a further nation-wide strike if their demands for a 
higher share of company profits are not met.  Negotiations between 
Petrobras and union representatives are ongoing.  The last 
significant nationwide strike of Petrobras workers in 2001 saw 
production seriously curtailed before an agreement was reached.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  On July 14, about 4,500 Brazilian oil workers will begin a 
five-day strike against Petrobras facilities in the prime 
oil-producing area of the Campos Basin.  The strike is part of a 
long-standing effort by workers to get full pay for the travel day 
on which they return to the mainland after completing a 14-day shift 
on platforms.   All forty-two of Petrobras' offshore rigs in the 
Campos Basin, the source of nearly 80 percent of Brazil's current 
oil production, will be affected by the strike.  (Note: Several 
international oil companies are partnered with Petrobras in the 
Campos Basin, including U.S. firms Chevron, Anadarko and El Paso.) 
"There will be minimal production if Petrobras accepts that the 
production is controlled by the workers but if the company tries to 
use its own teams, we will disconnect the equipment," union 
spokesman Marcos Brida said to press. 
 
¶3.  The Campos Basin strike is not expected to significantly hurt 
output since Petrobras has sufficient stocks built up to keep up 
refinery production during the strike.  More serious, however, is a 
possible five-day nationwide strike against Petrobras being 
considered by workers.  The United Oil Workers' Federation (FUP) 
umbrella union will meet on July 15 to discuss the possibility of a 
five-day nationwide strike at all Petrobras facilities, including 
refineries and terminals, to demand a bigger share of company 
profits for workers.  After a 24-hour warning strike on July 1, 
Petrobras labeled the union labor protest a hasty measure and called 
for talks to look for a solution. 
 
¶4.  According to FUP, workers are seeking at least 18 percent of 
what is paid to shareholders, citing that Petrobras' profits and 
market capitalization have been rising over the past few years, 
helped by record world oil prices and new production.  In 2007, 
Petrobras paid USD 527 million in profit sharing to employees.  But 
Petrobras argues that its costs, including labor, have also jumped 
due to the high cost of oil equipment and services prices.  Its 
latest proposal, offering a maximum of 12.8 percent, was rejected by 
FUP on July 9. 
 
¶5.  The last significant nationwide strike of Petrobras workers in 
2001 saw production seriously curtailed before an agreement was 
reached.  The five-day strike of seriously reduced output and forced 
Brazil to import additional oil.  Petrobras is hoping to avoid a 
similar occurrence; negotiations will continue next week during the 
Campos Basin strike. 
 
¶6.  This message was cleared/coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
HOLM-OLSEN