08STATE71974
BUILDING MOMENTUM FOR HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY
Thu Jul 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
R 032029Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
INFO EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVEUNCLAS STATE 071974 
 
 
SIPRNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM EUN CU
SUBJECT: BUILDING MOMENTUM FOR HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY 
IN CUBA - PRAISING THE EU,S NEW BENCHMARKS 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 5. 
 
¶2. (U) Summary.  The European Union,s recent policy 
statements on Cuba provide an opportunity to discuss respect 
for human rights and the need for democratic change in Cuba 
in Western Hemisphere countries. The EU placed respect for 
human rights at the center of its policy, acknowledged 
Cuba,s democratic opposition, and renewed its commitment to 
promote "real progress towards pluralist democracy" in Cuba. 
End Summary. 
 
¶3. (U) On June 10, the U.S.-EU Summit Declaration reaffirmed 
a Trans-Atlantic commitment to democracy and respect for 
human rights in Cuba:  "We encourage democratic processes in 
the countries of the region consistent with the 
Inter-American Democratic Charter. We welcome Cuba,s signing 
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
and urge the government to ratify the covenant and 
demonstrate its commitment by unconditionally releasing all 
political prisoners." 
 
¶4. (U) On June 23, the EU Council set aside "political 
sanctions" (restrictive measures) and offered to establish a 
political dialogue with the Cuban government linked to what 
we consider to be important human rights benchmarks: "The 
Council called upon the Cuban government to improve 
effectively the human rights situation by, inter alia, 
releasing unconditionally all political prisoners, including 
those who were detained and sentenced in 2003. This remains a 
key priority for the EU. It also calls upon the Cuban 
government to facilitate access of international humanitarian 
organizations to Cuban prisons. The Council further called 
upon the Cuban authorities to ratify and implement the 
recently signed International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and International Covenant on Economic, Social, and 
Cultural Rights and urged again the Cuban government to make 
real the commitment to human rights it has demonstrated 
through the signing of these two human rights covenants." In 
June 2009, the EU will continue its dialogue with the GOC if 
the EU Council decides it is effective, taking into account 
in particular the human rights benchmarks. The EU Council 
also reaffirmed its policy of contacts with Cuba,s 
democratic opposition. 
 
¶5. (U) ACTION REQUESTED:  Posts are encouraged to seek 
opportunities to discuss the EU,s policy statements with 
Host Governments, with human rights activists, and others as 
appropriate to explore ways to build international momentum 
in support of human rights and democratic change in Cuba. 
Emphasis should be placed on the common vision shared by the 
EU and the U.S. and link this vision to areas of commonality 
with the Western Hemisphere,s commitment to democracy, 
particularly the Inter-American Democratic Charter. Host 
Governments should be encouraged to use their influence with 
Cuba,s authorities to encourage the GOC to meet the EU,s 
human rights benchmarks. You are encouraged to be creative in 
suggesting ways Host Governments and others can broadly 
engage Cuban civil society. For example, some may be willing 
to talk with Cuba,s democratic opposition; others may be 
more open to approaches such as promoting university contacts 
with Cuba or allowing their diplomats be interviewed by 
independent (dissident) journalists in Cuba. 
 
Talking Points: 
 
-- The U.S. and the European Union share common objectives in 
Cuba: universal human rights and real progress towards 
pluralist democracy. These values are also shared in the 
Americas, a point underscored in the US-EU Summit statement 
by the specific reference to the Inter-American Democratic 
Charter. 
 
-- The June 10, 2008 U.S.-EU Summit Declaration reaffirmed 
this Trans-Atlantic commitment by urging the Cuban government 
to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and demonstrate its commitment by unconditionally 
releasing all political prisoners. 
 
-- Our shared goal with the European Union of the 
unconditional release of all political prisoners is important 
because it is a step that could help to create the conditions 
for a broad dialogue among Cubans on the island about the 
future of their country.  This is a process the Western 
Hemisphere can and should support. 
 
-- The European Union has set human rights benchmarks for its 
dialogue with the Cuban government, including:  the unconditional 
release of all political prisoners; implementation of the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; freedom 
of information for Cubans, especially open access to the 
Internet; and a "dual-track approach" of meeting with Cuba,s 
internal democratic opposition in addition to the Cuban 
government. 
 
-- We encourage your government to use your dialogue with 
Cuba,s authorities to reinforce the kind of principles 
reflected in the EU position. We hope you can encourage them 
to work to meet the EU,s human rights benchmarks, especially 
the release of political prisoners and a genuine embrace of 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
These are principles upon which all democratic nations should 
be able to agree and could help map a path for Cuba,s 
eventual return to the inter-American system. 
 
-- We also encourage you to consider creative ways you can 
reach out broadly to Cubans on the island and share your own 
democratic experience.  You can help Cuba,s civil society 
play a constructive role in a process of change. 
 
RICE