08STATE74375
URGENT DEMARCHE ON ZIMBABWE NEGOTIATIONS IN SOUTH
Thu Jul 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4375 1922254
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 102244Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 074375 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM ZI XA ZU
SUBJECT: URGENT DEMARCHE ON ZIMBABWE NEGOTIATIONS IN SOUTH 
AFRICA 
 
REF: A. STATE 70836 
     ¶B. STATE 73173 
 
¶1. (U) Summary and Action request:  On July 8, the U.S. 
tabled a draft Security Council resolution on Zimbabwe. 
The vote planned for July 9 was postponed for procedural 
reasons.  While not yet scheduled, the vote is likely on the 
morning of July 11.  The Russians and the Chinese continue to 
oppose the Chapter VII resolution, and allege that that it 
will undermine negotiations between the parties that began 
July 9 in South Africa.  We want to refute these arguments 
and make clear to all members of the Council that no 
substantive negotiations have begun.  Zimbabwe opposition 
leader Morgan Tsvangirai on Thursday denied that substantive 
negotiations had begun with the ruling ZANU-PF party of 
President Robert Mugabe.  Tsvangirai said in a statement that 
officials from his Movement for Democratic Change were merely 
presenting conditions for negotiations, including the end of 
violence against the opposition.  Council members must be 
reminded that these negotiations are not new (no positive 
results despite 15 months of negotiations), and that the 
proposed UNSC resolution is intended to support regional and 
international mediation efforts by strengthening the 
incentives for Mr. Mugabe to engage constructively in any 
future negotiations.  All action addressees (except Pretoria) 
are requested to demarche host governments at the 
Ambassadorial level on an urgent basis to confirm or solicit 
their support, as appropriate, for the resolution prior to 
the July 11 vote.  Posts are requested to respond as quickly 
as possible by e-mail or cables slugged for IO/UNP-Rebecca 
Goldenberg and IO/PSC Jean Clark.  End Summary and Action 
Request. 
 
¶2. (U) All action addressees (except Pretoria) may draw from 
the following talking points: 
 
-- Media reports have said that negotiations are taking place 
in South Africa between the Movement for Democratic Change 
(MDC) and the Government of Zimbabwe. 
 
-- MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai today denied these reports. 
He has told the media that, "over the past 10 
days, I and my party have stated categorically that there are 
no negotiations between ourselves and ZANU-PF 
currently taking place...This position has not changed." 
 
-- In a letter to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon on July 9, 
Tsvangirai said, &in this environment there can be 
no meaningful negotiations and as I write you today there is 
no dialogue between my party and ZANU PF.8  He expressed 
support for the draft UNSC resolution and for the appointment 
of a UN Special Envoy to assist in finding a solution to the 
crisis. 
 
-- In his statement on July 10, Tsvangirai clarified that the 
meeting taking place in Pretoria is &solely to present the 
five conditions under which genuine negotiations can take 
place.8  These conditions include an end to the violence, 
the release of political prisoners, the lifting of 
restrictions on humanitarian operations, the swearing in of 
the Parliament and Senate, and the inclusion of an African 
Union permanent envoy in the mediation team.  These 
conditions have not yet been met. 
 
-- Informal talks between the MDC and ZANU-PF are not new. 
They have been going on for fifteen months.  The current 
meeting is designed to discuss conditions that would have to 
be in place to begin meaningful negotiations. 
 
-- The situation in Zimbabwe remains dire.  The Security 
Council must act to tell the Mugabe regime to end the 
violence and begin serious negotiations with the opposition 
leading to a solution that respects the will of the 
Zimbabwean people. 
 
-- The draft resolution will empower regional and 
international mediators by strengthening the incentives for 
Mugabe to negotiate seriously. 
 
-- We urge you to instruct your Permanent Representative to 
support bringing the draft resolution to an immediate vote 
and to vote &yes.8 
 
¶3.  (U) Background: 
 
The press is reporting that MDC Secretary General Tendai Biti 
and representatives of the Arthur Mutambara MDC faction are 
in Pretoria talking to GOZ representatives Nicolas Goche and 
Patrick Chinamasa.  SADC-facilitated 
talks between the GOZ and MDC have been ongoing for 15 months 
having produced minimal results.  Although press 
reports note progress, there is no reliable confirmation of 
any positive outcome from this latest round of talks.  On 
July 9, Tsvangirai sent a letter to SYG Ban in which he 
denied that there were meaningful negotiations and expressed 
support for the UNSC draft resolution and the appointment of 
a UN Special Envoy to assist in finding a solution to the 
crisis.  On July 10, Tsvangirai issued a statement again 
denying that negotiations were underway and outlining the 
five conditions necessary for substantive discussions with 
the GOZ to begin. 
RICE