08TELAVIV1636

Wed Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1636 2121152
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301152Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7747
INFO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 4528
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0187
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDCUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001636 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/REA and OES/ENV 
USDA FOR FAS/OCBD/DRDAD 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL 
AMMAN FOR ESTH - BHALLA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR EINV IS
SUBJ:  Knesset Seeks Scapegoats for Water Crisis 
 
Ref: (A)Tel Aviv 1211  (B)Tel Aviv 242 (C)Tel Aviv 678 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  The Israeli water crisis is turning political as 
the Knesset decided to form a special committee to determine who is 
culpable for the present water shortage.  Sitting GOI ministers 
endorse the effort, which is likely to fault previous 
administrations for their decisions to delay funding and 
construction of additional desalination plants and infrastructure 
projects.  Comment: Although the present government would like to 
see its predecessors faulted, there is plenty of blame to spread 
among all parties, as well as poor consumer practices and possibly 
changing weather patterns.  The water crisis may become an issue in 
Israel's coming domestic political reshuffling. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The State Control Committee of Israel's parliament (Knesset) 
ordered the establishment of a special investigative committee to 
review the origins of the serious water crisis facing Israel.  In 
requesting the investigation, the Knesset watchdog committee decided 
that it was necessary to examine the failure to implement the 
recommendations of many professional committees and previous 
government decisions on the subject.  After Israel's last water 
crisis in 2002, the cabinet decided to establish large-scale 
desalinization plants and targeted water conservation savings to 
reduce household water use by at least 10 percent.  In the 
intervening years, however, neither happened.   The special 
committee investigating this lapse will also be requested to 
formulate recommendations for the short and long-term in order to 
ensure the regular supply of water to the citizens of the State. 
 
¶3. (U) Zvulon Orlev, Chairman of the Control Committee, said that 
the water crisis is not an unexpected accident, but rather results 
from serious failures by generations of governments of Israel. (Post 
has outlined the evolution of the present crisis in reftels.) Orlev 
and some media analyses have faulted the Ministry of Finance for 
preferring immediate economic considerations over long-term needs. 
In the quest for balanced budgets, he claims the Finance Ministry 
chose not to undertake the required investment in desalination 
facilities, in rehabilitation of the aquifer, in more water 
treatment plants, and in effective water conservation programs. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Sitting Minister of National Infrastructure Binyamin 
Ben-Eliezer favors formation of the special committee.  In a public 
statement he was adamant about determining the individuals at fault. 
 The best defense of his administration, he implied, is to have the 
blame placed on those responsible - those previously in office. 
Although last winter's disappointing rainfall - just 65 percent of 
normal - may appear the proximate cause, Ben Eliezer points to the 
longer term problems of pollution of reservoirs, overpumping from 
deep water sources, and the decision four years ago to cancel plans 
to build additional desalination installations.  Had those 
investments been made, the new facilities would shortly be coming 
on-line.  Lack of a clear public conservation campaign until now is 
one charge leveled against the government that even the present 
minister cannot dodge. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: The water issue has now been seized as a political 
football with which to score points.  Eliezer tries to gain points 
for candor and good management, Knesset opponents try to score for 
activism on a key issue and stress the Kadima government's inability 
to redress the situation.  Given that the weakened Olmert government 
is heading into party and probably national elections, the water 
crisis may become more highly politicized in coming months. 
 
MORENO