06MANAGUA220
OAS SENIOR POLITICAL ENVOY READS THE RIOT ACT TO
Mon Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO6774
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0220/01 0302227
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 302227Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5063
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MANAGUA 000220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/30/2016 
TAGS: KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL KCOR
SUBJECT: OAS SENIOR POLITICAL ENVOY READS THE RIOT ACT TO 
NICARAGUAN ELECTORAL COMMISSION 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 00212 
 
     ¶B. 2005 MANAGUA 02746 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: OAS senior political envoy John Biehl has 
placed stringent conditions on the Supreme Electoral Council 
(CSE) to enable the OAS to participate in Nicaragua's March 
and November elections.  In his recent visit to Managua, 
Biehl clarified that CSE's invitation for OAS observation of 
Nicaragua's elections is incomplete.  Biehl believes that the 
OAS can work with IFES, possibly the UNDP, and others to 
cover all necessary ground.  He is playing the legitimacy 
card, citing to Sandinistas the example of the successful 
Bolivian elections to convince them to play clean.  CSE 
magistrates are playing high-stakes poker: the prizes are the 
presidency and the control of the National Assembly.  The 
cards up their sleeves include stalling on external scrutiny; 
possibly disqualifying FSLN dissident Lewites from running 
and/or releasing PLC leader Arnoldo Aleman to divide the 
Liberal vote; and, a "royal flush" of fraudulent tactics 
favoring Sandinista voters.  Only sustained and robust civil 
society and internatational scrutiny stand in their way.  End 
Summary. 
 
Play Nice -- or No Dice 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (C) OAS Director of Democratic and Political Affairs John 
Biehl traveled to Managua January 24-29 to lay the groundwork 
for OAS observation of Nicaragua's March regional and 
November national elections.  The OAS exploratory mission 
responds to President Bolanos' recent request to OAS 
Secretary General Insulza.  After concluding a full day of 
 
SIPDIS 
back-to-back meetings on January 26 with the Supreme 
Electoral Council (CSE), political party leaders, civil 
society, UN representatives, and EU ambassadors, Biehl shared 
with us the gist of his meetings, his message, and his 
general outlook on the electoral process. 
 
¶3. (C) Biehl explained he had clarified to the CSE that his 
visit was in response to President Bolanos' invitation, not 
the CSE's.  Moreover, the OAS does not consider the CSE's 
recent letter inviting the OAS to observe the elections an 
official invitation because the CSE lacked a quorum when 
extending the invitation and the notification was not 
transmitted, as it must, via the MFA.  (Note: For the last 
few months, three PLC magistrates on the seven member board 
of the CSE have abstained from participation.  Five votes are 
required for a quorum, which means that the legality of any 
recent CSE decisions, including the invitation to the OAS 
observers, could be questioned.) 
 
¶4. (U) Biehl outlined the OAS' terms for assisting in 
elections observation, noting that the CSE must agree in 
writing to a clear, detailed, and transparent work plan. 
Components of the work plan must cover and resolve problems 
concerning the following areas: 
 
--Provide equal cedula access: Determine why the CSE is not 
issuing cedulas in a timely fashion to some applicants, 
whether - as alleged by some political party and civil 
society leaders - there is partisan-directed issuance of 
cedulas (some allege that Sandinista sympathizers are 
receiving their cedulas, while other Nicaraguans are not; 
others claim that both the FSLN and PLC-controlled CSE 
ensures that militants of these two parties get their cedulas 
while the applications of other Nicaraguans are sidelined.) 
Resolve these inequities so all Nicaraguans receive their 
cedulas (required to register to vote). 
 
--Partially purge the voter registry (padron):  Biehl 
remarked that a complete audit and purge of the voter 
registry (padron) would be ideal but unrealistic at this 
point, not only because of time restrictions, which are 
considerable, but also because of the political fallout 
a full purge could generate.  The new government, he 
asserted, must assume this task after it first undertakes a 
massive recedulation of all Nicaraguans soon after it is 
elected.  Nonetheless, the CSE must scrub the padron and find 
ways to prevent the deceased on the padron from voting. 
 
--Stem Raton Loco ("Crazy Mouse"): Determine the scope and 
reason the CSE moves thousands of Nicaraguans to new voting 
stations (JRVs) at great distances from their places of 
residence.  On Election Day, many Nicaraguans cannot vote 
 
MANAGUA 00000220  002 OF 004 
 
 
because when they arrive at their customary JRV, they find 
they have been moved to another JRV, sometimes even in 
another department or region.  (Note: This is a tactic 
employed to reduce the votes of certain political streams to 
benefit a competitor).  Resolve these irregularities to give 
fair and equal access to all Nicaraguan voters. 
 
--Quash unneeded for JRV Relocation: Determine the scope and 
reason the CSE is moving some JRVs to more remote areas, 
which confuses and restricts voter access on Election Day. 
 
--Verify voter registry lists/JRV locations: Ensure the 
accuracy of the JRVs for all registered voters.  Mount a 
robust month-long awareness campaign via radio, megaphone, 
informing citizens of their rights and responsibilities. 
Allow citizens to verify their registration and voting 
location. 
 
--Clarify Electoral Law Article 41:  Article 41 enables a 
voter to vote in a JVR even if they are not on the list for 
that particular JVR so long as the cedula shows he/she is a 
resident of the area.  The Sandinistas are trying to 
eliminate this article. 
 
--Guarantee CSE quorum, non-partisan professionalism:  The 
CSE must work as a professional, non-partisan electoral body, 
not/not as a center of political negotiations (Biehl likened 
the CSE as something out of the Al Capone era).  Both FSLN 
and PLC magistrates must work together to establish quorum 
and ensure fair and credible elections. (Note:  CSE 
magistrates are totally beholden to their respective 
political parties; three report to Aleman, three to Ortega, 
and one -- Chief Magistrate Roberto Rivas -- reports to 
Cardinal Obando, who recently swings for the Sandinista 
interests. 
 
--Publicize the CSE work plan: The CSE must make public its 
detailed work plan to give the public confidence in the 
process and to avoid previous "mistakes,' most recently those 
occurring during the 2004 municipal elections. 
 
--Extend an official invite to the OAS:  The CSE must extend 
an official invitation to the OAS, which requires a CSE 
quorum and channeling the letter via the Foreign Ministry. 
 
--Commit to clean elections:  The CSE must ensure the 
elections are clean or they will not be credible or 
legitimate.  The spirit of the OAS Democratic Charter, and 
respect for human rights back this principle. 
 
--Keep the courts out of politics -- disallow candidate 
disqualifications (inhibiciones):  The CSE will ensure that 
no candidates are disqualified for political reasons.  Biehl 
was emphatic that disqualifications of candidates is a 
non-starter and the elections will lose all credibility if 
this occurs.  He added that this commitment will require some 
sort of outside guarantor (perhaps someone from the 
Inter-American Human Rights Court) who will review any 
candidate disqualification cases should they arise.  (Note: 
CSE chief magistrate Rivas has publicly stated that he will 
respect court decisions relating to inhibiciones.) 
 
¶5. (C) The CSE magistrates (Biehl met separately with the PLC 
and Sandinista magistrates) were receptive to Biehl's 
parameters, he said, assuring they would try to meet the next 
day to vote on the OAS invitation.  Biehl estimated that once 
the CSE agrees to these terms, the OAS could deploy a 
technical team within ten days.  Biehl recommends a 
bifurcated approach to OAS participation: technical 
assistance on the one hand to be complemented by a group of 
"notables," possibly including the chief of the Canadian 
election commission, former IFES president Jose Waldenburgh, 
and the director of IFE-Mexico.  A smaller OAS team would 
work on the Atlantic Coast elections and a larger, parallel 
team would focus on the national elections, he said.  Biehl 
confirmed that Patricio Gajardo has already signed a contract 
to work with the OAS on the Nicaraguan elections.  To address 
alleged FSLN concerns of "foreign intervention," (reportedly 
the Sandinistas asked Biehl to monitor the U.S. Embassy, to 
which he quipped that he 
could also watch the Venezuelan Embassy) the OAS will include 
two senior political analysts in its team of experts  to 
write about the political context. 
 
Divvying up the Tasks via Cooperation Framework 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
MANAGUA 00000220  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Responding to Ambassador's concerns that the three 
tasks at hand - observation, diagnosis of problems, solution 
of these problems - are covered, Biehl explained that the OAS 
has neither the mandate nor the resources to cover all areas. 
 He was sympathetic to the difficulties IFES has encountered 
in getting the CSE's approval to start work on its technical 
assistance program, noting that UNDP has also offered 
technical assistance, but to date the CSE has not responded. 
Biehl was receptive to working under a cooperation framework 
in conjunction with IFES, possibly the UNDP, and others to 
cover all election aspects.  For example, the Canadians have 
expert election auditors, he said. 
 
Worst-Case Scenario: Lewites is Disqualified, Aleman Freed 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) Biehl opined that FSLN dissident Herty Lewites is the 
most vulnerable candidate; the Danielistas are prepared to 
disqualify him at the right moment.  The unabashed 
Sandinistas shared with Biehl that they could strike an 
agreement with PLC leader/convicted criminal Arnoldo Aleman, 
whereby Aleman would receive his freedom in exchange for the 
PLC allowing the courts to disqualify Herty Lewites.  Biehl 
recounted how he had pushed back, by urging the Sandinistas 
to follow the example of Morales and the Bolivian elections, 
where Morales won a fair, transparent election. 
 
Flawed Atlantic Coast Election to Serve as Lessons Learned 
- - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (C) Lamenting his prediction the March 5 Atlantic Coast 
regional elections will be flawed, Biehl ventured that at 
least the poor results will serve to exert pressure on the 
CSE to correct its mistakes.  The CSE will have time to 
correct these irregularities for the November 5 national 
election, opined Biehl. (Note: Accusations of CSE, especially 
FSLN-committed fraud in the lead-up to the Atlantic Coast 
election are rampant, including the CSE's according priority 
to issuing and delivery cedulas to Sandinista sympathizers, 
the issuance of cedulas to minors (voting age is 16 in 
Nicaragua) through the use of fraudulent birth certificates. 
NGOS are proposing a partial audit of the voter registry - 
specifically the last 20,000 additions on the padron -- to 
determine the scope and reason for the problem.)  Montealegre 
campaign manager in the North Atlantic Autonomous Region 
(RAAN), Jaime Chow, reported to poloff (Ref. A) that 20,000 
citizens in the vicinity of Waspam (half the population) are 
without cedulas.  Most are offspring of the Nicaraguan 
anti-Sandinista resistance and would naturally vote 
anti-Sandinista.) 
 
Still No Quorum 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C) Despite Biehl's "tough love" with the CSE and the CSE 
magistrates' assuring Biehl they would meet January 27 to 
vote on the OAS invitation, they did not.  Biehl's reaction 
was immediate and received prominent news coverage: the CSE 
must free itself from any political pressure and warned the 
CSE that it must immediately resolve the quorum impasse or 
lose all credibility in its management of the Atlantic Coast 
election.   According to President Bolanos senior political 
adviser, the PLC backed out on the excuse that CSE President 
Rivas (appointed for his PLC affiliation, but now he reports 
to Cardinal Obando and sides for the most part with the 
Sandinistas) had insisted on a multi-point agenda, while the 
PLC would only agree to vote on inviting the OAS.  The PLC 
magistrates accused the Sandinistas of trying to "ambush" 
them to force a quorum so they could approve the legality of 
Eduardo Montealegre's ALN-PC party and its party symbol. 
 
¶10. (C) Bolanos' advisers, who met with Biehl just before our 
meeting, also shared that Biehl will urge the Secretary 
General Insulza to issue a strong statement next week on the 
CSE crisis.  DCM raised these concerns with the donor 
elections working group on January 30.  Following the release 
of the OAS statement, Bolanos' aides will arrange a meeting 
for President Bolanos with the diplomatic corps to encourage 
them to issue a statement. 
 
Renewed FSLN Saber Rattling against the OAS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - 
 
¶11. (C) Further complicating matters is the Sandinistas 
latest saber rattling against the OAS, this time for its 
 
MANAGUA 00000220  004 OF 004 
 
 
alleged failure to condemn President Bolanos for having 
breached last fall's OAS-brokered Bolanos-Ortega governabilty 
agreement.  (Note: In Bolanos' annual address to the National 
Assembly he proposed a referendum on the constitutional 
changes that had reduced his executive powers.  The 
Bolanos-Ortega agreement included the passage of a framework 
law (ley marco) that freezes the implementation of these 
constitutional changes until January 2007.) 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶12. (C) CSE magistrates are playing high-stakes poker: the 
prizes are the presidency and the control of the National 
Assembly.  Their ultimate concern is not so much which 
political ideology the winner will impose; rather, it's a 
struggle for power and a matter of who gets to divide the 
spoils.  Either a FSLN or Aleman-controlled PLC election 
victory would consolidate a caudillo "kleptocracy" in 
Nicaragua and derail President Bolanos' well-intentioned 
efforts to steer Nicaragua along a path of good governance 
and public service.  Notwithstanding the apparent friction 
between Sandinista and Liberal CSE magistrates, the 
Ortega-Aleman pact continues to thrive, although clearly the 
Sandinistas have the upper hand.  Some interlocutors and 
political analysts assert that if Aleman cannot gain amnesty 
via a National Assembly vote, he is willing to strike a deal 
with Ortega "allowing" Ortega to win the election in exchange 
for his freedom and ensuring that Aleman's rival Montealegre 
loses.  Under this line of reasonin 
g, Aleman would prefer an Ortega win because he can deal with 
an Ortega victory, while if Montealegre wins, Aleman's hold 
over Nicaraguan Liberalism will recede. 
 
¶13. (C) Certainly, releasing Aleman and disqualifying Lewites 
would wreak further havoc in the Liberal camp and make a 
broad Liberal alliance even more unlikely (although the 
reaction and consequences of disqualifying Lewites could also 
have negative repercussions in the Sandinista camp).  Even if 
a free Aleman would not run on the PLC ticket, his designate 
certainly would, and with Lewites out of the picture, Ortega 
would be running against two Liberal candidates.  Further, an 
unmonitored, unchecked, and Sandinista-dominated electoral 
commission can employ cedula issuance and delivery, and the 
relocation and redistribution of voters and JRVs to increase 
the number of Sandinista sympathizers who can actually vote, 
while restricting non-Sandinista voter access to the polls. 
These combined tactics could conceivably suffice to turn the 
March and November elections in Ortega's favor.  Only robust 
and sustained civil society and international scrutiny stand 
in their way.  The longer the CSE stalls on allowing external 
scrutiny, the more the stakes play into the hands of the 
Sandinistas. 
 
TRIVELLI