06MANAGUA1400
NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS REGIONAL REPORTING: RIO SAN
Tue Jun 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0031
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1400/01 1781635
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 271635Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6773
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0718
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001400 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2016 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SOCI NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS REGIONAL REPORTING: RIO SAN 
JUAN 
 
REF: MANAGUA 1359 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Nicaraguan department of Rio San Juan 
is largely rural and a majority of the population has voted 
Liberal in every election since 1990.  The FSLN has, however, 
captured a consistently large minority of the vote.  Local 
political, religious, and community leaders disagree on 
whether or not citizens will vote in large numbers for the 
new parties that have appeared in opposition to the PLC-FSLN 
political pact and the corruption and anti-democratic 
practices that the pact has perpetuated.  There is a 
widespread consensus, however, that the national and local 
electoral authorities are working to support the FSLN. 
Contacts reported numerous irregularities during the recent 
electoral verification campaign.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The remote southern department of Rio San Juan (est. 
pop. 96,000) is divided into six municipalities: San Carlos 
(FSLN); Morrito (PLC); San Miguelito (PLC); El Almendro 
(APRE); El Castillo (PLC); and San Juan del Norte (FSLN). 
Farming, ranching, fishing, and limited tourism provide 
income to its mostly rural and impoverished residents. 
Economic development is limited by poor transportation links 
and infrastructure.  Poloff and Political Specialist met with 
political party, NGO, and labor representatives, Catholic 
Church leaders, and local community activists to discuss the 
upcoming national elections, economic and social conditions 
(septel).  We spent a total of two days in the departmental 
capital San Carlos and the Solentiname archipelago in Lake 
Nicaragua. 
 
IS THE ALN THE NEW LIBERAL FORCE IN RIO SAN JUAN? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) We first met with the departmental chief for the 
Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) and ALN departmental deputy 
candidate Sergio Romero.  Romero joined the PLC in 1995 but 
defected to the ALN out of disgust with the PLC-FSLN pact and 
the fact that the local PLC structure would not permit any 
"new faces" to rise to leadership positions.  He claimed that 
the ALN maintains a strong party structure in Rio San Juan, 
with directorships in each municipality and developing 
organizations in smaller towns and rural areas.  When asked 
about coordination with ALN alliance members, Romero stated 
that he had formed a departmental committee last week to 
direct ALN activities, which includes representatives from 
the Conservative Party (PC), the Resistance (PRN), the 
Alliance for the Republic (APRE) and the Christian Social 
Party (PSC).  The PRN in particular is strong in the 
department, as many ex-contras were resettled there after the 
1980s civil war, he noted.  When queried about the allegiance 
of the Conservative mayor of El Almendro, Ulfredo Arguello, 
Romero commented that Arguello is a close personal friend of 
PLC vice presidential candidate Jose Antonio Alvarado, but 
has nevertheless indicated his support for the ALN to Romero. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Aldrisk Bedford, the head of APRE in Rio San Juan, 
reported that APRE members in the department support the ALN 
and Eduardo Montealegre, despite the former popularity of 
ex-APRE presidential candidate Jose Antonio Alvarado, who 
defected to the PLC.  Bedford commented that the PLC and FSLN 
are currently the strongest parties in the region, but was 
positive about the ALN's potential in the department, noting 
the presence of young and energetic leaders such as Sergio 
Romero, ALN National Assembly deputy Bladimir Pineda, and 
party activist Luis Downs.  He admitted, however, that Romero 
"lacks political experience."  When asked if the deputy 
candidate nominations had caused defections within the 
Liberal ranks, Bedford replied affirmatively, but said the 
flow of membership was largely from the PLC to the ALN.  He 
thought that Ulfredo Arguello would support the ALN because 
he would disapprove of Alvarado's alliance with the PLC. 
 
¶5. (C) Arguello later told us that he does not think 
Montealegre has any support in Rio San Juan and that many 
Liberal dissidents in the department had followed Alvarado 
back to the PLC.  He personally does not like Montealegre, 
although out of some residual sense of loyalty to APRE, he 
invited ALN vice presidential candidate Fabricio Cajina to 
meet with ranchers in the department.  According to Arguello, 
Cajina was unable to convince the ranchers that the ALN 
represents a viable alternative to the PLC.  Arguello 
mentioned the ALN's recent press release reminding the public 
 
that "PC" was officially dropped from the Alliance's name. 
He claimed that this was the work of Liberal ALN deputy 
Jamileth Bonilla, who is "driving the Conservative Party away 
from the ALN" and destroying the Alliance. 
 
¶6. (C) In a later meeting, PLC departmental director Benjamin 
Gross mentioned that the ALN changed its departmental deputy 
alternate candidate from Liberal Rafael Martinez (who won 
second place in the ALN primaries) to Conservative Aldo 
Padilla without informing Martinez or anyone else in the 
local ALN leadership.  Gross claimed that Martinez, a 
personal friend of his, was upset about the "betrayal" of his 
party and was considering returning to the PLC with his 
followers.  (Note: Neither Romero nor Bedford were 
immediately aware of the change.  End Note.) 
 
¶7. (C) Most of the labor and community activists we met with 
were reserved regarding their political preferences, but not 
all.  Martin Aguilar Bendana, the president of the Rio San 
Juan Fisherman's Union, arrived at our meeting sporting a 
"Eduardo Presidente 2006" shirt.  He claimed that Montealegre 
is a "good candidate" and that the ALN has "surpassed the 
PLC" in the department.  Aguilar believes that the FSLN also 
has "solid support" within the department, but the MRS 
leaders are "working hard" to attract Sandinista votes for 
Herty Lewites. 
 
ALVARADO CANDIDACY A BENEFIT, BUT ALEMAN WILL COST PLC VOTES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (C) Benjamin Gustavo Gross, the PLC director for Rio San 
Juan for over two years, joined the PLC at its inception. 
During his meeting with us, Gross insisted that only the PLC 
and FSLN have any real support in the department.  He 
commented that the Camino Cristiano (CCN) party had shown 
some strength in the 2004 municipal elections, but claimed 
that the CCN's followers now largely support the PLC.  Gross 
is very enthusiastic about the PLC presidential/vice 
presidential formula, noting that Alvarado "did a lot for Rio 
San Juan" while he was director of the GON's social 
investment fund (FISE).  Gross did admit, however, that he is 
"disappointed" with the selection of Carlos Oliva as the 
PLC's departmental deputy candidate since he had hoped to win 
the position for himself, and concurred that the PLC's opaque 
methods of naming the deputy candidates would cost the party 
support, both in Rio San Juan and nationally.  Furthermore, 
Liberals in Rio San Juan are unhappy with the PLC national 
leadership because the department was promised a national 
deputy nomination, but the party did not deliver. 
 
¶9. (C) In a separate meeting, PLC mayor of San Miguelito 
Carlos Domingo Fletes asserted that Rio San Juan is a Liberal 
department and will support the PLC.  He claimed that the 
FSLN is the dominant force in the larger towns, but the PLC 
dominates in the countryside.  When asked about the effect of 
Arnoldo Aleman's leadership of the party and pact with the 
FSLN, Fletes responded that PLC supporters are backing the 
Rizo/Alvarado ticket, not Aleman, and Jose Rizo will take 
control of party once he wins the presidency.  (Note: Most 
non-PLC contacts commented that the PLC has lost considerable 
support in Rio San Juan because of Aleman's pact and the 
party's general lack of effective leadership.  One insisted 
that "Liberals know that Rizo is a tool of Aleman -- they 
will not be fooled."  End Note.) 
 
FSLN IS SECOND FORCE IN RIO SAN JUAN, DOMINATES SOLENTINAME 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10. (SBU) Virtually all contacts agreed that the FSLN is the 
second strongest force in Rio San Juan after the Liberals, 
especially in the larger towns.  Sergio Romero noted the 
FSLN's considerable support in the municipalities of San 
Miguelito, San Carlos and Morrito.  One contact confidently 
stated that "Daniel will get 30 percent" of the vote in Rio 
San Juan. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Although not a major electoral force, the 1,000 or 
so residents of the Solentiname archipelago are solidly 
Sandinista.  Community leaders speak reverently of priest, 
poet and FSLN activist Ernesto Cardenal, who came to the 
islands in 1975 and encouraged the inhabitants to create art 
inspired by their pristine tropical surroundings.  The 
"primitivist" painting style created by the islanders has 
become famous and generates considerable income for the most 
talented artists.  Cardenal also initiated a literacy 
campaign and brought formal education, transportation links, 
 
and environmental consciousness to the islands.  While still 
poor and remote, the poverty of Solentiname is now more 
gentile than grinding, and the natives credit Cardenal and 
the Sandinistas with this transformation. 
 
IS MRS "READY FOR THE CAMPAIGN"? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶12. (C) Domingo Mercado, departmental deputy candidate for 
the Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) in Rio San Juan 
informed us that the MRS is "ready for the campaign" with a 
structure and trained party poll watchers (fiscales) in every 
municipality.  Mercado claimed that he had never been active 
in politics before and commented that MRS supporters include 
many Liberals, Conservatives and independents, though most 
are Sandinistas unhappy with Daniel Ortega's leadership of 
the FSLN.  Ex-FSLN activist Freddy Vasquez noted that many 
Sandinistas may "cross vote" in November as Mercado is a 
popular candidate locally, but many voters do not recognize 
MRS presidential candidate Herty Lewites.  To correct this 
lack of recognition, Lewites may open his official campaign 
in Rio San Juan, Mercado reported.  Regarding the other 
parties, Mercado and Vasquez admitted that the PLC and FSLN 
have considerable strength.  The ALN has "considerable 
sympathy," they said, but lacks experienced activists who can 
turn this sentiment into votes. 
 
LOCAL CLERGY: CARDINAL OBANDO IS NOT THE OFFICIAL VOICE OF 
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13. (C) During a meeting with local Catholic Church 
officials, parochial coordinator Frank Teran commented that 
there is not yet a lot of enthusiasm for the campaign, 
although most residents will ultimately vote for the party 
that they have associated with historically, which will hurt 
the ALN and MRS.  Father Pablo Alexis disagreed, noting that 
many young people will vote for the "candidates of change," 
although ALN and MRS leaders need to work harder to inform 
the population about their plans for government.  Father Luis 
Zavala predicted a number of "crossed votes" as citizens 
would support popular local candidates, but back traditional 
parties nationally. 
 
¶14. (C) Poloff inquired about the seemingly discordant 
messages from Catholic Church leaders in Nicaragua regarding 
the elections -- formal head, Archbishop of Managua Leopoldo 
Brenes states that the Church should be apolitical, but 
retired Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo claims that priests 
and bishops should opine on the campaign.  Zavala replied 
that the Church should promote voting and provide general 
information about the elections, although Church leaders can 
also express their personal opinions.  Zavala commented that 
they were awaiting official instructions from the Episcopal 
Conference related to the electoral campaign.  The 
Conference, not Cardinal Obando, is the official voice of the 
Church, he stated. 
 
NO CONFIDENCE IN ELECTORAL AUTHORITIES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶15. (C) All contacts expressed a considerable lack of 
confidence in the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) and its 
local branch, the Departmental Electoral Council (CED), which 
is led by an FSLN activist.  Aldrisk Bedford labeled the CED 
a "mafia" in the hands of the FSLN, and Sergio Romero claimed 
that CED members were telling Liberals that "they would have 
to pay" to participate in the recent verification process 
(reftel).  Romero also accused the CED of providing 
registration forms to FSLN party members so they could allow 
their supporters to "verify" without having to travel to the 
voting centers.  Carlos Fletes commented that the CED did not 
provide enough change of address forms in the voting centers 
(only 40 per table) and said that the PLC will organize trips 
to the CED in San Carlos for those who were unable to 
complete the verification process. 
 
¶16. (C) Domingo Mercado reported that MRS fiscales detected 
numerous irregularities during the verification process.  MRS 
will file a report to the CSE and NGOs involved in 
observation claiming that 1,133 people were allowed to 
register in two different voter registries (padrones).  The 
report will also note that the CSE provided insufficient 
change of address forms, and no forms at all for the fiscales 
to register complaints.  MRS fielded fiscales at 95 percent 
 
of the voting centers in Rio San Juan -- the party did not 
have sufficient funds to send fiscales to Solentiname or the 
remote border areas.  When poloff asked Mercado about the 
CSE's claims that many voters were returning from a temporary 
move to the North and South Atlantic Autonomous Regions (RAAN 
and RAAS) where they registered to influence the March 
regional elections, he responded that those voters 
registering a change of address had come from different 
departments and Costa Rica, not the RAAN and RAAS. 
 
¶17. (C) At the CED, we were originally scheduled to meet with 
FSLN-affiliated CED president Nidia Vallecillo Sevilla, but 
she was absent at the time of the appointment.  Instead, we 
saw PLC-affiliated First Member Sandra Parrales.  Parrales 
claimed that the CSE opened 79 voting centers in Rio San Juan 
for the verification, 65 rural and 14 urban.  The final 
results demonstrated that 43.13 percent of eligible voters 
participated in the verification.  Parrales commented that 
the CSE provided "excellent" training for the verification 
officials, although some abandoned their posts complaining 
that the per diem was too low.  She explained that the CED 
has 4,000 undistributed cedulas, but will be sending them out 
to the municipal electoral offices (CEMs) and IFES-sponsored 
kiosks for easier access.  Several people who solicited a 
cedula have since passed away or used their proof of 
solicitation to obtain a passport and then emigrated to Costa 
Rica, she observed. 
 
¶18. (C) Parrales was initially reluctant to criticize the CSE 
to us, but ultimately admitted that the organization "isn't 
perfect."  She agreed that the CSE failed to provide 
sufficient change of address forms and does not believe that 
the migration is fraud-related.  Parrales noted that the 
CED's Second Member position was allocated to the CCN after 
the 2004 elections, but through some "strange circumstances" 
was passed to the Alternativa por el Cambio (AC) party, whose 
representative often votes with the FSLN president and 
against her.  (Note: Benjamin Gross was more explicit in his 
accusations against the CSE, claiming that FSLN magistrate 
Emmet Lang personally selected the AC representative to sit 
on the CED, who is really a loyal agent of the FSLN.  End 
Note.) 
 
RIO SAN JUAN: DEMOGRAPHICS AND VOTING PROFILE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶19. (U)  Total Population (2005 est.):    95,546 
         Total Urban Population:          23,050 
         Total Rural Population:          72,496 
 
         Votes Received by Party, 2004 Municipal Elections 
         PLC:     11,571 
         FSLN:    10,073 
         APRE:    2,546 
         CCN:     209 
         PRN:     1,322 
         PLI:     656 
         Others:  310 
 
COMMENT: OPPORTUNITY FOR ALN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶20. (C) As we noticed in other departments, the ALN leaders 
in Rio San Juan seem to have more energy and conviction than 
the PLC representatives, who are clearly unhappy with Aleman 
using the "dedazo" (finger) to select many deputy candidates. 
 Many independents, especially young people, also appear 
ready to vote for change.  The ALN, however, seems to be slow 
to take advantage of this discontentment.  The local 
structures of the Alliance members have only recently begun 
to cooperate, and the mysterious swapping of candidates makes 
the party seem more like the PLC than an open, democratic 
organization.  The ALN will have to be more consistent in its 
leadership style to prove to the public that it is different 
from the PLC and worthy of support. 
TRIVELLI