06MANAGUA2645
A/S SHANNON'S MEETING WITH THE MRS
Tue Dec 05 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2645/01 3392155
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 052155Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8376
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0853
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002645 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA A/S SHANNON, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2016 
TAGS: EAID ECON EFIN KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL
SUBJECT: A/S SHANNON'S MEETING WITH THE MRS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: During a November 27 meeting with Assistant 
Secretary Thomas Shannon, key Sandinista Renovation Movement 
(MRS) leaders expressed their views on the elections and the 
party's future.  MRS member Luis Carrion, National Assembly 
deputy Monica Baltodano and spokesperson Israel Lewites 
stated that the MRS will not "pact" with anyone in the 
National Assembly, but rather will seek alliances on an 
issue-by-issue basis.  The MRS will continue to "test" Ortega 
and push him on key concerns, Luis Carrion told A/S Shannon. 
He also suggested that the United States should engage 
Ortega, but insist on adherence to the rule of law, 
anticorruption efforts and judicial reform. 
 
THE PACT DETERMINED THE ELECTION RESULTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) On November 27, A/S Shannon met with MRS members Luis 
Carrion (who came in place of MRS deputy Victor Hugo Tinoco, 
who could not attend due to a death in the family) Monica 
Baltodano and Israel Lewites to elicit their views on the 
November elections.  Claiming that the "pact" between the 
National Sandinista Liberation Front (FSLN) and the Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) was responsible for the outcome, 
Carrion opined that the FSLN and PLC acted as if they "owned 
the process" on election day.  He stated that while Daniel 
Ortega did win the presidency, the MRS believes that the 
Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) manipulated some of the 
National Assembly deputy results.  According to Carrion, on 
election day, the FSLN was "ready for fraud," and if there 
had not been so many national and international observers, 
the fraud would have been much worse. 
 
¶3.  (C) Carrion also pointed to national/voter ID (cedula) 
issuance and distribution problems and their effect on 
election results.  He mentioned his party's difficulties with 
recruiting and training a sufficient number of party poll 
watchers (fiscales) and maintaining a presence in rural 
areas.  In Carazo, Carrion believes the MRS succeeded in 
fighting for its Assembly deputy seat because of its strong 
presence in the department.  In rural areas, however, the MRS 
may have lost deputy seats because of little or no presence. 
Carrion emphasized that the CSE also played a role in 
manipulating the results.  Though the CSE said that election 
"anomalies" cited by the parties did not affect the vote 
count, the MRS believes they add up and "probably stripped 
them of a deputy or two."  Carrion has sent several written 
complaints to the CSE, but they have not answered a single 
one.  He opined that the system "is not trustworthy," and 
that the electoral law needs to be reformed to make it more 
equitable. 
 
THE MRS:  A SMALL BUT CRITICAL VOICE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) Carrion stated that the MRS was disappointed with the 
election results, having received less than they had wanted 
and expected -- especially in the deputy races.  But, he 
opined, the MRS is convinced that it exercises "more 
political weight than just a couple of deputies."  Carrion 
views the MRS as "a critical voice in the National Assembly" 
and insisted that the party will not cave to pressure from 
the FSLN.  The FSLN is already trying to pull away MRS 
members with offers of money and high-ranking positions, and 
are using the argument that "all Sandinistas are the same," 
according to Carrion.  He cited the example of Mario Valle, 
who was elected on the MRS slate of deputies but has since 
left the party for the FSLN.  Carrion told A/S Shannon that 
the MRS needs to push its programs and ideas and that there 
will be no rigid "pact" with any party; instead the MRS will 
seek alliances on individual  issues. 
 
¶5.  (C) Carrion observed that in a way, having few deputies 
gives the MRS more freedom to work on its central platform -- 
diminishing the inequity in Nicaragua.  The MRS will not only 
highlight justice and corruption issues, but also work 
towards concrete and practical change.  The MRS will expand 
party presence throughout the country and prepare for the 
2008 municipal elections, according to Israel Lewites.  In 
particular, the party will consolidate support in Carazo, 
Masaya, and Managua and seek more rural support, he stated. 
Monica Baltodano echoed the need for grassroots campaigning 
to organize MRS supporters in the rural areas. 
 
¶6.  (C) A/S Shannon queried Carrion about the future of the 
party and the possibility of membership in international 
party centrals, much as the Soviet International.  Carrion 
admitted that the MRS was often overshadowed by the FSLN in 
the international arena, but was looking to increase its 
profile in that arena.  A/S Shannon mentioned Spain as a 
possible ally and suggested that international solidarity 
would counter FSLN efforts to dismantle the party. 
 
WE WILL TEST ORTEGA'S DEMOCRATIC CREDENTIALS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) Throughout the meeting, the MRS leaders expressed 
their concern about an FSLN government to A/S Shannon. 
Carrion believes that the FSLN leadership is corrupt, which 
presents an "enormous chance" for rampant corruption within 
the new government.  The MRS members each mentioned Ortega's 
commitments to his supporters and that these promises will be 
difficult to keep.  Carrion considers it a "litmus" test -- 
how Ortega will balance the different factions within the 
FSLN.  Ortega's dealing with Arnoldo Aleman will be another 
"test," since the PLC and the FSLN enjoy a majority in the 
National Assembly, added Carrion.  Lewites foresees Ortega 
looking for opportunities to consolidate power and believes 
that he will "pay off" certain sectors to the detriment of 
the middle class. 
 
¶8.  (C) The MRS sees a clear role for the party to "test 
Ortega's democratic credentials every step of the way," 
opined Carrion.  The MRS will grant Ortega the benefit of the 
doubt -- but he must respect and expand the democratic 
process, elaborated Carrion.  They will view each political 
moment as "a test of his commitment to democracy."  Lewites 
added that the MRS "will be the pebble in Ortega's shoe, a 
constant irritant and reminder of his promises to the people." 
 
¶9.  (C)  Former FSLN militant Monica Baltodano claimed that 
Ortega is "not a leftist" despite his radical discourse.  She 
termed him a "mafioso" and stated that his government is not 
going to be good for the country -- Nicaragua needs change. 
Opining that everyone appears happy with Ortega's initial 
statements, she predicted that Ortega may be able to satisfy 
certain sectors so that no one will oppose him, even though 
fundamental problems in Nicaragua will not be addressed. 
Baltodano sees the role of emerging leftist organizations 
(and the MRS) to force Ortega to focus on issues of social 
justice and anticorruption. 
 
MRS ADVICE ON DEALING WITH ORTEGA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) A/S Shannon explained to the MRS that he wants to 
maintain a dialogue with Ortega but that he also hopes to 
foster better dialogue with civil society and other political 
parties.  He emphasized that Nicaragua needs parties that are 
focused on change and asked what the MRS predicted for the 
future.  Carrion responded that the situation is complex -- 
"When you expect the worst, even something poor becomes OK." 
He believes this dynamic has created the image that 
"everything is OK." 
 
¶11.  (C) In response to a question from Ambassador Trivelli 
for advice on dealing with Ortega, Lewites cautioned that the 
United States should not believe everything Ortega says. 
Carrion opined that Ortega is driven by two "psychological 
needs" -- one, to be legitimately elected as the president of 
Nicaragua and two, to be recognized and accepted by the 
United States.  Because of this, Carrion believes that Ortega 
needs to maintain a relationship with the United States. 
Baltodano stated that the United States 
needs to insist on rule of law and justice.  Carrion echoed 
her statement and added that judicial appointments will be a 
key test of the new government. 
 
¶12.  (U) Participants: 
 
Nicaragua: 
Luis Carrion 
Monica Baltodano 
Israel Lewites 
 
U.S.: 
Assistant Secretary Tom Shannon 
Ambassador Paul Trivelli 
Polcouns Victoria Alvarado 
Poloff Nicole Chulick (notetaker) 
 
¶13.  (U) This cable was cleared by A/S Shannon. 
BRENNAN