07MANAGUA324
PLC DEPUTY WARNS OF OPPORTUNISTIC FSLN INCURSIONS
Fri Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO7028
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0324/01 0332343
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 022343Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8954
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 000324 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/01/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR EAID NU
SUBJECT: PLC DEPUTY WARNS OF OPPORTUNISTIC FSLN INCURSIONS 
INTO LIBERAL STRONGHOLDS 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0241 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC) deputy 
Freddy Torres recently warned that the Sandinistas are 
working to buy the loyalty of vulnerable and impoverished 
farmers in the Liberal heartland, and the Liberals do not 
have the resources to oppose them.  Torres agreed that the 
PLC must seek unity with the Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance 
(ALN) to fend off Sandinista domination.  He explained that 
the two parties are discussing a common legislative agenda, 
which, however, may be derailed by the upcoming contentious 
votes for Supreme Court magistrates that will require support 
from the Sandinista Front (FSLN) caucus.  Torres also warned 
that the Sandinistas' proposed salary cuts are a ploy to gain 
more leverage over the Liberals.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Poloffs met with PLC deputy Freddy Torres of Matagalpa 
on February 1 to discuss Sandinista activity in his 
department, Liberal unity, and legislative issues.  Torres 
was pleased with the attention, and urged us not to shun the 
entire PLC because of the actions of a few.  We responded (as 
we have in the past) that we do not have a problem with the 
PLC per se, but rather that it continues to be controlled by 
convicted ex-President Arnoldo Aleman, a discredited figure 
who is constantly manipulated by President Daniel Ortega 
under the threat of imprisonment.  He then recognized that 
the PLC made a mistake by supporting Ortega's request to 
"fast-track" the Law 290 reforms (reftel). 
 
FSLN Working to Win Over Farmers in Liberal Strongholds 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) Torres warned that the Sandinistas will seduce 
impoverished farmers in rural areas using discounted loans 
subsidized by Venezuela and other patrons.  They have already 
begun to work in traditionally Liberal bastions, such as 
Jinotega and Matagalpa, he said.  Torres explained that, in 
general, the non-Sandinista guilds and organizations were 
persecuted during the 1980s and then largely ignored by the 
donor community during the 1990s in favor of the better 
organized Sandinista groups, resulting in a weak independent 
civil society sector unable to respond to the needs of the 
people.  Torres then made a pitch for "CafeNic," a 
Liberal-oriented association for small and medium coffee 
producers active in eight departments.  He did not offer a 
specific proposal at the time of the meeting, but noted his 
interest in a meeting with USAID. 
 
Liberal Unity and the Aleman Question 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (C) Torres agreed that the Liberals must seek unity or 
risk Sandinista domination of Nicaragua for the foreseeable 
future.  He equivocated on the question of ousting Aleman 
from the PLC, commenting that there is "no one available to 
take his place" and that Aleman must be gradually sidelined 
within the party.  Most of the PLC wants to "do the right 
thing," he claimed, and work with the ALN. 
 
¶5. (C) Torres commented that he has been involved in informal 
talks with ALN deputies (such as Jamileth Bonilla) on the 
subject of unification.  He advised that the discussions 
should be conducted openly, caucus to caucus, not by 
officially designated emissaries.  Torres confided that 
Aleman would only send his confidants -- specifically 
Wilfredo Navarro, Oscar Moncada, Maria Dolores Aleman, and 
Noel Ramirez -- to control the process and shut out moderate 
deputies. 
 
¶6. (C) Torres also warned us about the lack of confidence and 
coordination within the ALN, another reason to hold "open" 
discussions.  He recounted that before the inauguration he 
approached Montealegre privately to discuss the composition 
of the National Assembly's Executive Board, but Montealegre 
rebuffed him, refusing to negotiate with "corrupt PLC 
delinquents."  According to Torres, Montealegre never 
revealed the contents of the meeting to the ALN, giving his 
deputies the impression that the PLC would only negotiate 
with the FSLN. 
 
Opportunities and Challenges in the National Assembly 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) Torres was confident that a Liberal alliance could 
count on sufficient support for simple majority votes.  He 
specifically mentioned the proposed Freedom of Information 
Law as a priority that could help rein in the Sandinistas. 
Torres was less certain about qualified majority votes, such 
as the election of new Supreme Court and Supreme Electoral 
Council magistrates, which would mathematically require at 
least some votes from the FSLN caucus.  We advised him to 
approach civil society groups as allies to pressure the FSLN 
to vote for independent, qualified magistrates instead of 
political party hacks.  We also suggested that some 
Convergencia deputies (allied members of the FSLN caucus from 
other political parties) may be open to negotiating with the 
Liberals. 
 
¶8. (C) One of the populist reforms on the FSLN legislative 
agenda is to reduce the salaries of Assembly deputies from 
$3,500 to $2,000 per month.  Torres warned that this will 
make those Liberal deputies who are not independently wealthy 
more susceptible to FSLN bribes.  He is also convinced that 
the FSLN deputies will receive under the table "supplements" 
to their income to make up for any salary cuts. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶9. (C) The Sandinistas' eagerness to ram through 
anti-democratic reforms in the Assembly and Aleman's 
continued subjugation to Ortega are clearly splintering the 
PLC.  Although wary of confronting Aleman outright, a group 
of moderate deputies appears ready to negotiate in good faith 
with the ALN to develop an agenda independent of the 
Ortega-Aleman political pact.  A vote on the Freedom of 
Information Law could serve as a litmus test for the 
direction and unity of the PLC caucus. 
TRIVELLI