07MANAGUA331
CONVERGENCIA DEPUTIES HAVE INDEPENDENT AGENDA FROM
Mon Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO8462
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0331/01 0362112
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 052112Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8967
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 000331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT: CONVERGENCIA DEPUTIES HAVE INDEPENDENT AGENDA FROM 
FSLN IN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 0241 
     ¶B. 06 MANAGUA 2724 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: National Assembly deputy Augustin Jarquin 
recently told us that the non-Sandinista deputies in the 
Sandinista Front (FSLN) caucus have developed an independent 
legislative agenda.  The deputies -- a mix of Liberals, 
Conservatives, Resistance leaders, and indigenous 
representatives -- are generally referred to as the 
"Convergencia" (Convergence), a group of parties that have 
formed alliances with the FSLN.  Jarquin and some of the 
other Convergencia deputies are troubled by President 
Ortega's attempts to centralize power through legislative 
reforms and decrees, and plan to support efforts to reverse a 
number of "mistakes."  Jarquin also requested assistance for 
FOPREL, an organization that is working to harmonize 
legislation in the region.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador and poloffs met with Convergencia deputy 
Augustin Jarquin on February 2 (at his request) to discuss 
perspectives on the Ortega government and the role of the 
Convergencia deputies in the National Assembly.  Ambassador 
told Jarquin that our private meetings with administration 
officials have been cordial and productive; nevertheless, we 
are concerned that the FSLN has acted to centralize power 
without any dialogue with civil society.  Ambassador 
explained that we will continue to closely monitor 
legislative reforms, as well as the administration's 
treatment of the press and civil society. 
 
¶3. (C) Jarquin reported that the Convergencia deputies have 
developed an independent legislative agenda that focuses on 
professionalization of the justice system, electoral reforms, 
and political/constitutional reforms.  Specifically, the 
Convergencia deputies agree that National Assembly deputies 
should be directly elected from individual districts, not 
from national or regional party lists.  Jarquin agreed that 
such a reform would make deputies more accountable to their 
constituencies and give citizens a better sense of 
representation from their elected officials.  Jarquin 
suggested a future meeting between Embassy officials and the 
Assembly's Foreign Relations Commission (of which he is a 
member) and a separate meeting with the five Convergencia 
deputies. 
 
¶4. (C) Jarquin agreed that President Ortega has made some 
"mistakes" in his public discourse and legislative agenda, 
but assured us that the administration will correct its 
errors.  Discounting recent press reports implying that 
Ortega may not negotiate to renew Nicaragua's agreement with 
the IMF, Jarquin commented that, while the IMF and the 
administration may disagree on certain points and that the 
negotiations may well be "difficult," the government will 
ultimately sign a new accord with the IMF. 
 
¶5. (C) Regarding the controversial reforms to the Organic Law 
and Law 290 that were pushed by the FSLN (reftels), Jarquin 
stated that Ortega should have left at least nominal 
authority over the police and military with the Ministers of 
Government and Defense to act as a buffer should the security 
forces become involved in confrontations with civilians.  He 
was more critical of the Organic Law reforms, calling the 
provision allowing the National Assembly to summon private 
citizens "wrong" and mentioned that the Assembly will 
probably revise this provision.  He also asserted that the 
Assembly's new power to hold secret votes should only be used 
in "exceptional" cases such as votes on boundary disputes. 
When asked, he pledged that the FSLN/Convergencia deputies 
would not allow a secret vote on amnesty for ex-President and 
convicted money launderer Arnoldo Aleman.  Jarquin said that 
the Convergencia will support efforts to modify the more 
egregious reforms. 
 
¶6. (C) Jarquin mentioned that he is a participant in the 
Presidential and Legislative Forum (FOPREL), an organization 
that works with SICA and SIECA to harmonize bureaucratic 
practices and legislation throughout the Central American and 
Caribbean region to facilitate travel and trade.  FOPREL has 
eight commissions that work in different areas of unification 
and make proposals to the member states through SICA 
(although the proposals are non-binding).  Jarquin requested 
assistance to establish a central document repository, where 
experts would perform analysis of the legal and 
constitutional framework of the member states for the FOPREL 
commissions.  The Ambassador suggested that USAID regional 
funds might be available to support some of this work. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: Jarquin was eager that we perceive the 
Convergencia deputies as a separate bloc from the rest of the 
FSLN caucus, possibly as a way to improve direct 
communications (and assistance flows from?) the Embassy. 
Contacts have indicated that Convergencia leaders are 
disgruntled with Ortega's moves to increase his authority, 
but more upset that they have not been allotted their "quota 
of power" within the administration.  The Convergencia has 
been reliably obedient to Ortega in the past, and many of its 
more outspoken firebrands defected to the Sandinista 
Renovation Movement (MRS) before the elections.  Should the 
Convergencia deputies eventually decide to break ranks, 
however, their votes could prove crucial for the opposition. 
TRIVELLI