08MANAGUA955
NICARAGUA: CATHOLIC CHURCH LEADER HIGHLIGHTS LACK
Fri Jul 25 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO6365
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0955/01 2071536
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 251536Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2955
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 000955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SJUSTICE WHA/CEN 
AEMERSON INR/AA 
NSC FOR VALVARADO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2018 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KDEM NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: CATHOLIC CHURCH LEADER HIGHLIGHTS LACK 
OF JUSTICE AND MORAL VALUES 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2008 761 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2007 01904 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: Influential Catholic Church leader Monsignor 
Bernard Hombach, the German-born Bishop of Granada, privately 
reaffirmed his concerns about Nicaragua,s fragile democracy, 
absence of justice, politicization of government 
institutions, and erosion of moral values.  While 
acknowledging the troubled political situation, Hombach 
remains staunchly opposed to any Church involvement in 
politics.  Although some prominent religious leaders have 
joined the civil society chorus calling for a national 
dialogue, in Hombach,s estimation it would be a waste of 
time because Nicaragua has no coherent political opposition. 
Hombach expressed a general lack of faith in the Nicaraguan 
political class,s ability to solve the real problems facing 
Nicaragua, and underscored the need to restore values of 
social justice to put the country on the right path. END 
SUMMARY 
 
CHURCH AND POLITICS SHOULDN'T MIX 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) During a July 11 visit with Poloff, Monsignor Hombach 
explained that the Church,s role is not to meddle in 
politics nor identify with any particular political party, 
but rather to demonstrate a positive image for the people. 
He objected to many of the actions by the Ortega government 
and the Sandinista National Liberation Front,s (FSLN) 
partisan control of state institutions, but the Catholic 
Church needs to stay out of politics, Hombach insisted. 
Bishops who side with or oppose any one party are making a 
mistake, although he confided that not all church leaders 
share this point of view.   (Note:  In a recent interview 
with leading center-right La Prensa, Bishop Hombach 
criticized the Council of Peace and Reconciliation, 
administered by retired Cardinal Obando y Bravo, which he 
judged had accomplished nothing and whose existence was 
&unnecessary.8  End Note.)   The Church has no business 
being &married8 to any party, be it on the left or the 
right, but must instead serve as an independent arbiter of 
justice and morality.  Like the prophets of the Old 
Testament, the Church,s duty is to uphold its principles to 
serve God not the politicians.  The Church did have an 
obligation to be alert to any wrongdoings by the government 
against the people.  In his view, however, the criticism must 
not be to antagonize or create enemies, but rather to 
pressure the government to keep its commitment to ending the 
country,s social problems. 
 
LACK OF JUSTICE, PARTISANSHIP, PACTO HAMPER REAL DEMOCRACY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) Monsignor Hombach was especially perturbed about the 
lack of justice in Nicaragua and found it astounding that one 
party, the FSLN, could have exclusive control of the 
country,s legal institutions, the courts, and the Supreme 
Electoral Council (CSE).  The justice system in Nicaragua is 
managed primarily by partisan interests, he explained, rather 
than out of any respect for truth or ethics, and the highest 
judicial positions are doled out as rewards for party 
loyalists.  In Hombach,s view,  the partisan monopoly was 
preventing Nicaraguan democratic forces from flourishing 
while enabling corruption. 
 
¶4.  (C) Offering his perspective on the relationship between 
President Ortega and former president and convicted felon 
Arnoldo Aleman of the Liberal Constitutionalist Party (PLC), 
Hombach likened them to Siamese twins who were paralyzing 
&true democracy.8  Although Ortega is a poor administrator, 
he is a Machiavellian politician.  With justice in the hands 
of the Sandinistas, they have Aleman chained up &like a 
dog.8  According to Hombach, as long as Daniel Ortega is in 
power, Aleman, who is ostensibly under house arrest, will 
never be free because he is Ortega,s most &valuable card.8 
 He observed that Ortega places people who are corrupt but 
obedient in key positions.  For example. Roberto Rivas, 
president of the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE), is not even 
a true Sandinista, Hombach noted, but is willing to carry 
Ortega,s water out of convenience and personal opportunism. 
Arnoldo Aleman, meanwhile, would never put anyone in a 
position of authority he deemed more capable than himself. 
Hombach judged that Nicaragua was prone to corruption and 
dependency on outsiders, largely due to its history of 
caudillismo and tradition of "the Gueguense," the Nicaraguan 
custom of wearing "two different masks." 
 
PARISHIONERS SHARE CONCERNS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C)  Reflecting on the state of Nicaragua,s democratic 
development, Hombach relayed the concerns he has heard from 
members of his congregation.  Many Granada parishioners have 
expressed frustration about the closure of democratic space 
and the controversial CSE ruling to block minority political 
parties from participating in the November 2008 municipal 
elections (Ref. A.)  Some citizens have grown disillusioned 
with the democratic process and lamented that they have no 
one for whom to vote.  Hombach emphasized that the 
manipulation of the Nicaraguan electoral process is nothing 
new.  He recounted previous elections rife with fraud, and 
noted the frustration of having reported several instances of 
electoral abuse directly to CSE president Roberto Rivas who 
has simply ignored his complaints. 
 
LOSS OF VALUES AND ETHICS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) Hombach stressed that the Catholic Church views the 
problems facing Nicaragua, particularly the failure of 
justice, within the larger context of the loss of societal 
and moral values rather than as a result of political 
tension.  Hombach was indignant about the impunity often 
afforded to drug traffickers and perpetrators of sexual 
violence and child abuse, and noted many parishioners had 
sought his counsel on dealing with the issue of intrafamily 
violence, a serious problem throughout Nicaragua.  Because of 
the lack of an independent judiciary, many cases go 
unresolved or are treated with impunity.  The bishop was 
clear that no one, not even priests, should be exempt from 
punishment in cases involving child abuse.  He cited one 
disturbing case of a step-father who had raped his own 
step-daughter, but instead of justice being served, the girl 
was blamed for "lying about" the allegations.  According to 
Hombach, the Church had a duty to defend and teach ethics and 
moral values because although laws exist, laws can,t change 
human behavior.  The bishop also lamented that as a 
consequence of societal tolerance of child abuse, Granada is 
gaining a reputation as a popular destination for child sex 
tourism among foreign travelers.  (NOTE: A representative of 
a Granada-based NGO involved in defending the rights of women 
and children informed poloff separately that Monsignor 
Hombach is playing a prominent role in the fight to stop 
sexual abuse and exploitation of children in the community, 
praising his advocacy of this cause.  END NOTE.) 
 
PASTORAL LETTER TO URGE END TO INJUSTICE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) In contrast to other church leaders who have called 
for a national dialogue as a means for dealing with the 
country,s political, economic, and social crises, Hombach 
demurred that it did not make any sense given the absence of 
real political opposition.  He suggested that the lack of an 
opposition leadership is even more of a problem than Daniel 
Ortega.  Politicians in Nicaragua don,t have principles, he 
judged, and many National Assembly deputies are opportunists 
who people can't trust because they change from one party to 
another.  A national dialogue would just turn into &a 
monologue, and no one would listen.8  Rather than demand a 
national dialogue, Hombach was in favor of the Church sending 
a pastoral letter to the Nicaraguan people, to urge 
reconciliation, address poverty and hunger, and to demand 
that politics be practiced as a "noble art, with noble 
people."  He indicated plans to do so at some point in 
August. Furthermore, although he expressed admiration for the 
strength of the ecumenical dialogue on the Atlantic Coast, he 
lamented that this spirit was weak in the rest of the country 
and regretted that tensions between the Catholic Church and 
evangelical communities exacerbate divisions among people. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶8.  (C)  While Hombach remains steadfast in objecting to 
direct Church involvement in politics, he was clearly more 
critical of the Ortega government than he had been a year ago 
(Ref. B).  He is aware that everything is politicized in 
Nicaragua, but seeks to maintain a distinction between 
criticizing the injustices of the government and criticizing 
or defending political figures or parties.  His complaints 
mirror the many voiced by democratic opposition groups, human 
rights organizations, media, and civil society contacts. 
Given recent public opinion polling showing both the Catholic 
and Evangelical Churches as inspiring considerably greater 
confidence among the population than state institutions and 
many political figures, Monsignor Hombach's insistence on 
keeping a distance from politics is probably both prudent and 
understandable. 
 
 
 
 
TRIVELLI