08MANAGUA866
CITIZENS' POWER COUNCILS MEDDLING IN HEALTH CARE
Tue Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO2252
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0866/01 1902303
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 082303Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2850
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL//J2/J3/J5// PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 000866 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLS PASS TO USAID LAC 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN GREENE AND NYMAN 
DEPT FOR DRL G. MAGGIO 
DEPT FOR INR/IAA - EMERSON 
DEPT FOR USOAS 
NSC FOR V ALVARADO 
SOUTHCOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/07/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ECON KDEM NU
SUBJECT: CITIZENS' POWER COUNCILS MEDDLING IN HEALTH CARE 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for Reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: Representatives from health care unions 
reported that Citizens' Power Council (CPC) members have been 
installed in all 102 of Leon's public health centers. 
Although not healthcare professionals, these CPC stalwarts 
are making healthcare-related decisions.  Over 40 qualified 
healthcare professionals have been fired, and many more 
"blacklisted," as the result of weekly reports these CPC 
members are submitting to a departmental committee led by the 
Sandinista National Liberation Front's (FSLN) political 
secretary in Leon.  The CPC members are reportedly ordering 
doctors to write prescriptions for medicines often 
unavailable from public health centers to maintain the facade 
of free medical care, despite the risks to patients' health. 
Union representatives report that the installation of the 
CPCs in the health sector is now a nationwide phenomenon. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
Intimidation Whittles Ranks of Non-Sandinista Unions 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  On July 3 Mario Reyes, president of the Federation of 
Doctors and Dentists in the department of Leon, reported to 
Emboff that almost half of his union's 300-plus affiliates 
have bolted to join Fetsalud, the Sandinista-linked 
healthcare confederation controlled by FSLN National Assembly 
Deputy Gustavo Porras.  Reyes complained that Fetsalud is 
coercing and threatening members of his federation; those who 
refuse to re-affiliate themselves with Porras' union are 
fired or transferred to other institutions and/or other parts 
of the country.  He alleged, in addition, that those who 
resist are also blacklisted and are subsequently unable to 
work at any public health institution in the department. 
Other healthcare unions reported similar attrition to their 
membership ranks as a result of similar tactics. 
 
¶3.  (C) Beyond intimidation of union affiliates, at least 17 
leaders from the various non-Sandinista unions have been 
summarily fired without justification from their public 
health sector jobs.  Despite Ministry of Labor orders to 
re-instate these fired labor leaders -- who should receive 
special protection under Nicaraguan labor law -- Health 
Ministry entities have simply refused to comply.  The 
Ministry of Labor has taken no further steps to rectify the 
situation.  In addition to the labor leaders, Reyes and the 
others estimate that at least 40 other Leon healthcare 
professionals have been fired without cause, some with over 
20 years of experience.  To be re-instated, fired workers are 
forced to join Fetsalud and present a testimony or guarantee 
from a local CPC member. 
 
¶4.  (C) In several of the larger health centers, including 
the public hospital in Leon, the largest public hospital in 
the country, Reyes reported that union leaders have been 
kicked out of their on-premise offices and the offices 
turned-over to the CPC representative. 
 
CPCs Cover 100 Percent of Health Centers 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) Reyes, Juan Jose Altamirano, General Secretary of 
healthcare union FETRA, Jose Ines Lopez, General Secretary of 
the Federation of Independent Healthcare Workers of Leon, and 
Nuncio Antonio Silva, Labor Secretary for the Health Workers 
Syndicate in the Ministry of Health, Leon, all confirmed that 
CPC representatives have been installed in all 102 of Leon's 
public health facilities.  (NOTE: In a subsequent 
conversation, Marcos Carmona, Executive Director of the 
Nicaraguan Permanent Commission for Human Rights, confirmed 
the installation of CPC representatives in public healthcare 
centers is taking place throughout the country.  END NOTE) 
Although these representatives hold a variety of job titles, 
their primary marching orders are reportedly the same: 
oversee the operations of the facility, give preferential 
treatment to FSLN supporters, and report back to a 
CPC-directed departmental council on the health units' 
activities and the performance and attitudes of the staff. 
 
¶6.  (C) All four cited multiple instances in which CPC 
appointees have directly interfered in patient diagnosis and 
treatment recommendations, closely surveyed doctors doing 
their rounds, and actively intervened to win preferential 
treatment for known Sandinista supporters.  Reyes recounted 
one particularly blatant incident in the Leon hospital in 
which a local CPC delegate tried to put a Sandinista 
supporter at the head of a two-year waitlist to receive 
treatment from the American-Nicaraguan Orthodontic 
Cooperative (COAN).  Upon being refused, the local CPC 
delegate complained to the CPC representative installed at 
the hospital who, in turn, lobbied for the patient.  The 
doctors again refused to budge.  Following the second 
refusal, according to Reyes, the hospital CPC representative 
denounced the COAN doctor, accusing him of soliciting a USD 
1,500 bribe from the would-be patient.  Reyes concluded by 
noting that the situation had become so bad that senior FSLN 
official Lenin Cerna had to directly intercede and the CPC 
representative was transferred to a less-visible position. 
 
Firings and Black-listings by CPC-Controlled Committee 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) According to Reyes, Altamirano, Ines, and Silvia, the 
FSLN political secretary for Leon, who also heads the 
department-level CPC, chairs a weekly meeting -- in which the 
local Ministry of Labor representative reportedly 
participates -- to evaluate reports sent in by the CPC 
representatives from each public health facility.  Reyes and 
the others are convinced that this committee fires and 
blacklists doctors and healthcare workers based on these 
weekly field reports.  Most fired workers have been unable to 
secure work in the healthcare profession anywhere in the 
department of Leon. 
 
Medical Residencies -- It's Not What You Know 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) In addition to establishing a strong direct presence 
in the department's health centers, the CPCs are also 
reportedly exerting pressure and influence within the 
University of Leon's medical residency program.  Previously, 
stated Reyes, students had to pass a battery of exams to be 
accepted to the residency program for specialized medicine. 
However, according to Reyes and confirmed by the others, 
these exams have been scrapped, with students now needing 
only a political voucher or guarantee to gain a slot. 
 
Maintaining the Facade of Free Medicine 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (C) Altamirano, Reyes, and Lopez categorized the 
government's campaign of free healthcare and medicine as a 
"lie," and insisted that the CPC representatives are 
pressuring doctors to write prescriptions only for the 
medicines included on the basic healthcare list -- no 
exceptions -- even if another drug might be more effective or 
the hospital does not have the medicines in stock and the 
patients would have to wait days or weeks.  Altamirano 
recalled an event last April in which the CPC representative, 
in front of an assembled group of doctors, declared that a 
certain condition related to women's health could only be 
treated with the drug provided for in the basic list of 
medicines.  When one doctor pointed out that the hospital 
didn't have the drug, the CPC representative reportedly 
responded, "That's okay.  Make them come back tomorrow or 
until we have the medicine.  We must maintain the image of 
free medicine." 
 
Doctors/Patients Fed-up 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) At the Leon hospital and other centers, patients and 
doctors are apparently tiring of the heavy-handedness of the 
CPC representatives.  At the Leon hospital, doctors and other 
healthcare personnel adopted a policy of immediately leaving 
the room every time the CPC representative (eventually 
deposed by Cerna) entered the room.  In one particular 
instance, Reyes quipped, the patients, realizing what was 
going on, got so angry that they reportedly chased the CPC 
representative from the room.  While this was, Reyes 
admitted, an isolated incident, all the unions, leaders were 
clear that patients are growing increasingly frustrated by 
the CPC-imposed changes. 
 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶11.  (C) While our discussion focused on the situation 
unfolding in Leon, the union representatives insisted that 
their colleagues are reporting the same phenomenon all over 
the country.  Healthcare workers not affiliated with 
Sandinista unions -- specifically Porras' Fetsalud -- are 
being pressured, threatened, transferred, and fired.  Those 
fired find it impossible to secure further employment in the 
healthcare sector.  CPC representatives are forcibly imposed 
on hospitals and health clinics and those who protest are 
reported, fired, and blacklisted.  CPDH's Carmona assured us 
that he has heard similar stories and that the problem is 
widespread.  We will continue to track the issue, contacting 
healthcare unions throughout the country to assess the scope 
of the problem. 
TRIVELLI