08MANAGUA323
Managua End Use Monitoring Report 2007
Mon Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0323/01 0771949
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171949Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2272UNCLAS MANAGUA 000323 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/RM, INL/LP 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR AFIN NU
SUBJECT:  Managua End Use Monitoring Report 2007 
 
REF: (A) State 16874 (B) 07 State 163708 
 
¶1.  Embassy Managua provides the following information regarding the 
end use of resources acquired with INL funds. INL began operating in 
Nicaragua in 1997.  This cable reviews resources used through the 
end of 2007 and details resources supplied in 2007. 
 
¶2.  The USG supports the Nicaraguan National Police (NNP), 
principally the Narcotics Unit and the Vetted Unit.  Since 2002, INL 
Managua has also supported the Nicaraguan Navy in joint 
counter-narcotics operations with the Nicaraguan Police and U.S. law 
enforcement vessels. 
 
¶3. The end of ICITAP: Until December, 2003, Post INL administered the DOJ's ICITAP programs. With ICITAP's withdrawal, Post INL arranged the permanent transfer (via MOUs) of all ICITAP donated equipment to the NNP. This transfer included 17 computers, projectors, TVs and other training equipment for the NNP's basic investigator school, and one Toyota pick-up truck.
 
¶4.  PISCES: In 2003, INL began the deployment of a new Immigration 
computer system called PISCES.  The contractor made the original 
equipment installations, but was unable to follow through with 
making the system operational due to the greater demand to bring the 
system on line in the Middle East.  In January 2005, the contractor 
was able to send a team to Managua to conduct an inventory of all 
donated equipment, do the final installation, and provide training 
to Nicaraguan Immigration personnel.  PISCES is installed, with 10 
stations, at Managua's international airport. Unfortunately, due to 
the incomplete installation, PISCES is still not fully operational. 
Additionally, the current Government of Nicaragua (GON) is reluctant 
to take steps to move the project forward.  Post will continue to 
press the GON to take a forward-leaning stance on this issue. 
 
Procedures 
- - - - - - 
 
¶5.  DEA Special Agents and INL personnel verify the proper use and 
continuing maintenance of equipment acquired with INL funds while 
participating in operations and through regular program monitoring. 
The Embassy also receives written feedback from recipients regarding 
the use of provided equipment.  Early in 2003, the NNP Drug Unit 
initiated its own inventory system.  The inventory now tracks the 
location and condition of all vehicles it has received.  An INL 
Program Assistant was hired on a part-time basis in April 2006 and 
then made a full-time employee in August 2006. One of his 
responsibilities is to monitor INL-donated equipment. 
 
Computers/Electronic Equipment 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  INL has purchased computers, monitors, and miscellaneous 
hardware and software for the NNP.  Prior to 2003, the NNP Narcotics 
Unit received nineteen computers, two scanners, nine printers, and 
eleven uninterrupted power supplies (UPS) for that unit's Joint 
Information Center (JIC).  DEA also donated one computer to the 
Unit.  These items are all in use in the JIC.  The NNP Narcotics 
unit received ten digital cameras in 2003 and nine more in 2004.  In 
2003, INL provided three digital cameras for the NNP internal 
affairs unit.  In 2005, Post INL provided 8 laptop computers and 8 
portable printers to the NNP Narcotics Unit for use in the field. 
INL donated a laptop computer and printer for use with DARE 
materials and anti-gang programs in 2006. 
 
¶7.  The NNP Drug Laboratory was set up in 2002 in Managua for the 
purpose of evidence processing.  It is one of three labs in 
Nicaragua whose reports the judiciary allows as evidence in trials. 
INL had provided the laboratory with equipment and supplies. 
However, upon delivery, the computers were found to be faulty and 
returned to the local supplier.  That supplier has since gone out of 
business and fled to the U.S.; and the computers have disappeared. 
Post INL is ordering supplies and equipment for the lab and will 
continue to evaluate what is needed to improve the lab's ability to 
process evidence. 
 
¶8. INL Managua transferred USD 392,000 to ICITAP Guatemala in 2000 to finance the formation of an NNP Anti-Corruption Unit. ICITAP used these funds to buy forty computers, forty uninterrupted power supplies (UPS), two laptops, a variety of radios, printers, digital cameras, camcorders and software and to provide training for the NNP Anti-Corruption Unit. The unit has been operational since 2001. Eight of the computers are in need of repair or replacement.
 
¶9.  During 2000, INL installed ten closed circuit television cameras 
with recorders for use by the Narcotics Unit at the Managua 
International Airport.  During 2002, six more cameras were 
installed, and five more in 2004.  The NNP Drug Unit uses these 
cameras for surveillance of the airport area and to monitor 
suspicious persons.  In 2005 and 2006, the system was only partly 
functional due to ongoing remodeling and expansion of the airport. 
Post INL contracted with the vendor to re-locate cables and move 
cameras to make the system fully operational during the remodeling. 
Now that airport remodeling is complete, post INL is working with 
the Airport Administration and the NNP to detail plans to revamp and 
expand the camera system. 
 
Communications Equipment 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10. Prior to 2003, INL Managua donated two repeaters, thirty-six radios, and three satellite phones to the NNP Narcotics Unit. The NNP Narcotics Unit uses the satellite phones to communicate with the Mobile Inspection Unit (MIU) when it operates in remote areas of Nicaragua. During 2002, INL Managua received surplus cellular phones from AID and donated seven to the Internal Affairs Unit and five to the NNP Drug Unit. During 2007 Post INL further provided 18 cell phones and 10 Motorola two way radios to the NNP. Additionally, INL Managua continues to pay for the NNP's internet connections.
 
Vehicles 
- - - - - 
 
¶11. The majority of vehicles donated to the NNP are attached to the NNP Drug Unit. The NNP Drug Unit inventory indicates that all donated vehicles are in working order except for three vehicles. One vehicle was totaled during a counternarcotics operation. The second vehicle, a GMC pick up truck, is more than 10 years old and in disrepair due to the lack of vendors who sell GMC spare parts in Nicaragua. Finally, the Drug Unit has retired a Chevrolet Suburban due to the high cost of maintenance and high rate of fuel consumption by the vehicle. Both DEA and INL personnel agree with the Drug Unit reports and observations regarding these three vehicles. Nine vehicles and thirty-six motorcycles were given to the Drug Unit prior to 2003. In 2003, INL provided the NNP Drug Unit with four trucks and 18 motorcycles. In 2004, INL provided four Toyota Hi-Lux pick-up trucks and 18 175cc Yamaha motorcycles. The motorcycles and vehicles are distributed throughout the country at various regional police offices. In addition to these vehicles, INL Managua has equipped two special units for the NNP Drug Unit, a Mobile Inspection Unit (MIU) and a Mobile Surveillance Unit (MSU). The MIU has two vans, a vehicle for carrying canines, two motorcycles, and a full set of entry and inspection tools. During 2004, INL purchased a second vehicle for the MIU, and turned this over with the necessary equipment in 2005. The MSU has seven vehicles that are employed in the surveillance of drug suspects and in interviewing informants. The Mobile Canine Unit also received a Land Cruiser in 2003. In 2004 a DEA surplus Toyota 4-Runner was also transferred to the MSU. In 2005, Post INL added 15 Honda motorcycles and 5 Toyota Hi-Lux trucks to the NNP's Drug Unit. In 2007 a new Hi-Lux was added to the MIU plus 6 motorcycles and 1 ATV for the Drug Unit in Penas Blancas.
 
¶12.  Visits by the INL Program Assistant have shown that a number of 
the donated motorcycles are in need of repair.  INL will further 
assess the problem in 2008 and decide which vehicles can be 
repaired.  Also, as noted in the 2006 Managua End Use Monitoring 
Report, four vehicles originally donated to the Drug Unit are "on 
loan" to other police departments.  Post is addressing this issue 
and insisting that vehicles be returned to the proper unit or risk 
jeopardizing future donations.  We note that the Drug Unit is now 
making a coordinated effort to track down and secure the return of 
the vehicles to the Unit; as a result of these efforts a Toyota 4 
Runner (originally donated by DEA) was returned to the Drug Unit in 
late 2007. 
 
¶13.  During 2000, INL donated two pick-up trucks to the Civil 
Inspection Unit (UIC) as part of Hurricane Mitch Programs. 
Additionally, INL donated one Mazda pick-up and ten motorcycles to 
the NNP Internal Affairs Unit (UAI).  During 2002, the UAI reported 
that one motorcycle had been stolen in Managua.  INL also purchased 
one Toyota Yaris and one Toyota Pick-up for the Anti-Corruption Unit 
(UAC) and ten motorcycles.  All these purchases were paid out of 
Hurricane Mitch funds and all equipment remains in official use with 
the exception of the stolen motorcycle. In 2004 INL purchased a 
Toyota Yaris for the NNP Women's Commissariat, for use in its 
prevention in trafficking in persons outreach program. 
 
Vessels 
- - - - 
 
¶14.  In 1998, INL purchased a Boston Whaler for the NNP.  It is 
currently in storage in the Police Headquarters in Managua.  The 
boat has had persistent engine and electronic problems, and the cost 
of repairs has become prohibitive.  INL has reconfirmed both the 
location and the status of the boat and has started negotiations 
with Mercury Motors either obtain a reimbursement on or 
refurbishment package for the boat. 
 
¶15.  During 2002, INL Managua made a variety of purchases for the 
Nicaraguan Navy, including lifejackets, whistles, lights, flares, 
compasses, radar, radios, and various other tracking and 
communications devices.  This equipment has been used in joint 
counter-narcotics operations with the USCG, the Nicaraguan Navy and 
U.S. law enforcement vessels.  All but the life jackets (due to 
normal wear and tear) are in good condition.  In 2005 Post INL 
donated 225 lifejackets and 2 life rafts to the Navy.  In 2006, Post 
turned over USD 25,000 worth of Yamaha engine parts for maintaining 
the fast boat fleet.  INL refurbished a Dabur Patrol Boat for the 
Nicaraguan Navy that became operational in 2003.  The second Dabur 
was refurbished in 2005.  However, there were some continuing 
maintenance problems which were addressed in 2006 and the vessel is 
now operational.  Work is set to finish on the third Dabur in 2008. 
Also in 2003, the U.S. Coast Guard delivered one fast boat to the 
Nicaraguan Navy in Bluefields and two other speedboats were 
delivered to Managua.  One, however, suffered damage to the hull in 
transit.  In 2003 the British Government provided funds for the USG 
to refurbish an additional fast boat as well.  The fast boats in 
Corinto, San Juan del Sur, Puerto Cabezas, Miskito Cay, and in 
Bluefields all appear to be in working order and are being used 
properly. 
 
¶16. In December, 2003 the USG donated a 110 ft. utility boat, named the MV Kastor, to the Nicaraguan Navy. The Kastor was seized while smuggling drugs. Post's original intent was to refurbish the Kastor to give the Navy a deep water capability in the Pacific. Unfortunately, during the two years that the Kastor was tied up in litigation, prior to the turnover, it deteriorated to the point that it was no longer cost effective to recondition it. It remains docked at the Navy base in Corinto.
 
Construction 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶17.  Vehicle Inspection Station: In 2000, INL Managua signed an LOA 
with the GON that committed the USG to build a Vehicle Inspection 
Station at Penas Blancas on the southern border with Costa Rica. 
The Inspection Station was inaugurated in August, 2002 and was 
outfitted with computers, two forklifts, an Ion Scan Machine, a 
pallet mover and a wide range of tools used in vehicle inspection. 
The Station is operational and in use. INL and DEA personnel visit 
Penas Blancas on a regular basis and have verified the status of the 
equipment.  In 2006, INL funded repairs to the vehicle inspection 
station, including paving the vehicle inspection lane, revamping the 
dog kennels, repairing the water pump and pipes, and enhancing 
security lighting and fencing. In 2007 INL acquired a contract with 
a local vendor to provide maintenance services for a generator at 
the Penas Blancas Station. 
 
¶18. NNP Canine (K-9) Unit: In 2001, INL Managua contracted with CSI International to do a study of the needs of the Nicaraguan Canine (K-9) Unit. During 2002, CSI delivered twelve counter-drug dogs and implemented a comprehensive program that included extensive training for the dog handlers. Six counter-drug dogs were added in 2003 and five more (three of which were dedicated to detecting drugs and illegal currency at the post office) were donated in 2004. This unit continues to function and participate in productive drug busts. The dogs are based in various areas of the country, including the Vehicle Inspection Station in Penas Blancas, the Managua International Airport and the Atlantic Coast port of Bluefields. It is noteworthy that in 2003 the first Nicaraguan-born dog was trained and is now an active component of the unit. The NNP has graduated its first full certified dog trainer, thus enabling the NNP to have a completely freestanding and autonomous K-9 program. Therefore, Post INL's contract with a US-based dog training contractor has been allowed to expire. Post has some concerns about the health of the dogs and the NNP's management of the program. In 2008, Post will coordinate with NAS Guatemala's highly regarded K-9 Unit management team to conduct a new assessment of the state of Nicaragua's K-9 Unit and implement the necessary changes.
 
Status 
- - - - 
 
¶19.  In general, equipment delivered to our counterparts is 
adequately used and maintained for its intended purposes.  The MIU 
follows a regular deployment schedule and routinely seizes drugs and 
disrupts illegal activity.  The Vehicle Inspection Station in Penas 
Blancas is fully operational and has made major drug seizures.  The 
Navy fast boats and Daburs are also making some seizures and their 
rate of seizures has increased dramatically compared to previous 
years, but they are continually hindered by a lack of fuel supply. 
 
¶20. However, as the INL Managua Program has grown, maintenance has become an increasingly important issue. NNP Drug Police officials have asked INL Managua to provide major maintenance and overhauls for expensive donated items, leaving more routine care and upkeep to the NNP. INL Managua will need to dedicate an increasing share of its budget to maintenance issues (such as the purchase of USD 200,000 in Yamaha engines and parts for the Navy) to ensure the viability of ongoing programs. Continuing repair and maintenance issues at the Penas Blancas Vehicle Inspection Station were addressed in 2006, but Post plans to pursue a longer-term maintenance contract to protect and maintain the facility. INL Managua also plans to pay for ongoing maintenance programs for the Dabur boats.
 
Problems 
- - - - - 
 
¶21.  The current GON administration has shown reluctance to 
cooperate on moving forward with complete implementation of the 
PISCES program.  Also, providing supplies and parts for upkeep of 
INL donations will be an increasing task for INL.  Both the NNP and 
Navy have insufficient budgets to maintain all the equipment that 
INL is providing. 
 
¶22.  Post needs to work with the NNP and Navy to ensure maintenance 
of INL donated-facilities and equipment.  This may include funding 
maintenance contracts for key programs such as the Dabur boats, the 
Penas Blancas vehicle inspection station and the Vetted Unit 
vehicles.  Post continues to have concerns about maintenance at 
Penas Blancas and will address these in 2008.  Despite recent 
repairs during 2006 and 2007, the facility is not being adequately 
maintained.  One ongoing problem is the apparent decrease in the 
water table in the area and the corresponding need to deepen the 
well providing potable water to the station.  INL is examining the 
feasibility and costs associated with deepening the well. 
 
¶23.  Several NNP vehicles have been "loaned" to other departments. 
Post will address this issue and remind the police that this can 
jeopardize future donations.  We note that the Drug Unit is now 
making a coordinated effort to track down and secure the return of 
the vehicles to the Unit; as a result of these efforts a Toyota 4 
Runner (originally donated by DEA) was returned to the Drug Unit in 
late 2007. 
 
Impact 
- - - - 
 
¶24.  INL funded equipment and operational support directly 
contributed to a record year of narcotics seizures by both the NNP 
and the Nicaraguan Navy, with 13.2 tons of cocaine seized in CY 2007 
versus 9.7 tons seized in CY 2006.  In particular, the Mobile 
Inspection and K-9 Units conducted extremely successful interdiction 
operations at the Penas Blancas inspection station.  We note that in 
CY 2008 the Vetted Unit, which is intended to investigate money 
laundering and corruption in addition to narcotics trafficking, has 
already conducted the seizure of over a ton of cocaine.  The 
Nicaraguan Navy also utilized INL refurbished DABUR patrol boats to 
achieve significant narcotics seizures on both the Atlantic and 
Pacific Coasts of Nicaragua. 
 
TRIVELLI