08MANAGUA123
NICARAGUA: FY 2008 BIOTECHNOLOGY OUTREACH PROPOSAL
Thu Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0123/01 0311709
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311709Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2024
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MANAGUA 000123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EEB/TPP/ABT/BTT - JFINN AND GCLEMENTS 
USDA/FAS FOR YVETTE WEDDERBURN, OCRA, RACHEL BICKFORD, OSTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO ENRG EAGR ETRD SENS ECON KPAO NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: FY 2008 BIOTECHNOLOGY OUTREACH PROPOSAL 
 
REF: 07 STATE 160639 
 
¶1. (U) In response to reftel, Embassy Managua submits the following 
proposal for FY2008 Biotechnology Outreach Funding. 
 
Purpose 
------- 
 
¶2. (U) The purpose of our proposal is to promote the benefits of 
biotechnology and biofuels technologies to Nicaraguan decision 
makers, academics, and agricultural producers. 
 
¶3. (U) Justification:  Biotechnology and biofuel technologies are 
important to economic development in the new century.  A number of 
Latin American countries have come to appreciate the inherent 
capacity of biotechnology and biofuel technologies to solve chronic 
problems related to agricultural and industrial development and 
energy supply.  Such technologies offer a wide range of 
opportunities related to the practical application of science and 
improvement in national competitiveness. 
 
¶4. (U) Nicaragua is a latecomer to promoting the use of science as a 
tool for economic development, yet scientific research is emerging 
as an integral component of the modern Nicaraguan university.  New 
research laboratories have been established, such as the Molecular 
Biology Center at the University of Central America, and the 
Biotechnology Analysis laboratory at the Universidad Nacional 
Autonoma de Nicaragua.  In 2007, the latter launched the country's 
first academic course on biotechnology.  Nevertheless, Nicaraguan 
awareness of the benefits of biotechnology and biofuel technologies 
largely lags behind the rest of the region. 
 
¶5. (U) We believe that there exists an excellent opportunity to 
promote the benefits of these technologies in Nicaragua and want to 
take advantage of the fact that the Department of State has 
identified Nicaragua as a "high priority country" for biotechnology 
and biofuels.  We propose three activities that address policy 
concerns and present commercial applications for biotechnology and 
biofuels.  They include a National Conference on Biotechnology, 
Outreach to Agricultural Universities and Institutions, and a 
Biofuel Energy Solutions Seminar. 
 
Proposed Activities 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) NATIONAL CONFERENCE ON BIOTECHNOLOGY:  Post proposes to 
sponsor a 2008 National Conference on Biotechnology that we propose 
to entitle, "The Future of Biotechnology: A Promising Story."  The 
conference would bring together governmental, private sector, 
academic, and non-profit stakeholders who have an interest in the 
field of biotechnology.  Our goal is to bring government decision 
makers, university academics and scientists, and agricultural 
producers together so that they may discuss the advantages of and 
opportunities generated by agricultural biotechnology.  We want to 
help them take a science-based approach when formulating law, 
regulations, and biotechnology policy and avoid political pitfalls 
created by anti-biotechnology myths and propaganda. 
 
¶7. (U) We would invite speakers from the U.S. academic community and 
government, knowledgeable regional experts and academic researchers, 
including members of Nicaragua's Commission for Risk Analysis of 
Genetically Modified Organisms, and biotechnology experts from the 
Molecular Biology Center for the University of Central America and 
the National Autonomous University of Nicaragua.  The event would be 
open to the press so as to contribute to general public awareness on 
the subject and encourage journalists to objectively report on 
biotechnology in the future. 
 
¶8. (U) The event should be hosted by a willing institution with a 
vested interest in biotechnology, such as the Interamerican 
Institute for Cooperation for Agriculture (IICA), based in Managua. 
IICA has been looking to sponsor events such as the one we propose, 
and has a vested interest in encouraging the objective and 
science-based presentation of the facts on biotechnology, as well as 
the stature to attract the high-level of interest and participation 
that we seek. 
 
¶9. (U) OUTREACH TO AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES AND INSTITUTIONS: Post 
sees the great need to conduct outreach on biotechnology to 
agricultural universities, cooperatives, and associations where 
individuals may benefit the most from biotechnology, but are 
vulnerable to misinformation.  In collaboration with USDA and USAID, 
we propose that we organize visits to five regional agricultural 
universities to address the potential benefits of biotechnology, as 
well as environmental and food safety issues.  Invited participants 
would include university students and academics, members from local 
agricultural cooperatives and associations, as well as regional 
representatives engaged in agro-industry.  Speakers and/or panel 
members may include members from these groups, but would be led by 
Spanish-speaking U.S. or regional experts on the subject that we 
recruit.  Experts should be able to discuss the science behind 
biotechnology and address safety and ethical issues that people 
have.  They should also be able to provide concrete examples of how 
biotechnology improves crop production and benefits the 
environment. 
 
¶10. (U) BIOFUEL ENERGY SOLUTIONS SEMINAR:  We believe there exists 
an excellent opportunity to promote the development of a biofuels 
industry in Nicaragua at this time.  The country is heavily 
dependent on imported oil and finding cheaper sources of energy is a 
top priority for the government.  While President Ortega has 
criticized the production of ethanol from corn, he has quietly 
supported private sector efforts to produce ethanol from sugar cane. 
 The fact is that Nicaragua's soil and climate are ideally suited to 
the cultivation of potential sources of biofuels, such as sugar 
cane, African palm, and grasses.  We want to advance the national 
dialogue on the development of a biofuels industry in Nicaragua. 
 
¶11. (U) To accomplish this, we propose a day-long seminar to educate 
government officials on biofuel technologies, opportunities for the 
production of biofuels in Nicaragua, and the legal and regulatory 
framework necessary to support the development of a biofuels 
industry.  Specific topics for discussion would include advances in 
cellulosic technology in light of Brazilian and other breakthroughs, 
overcoming challenges related to the consumption of biofuels, 
producing biofuels for export versus local consumption, the 
environmental impact of biofuel production (and consumption), food 
versus biofuel production, and biomass as a cost-effective source of 
energy. 
 
¶12. (U) Potential speakers for these seminars include U.S. 
government officials, U.S. industry representatives, local managers 
of ethanol plants, U.S. academics such as George Philippidis from 
Florida International University's Applied Research Center, and an 
expert on the environmental consequences of biofuel production (and 
consumption), as well as private and public sector officials who are 
involved in biofuel production in Nicaragua and/or the region. 
 
¶13. (U) Participants would include members of the National 
Assembly's Energy Committee, officials from the Ministries of 
Energy, Trade, and Environment, biofuel producers, business leaders, 
university researchers and academics from agricultural and 
engineering universities, and scientists from the Interamerican 
Institute of Cooperation for Agriculture (the institution in charge 
of developing a regulatory framework for the production of biofuels 
in Nicaragua). 
 
Target Audiences 
---------------- 
 
¶14. (U) Each activity targets a different audience.  The National 
Biotechnology Conference targets government officials, including 
members of the National Assembly's Committee on Health and other 
policy makers, and seeks their interaction with academics and 
industrial representatives.  Outreach to agricultural universities 
and institutions targets agricultural producers and university 
academics and students who live in agricultural regions.  The 
Biofuels Solutions Seminar will put government officials, 
scientists, and industry representatives together in the same room 
to discuss what is needed to develop a biofuels industry in 
Nicaragua. 
 
Impact 
------ 
 
¶15. (U) The proposed activities will advance U.S. objectives by: 
 
-- Publicizing the developmental benefits of 
   agricultural biotechnology and biofuels; 
 
-- Promoting the free exchange of ideas, based upon 
   science-based presentations, to objectively change 
   hearts and minds; 
 
-- Inviting government officials, the private sector, 
   and scientists to discuss a legal framework and 
   policy that is conducive to the development of 
   agricultural biotechnology and a biofuels industry; 
   and 
 
-- Helping National Assembly deputies to understand 
   the potential of biotechnology as they deliberate 
   pending biosafety legislation. 
 
Budget 
------ 
 
¶16. (U) Estimated costs are as follows: 
 
-- $12,350 - National Biotechnology Conference 
 
E 
 
     3 Speakers from U.S. - Transportation $4500 
                            Lodging and M&IE $1850 
     1-Day Conference, hall rental, refreshments, and 
                            invitations - $6000; 
 
-- $29,500 - Outreach to Agricultural Universities 
 
     2 Speakers from U.S. - transportation $3000 
                            2 weeks lodging, MIE $5800 
     Five 1-Day Regional Conferences - $20,000 
     Local Transportation - $700; and 
 
-- $16,675 - Biofuel Energy Solutions Seminar 
 
     2 Speakers from U.S.,  transportation $3000 
                            lodging and MIE $825 
     3 Speakers from Region, transportation - $5000 
                             lodging and MIE - $1850 
     1-Day Conference hall rental, etc. - $6000; 
 
-- $58,525: Total requested for all three activities. 
 
¶17. (U) POC:      Ronald Perkel 
        Email:    perkelrd@state.gov 
        Tel:      505-252-7619 
        IVG:      746-7619 
 
        LES POC:  Amanda Fonseca 
        Email:    fonsecaac@state.gov 
        Tel:      505-252-7559 
        IVG:      746-7559 
 
¶18. (U) These activities complement efforts by the U.S. Agency for 
International Development and the Departments of Agriculture, 
Commerce, Energy, and State to promote sustainable agricultural 
production, biotechnology, and biofuels.  Members of the country 
team, including the Economics Section, Public Affairs, Foreign 
Agricultural Service, and USAID will work together to identify 
qualified speakers from the United States and the region, and 
implement proposed activities. 
TRIVELLI