08MANAGUA1389
EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE (EAC) MEETING - MANAGUA
Mon Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
P 172339Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3389UNCLAS MANAGUA 001389 
 
STATE FOR DS/IP, DS/IP/WHA, DS/EX/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC AEMR CASC NU
SUBJECT: EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE (EAC) MEETING - MANAGUA 
 
REF: Managua 1382 
 
¶1. (SBU) AmEmb Managua's EAC convened on 11/17/2008 to discuss 
recent events surrounding the municipal elections that were held on 
11/9/2008.  Members in attendance were AMB (Chair), DCM, RSO, POL, 
ECON, ORA, DAO, MILGRP, DEA, PAO, MGT, CONS, IMO, HU, GSO, and 
USAID. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The following subjects were discussed: 
 
- Post election civil unrest/violence. 
 
The EAC discussed actions by the FSLN, the opposition, and the 
Nicaraguan National Police response (or lack thereof) following 
municipal elections that took place across Nicaragua on November 9, 
¶2008.  As reported in Reftel, violent demonstrations followed and 
numerous injuries were reported. 
 
On Sunday, November 16, 2008, opposition groups had planned a march 
in the city of Leon but were largely blocked from attending by 
supporters of the FSLN.  FSLN managed to block the road to Leon 
prior to most opposition members arriving.  Civil unrest which 
included violence in Leon was widely reported in the media.  Police 
were largely ineffective in controlling the situation and did little 
to re-open the road. 
 
In anticipation of a planned march on Tuesday, November 18, 2008, 
FSLN groups have taken to the streets.  FSLN groups first blocked 
kilometer 12.5 of Carretera Sur (South Highway) to prohibit 
opposition leaders from meeting.  Their roadblock of Carretera Sur 
later moved to kilometer 8.5.  Several direct-hire American 
personnel live in this direction and cannot go home for lack of 
another route as of the writing of this cable.  Note:  Carretera Sur 
is part of the Pan American highway. 
 
Numerous other members of the FSLN have also blocked other main 
routes which impact direct-hire American personnel.  The Galerias 
Mall area and the nearby Jean Paul Genie traffic circle have been 
occupied by FSLN.  A main difference from previous protests in this 
area is that the RSO office received reports that FSLN members were 
targeting vehicles for violence if they were believed to be driven 
by opposition members. 
 
Other areas affected by FSLN include the Pista Suburbana, a main 
thoroughfare for inner-city traffic and the Metrocentro Mall/Hotel 
complex which has been the main focal point of FSLN and opposition 
gatherings due to it's proximity to the Nicaraguan Supreme Electoral 
Council. 
 
The situation remains fluid.  Street protests and clashes are likely 
to continue. 
 
Activities observed during protests include, but are not limited to 
tear gas, rubber bullets, setting off fireworks, rock-throwing, tire 
burning, road blocks, bus/vehicle burning and some degree of 
physical violence between law enforcement and protestors or between 
rival political parties or individuals.  Activities tend to 
intensify in violence beginning in the early afternoon.  Passersby 
and observers are not immune from the effects of these protests. 
 
Mission members and American citizens were reminded that even events 
intended to be peaceful could turn confrontational and possibly 
escalate into violence.  Mission members and American citizens were 
urged to avoid the affected areas if possible, and to exercise 
caution if within the vicinity of any large gathering. 
 
- Post's Emergency Notification Systems (PENS). 
 
Post's emergency notification systems have been used regularly 
during recent demonstrations and have proven reliable.  Post's PENS 
system includes both the E&E radio network and a telephone cascade 
system. 
 
As reported in Reftel, while radio notifications have been largely 
successful, numerous Mission members reported problems with the E&E 
radio alert portion.  Due to limited radio repeater coverage, some 
Mission members did not get the alert and have sporadic coverage 
with Post 1.  The EAC requested that Post's IMO request additional 
funding to expand radio repeater coverage. 
 
- PAS events (Cal Ripkin Jr./Denis Martinez visit). 
 
The Cal Ripkin Jr./Dennis Martinez visit and the accompanying PAS 
events were accomplished without incident.  The final portion which 
was scheduled for Leon today, November 17, 2008, was cancelled due 
to safety/security concerns.  The members of the Cal Ripkin 
Jr./Dennis Martinez visit are scheduled to depart early morning on 
November 18, 2008. 
 
- Continuation of the situation. 
 
The EAC agreed that it can expect both the FSLN and the opposition 
groups will continue their activities into the foreseeable future. 
The EAC will continue to monitor developments and take action as 
 
appropriate. 
 
- American citizen issues. 
 
CONS stated it would issue another Warden Message on post-election 
violence as well as the planned march route for November 18, 2008. 
 
 
CONS will also suspend routine services that are scheduled for the 
afternoon of November 18, 2008. 
 
- Security Notice. 
 
RSO will issue another Security Notice on post-election violence as 
well as the planned march route for November 18, 2008. 
 
- Tripwires. 
 
EAC members were reminded that Post's tripwires are current and 
available in the Emergency Action Plan (EAP).  Note: The EAP was 
updated in the Crisis Emergency Planning Application in May 2008 and 
contact lists were updated following the summer turnover of 
personnel. 
 
It was agreed that agency/section heads would continue to have wide 
discretion in granting liberal leave during this time of civil 
unrest. 
 
Mission members were reminded of the need to reduce unnecessary 
classified holdings. 
 
EAC members were reminded of the location of the alternate command 
center which is located at the Ambassador's residence. 
 
EAC members were reminded that they should begin to consider how 
they would best implement extended hours of operations should it be 
necessary to do so. 
 
EAC members agreed that the Embassy would be open for business on 
Tuesday, November 18, 2008 but members should monitor developments 
to determine if that decision should change. 
 
- TDY and other visitors. 
 
EAC members agreed that at the current time, TDY and other visitors 
could continue to come to Post providing their intended purpose 
could be accomplished given current local conditions.  It was agreed 
that non-essential trips that could be postponed should be postponed 
until things settle down. 
 
- School security. 
 
The RSO briefed that the American Nicaraguan School (ANS) which has 
been most affected by the situation due to its location has been in 
close contact with the office on the situation.  The ANS is the 
school attended by most Mission children and other American 
citizens. 
 
The ANS originally scheduled a short day in anticipation of the 
planned march on November 18, 2008 but subsequently cancelled school 
for the day following the commencement of unrest. 
 
¶3. (U) Additional information will be reported as it is developed. 
POC is RSO Chris Rooks, 011-505-252-7694 or via unclassified e-mail 
at RooksCR@state.gov. 
 
CALLAHAN