09MANAGUA1111
Stop the Presses! Nicaragua's largest newspaper accuses FSLN of Sabotage
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1111/01 3351529
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011529Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0209
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 001111 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM NU
SUBJECT: Stop the Presses! Nicaragua's largest newspaper accuses FSLN of Sabotage
 
REF: A) MANAGUA 1091; B) MANAGUA 1077; C) MANAGUA 1041 
D) MANAGUA 1035; E) MANAGUA 959; F) MANAGUA 916; G) MANAGUA 626 
H) 2007 MANAGUA 669 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  On Thursday, November 19, the printing press of 
Nicaragua's largest daily newspaper, La Prensa, was sabotaged in 
what the owner believes was a politically motivated act perpetrated 
by the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) government to 
silence media dissent.  The sabotage, which occurred two days prior 
to a  civil society march against the FSLN government (see Reftel 
A), may mark a new chapter of reprisals against media outlets 
openly critical of Ortega.  The damage failed to significantly 
hinder printing operations; however, the company's technicians 
claim the sabotage nearly shut down the presses. End Summary. 
 
La Prensa discovers intentional act of sabotage 
 
¶2. (U) On November 19, the printing press of La Prensa, a 
center-right newspaper highly critical of President Daniel Ortega, 
was intentionally sabotaged in what owner Jaime Chamorro believes 
to be a politically motivated act by the Ortega-FSLN government. 
The incident occurred two days before a march against the Ortega 
government held by several opposition groups to protest the 2008 
municipal elections fraud, the Supreme Court decision to allow 
Ortega's reelection and recent acts of politically motivated 
violence against civil society, including media outlets (see Reftel 
B, C, D ).  While cleaning the press around 8:30 a.m., workers 
noticed an abnormal sound and upon inspection discovered five 
damaged gears located in the unlocked transmission box.  In the 
bottom of the compartment, they also found three metal bolts 
foreign to the press (see photos).  The bolts, which had been 
strategically placed to cycle through the gears, damaged the 
machine's "teeth," causing maintenance workers to temporarily shut 
down part of its printing operations to replace the broken parts. 
The temporary delay did not hinder the printing of that day's 
edition since the issue had already been printed; officials 
repaired the press in time to print the next edition. 
 
¶3. (U) According to Chamorro, this act of sabotage against the main 
printing press is the first in the paper's history.  Chamorro 
suspects that the act was intentional since the bolts were foreign 
to the machine and strategically placed, signifying that only a 
person with distinct knowledge of the system would know where to 
place them to inflict maximum damage.  Chamorro also acknowledge 
that two days prior to the sabotage, a rear entrance to the 
printing plant had been damaged in what appeared to be an act of 
vandalism, leaving the plant vulnerable to break-in.  Although La 
Prensa officials denied the likelihood of "internal sabotage," 
representatives admitted the possibility that one of their own 
workers may have committed the sabotage.  However, the paper 
currently has no suspects, either internal or external to the 
organization, based on its own investigation.  La Prensa will not 
request a police investigation, citing "a lack of confidence" in 
what they view as an Ortega-led, corrupt police department. 
Meanwhile, the paper is taking steps to improve its internal 
security because replacing its printing system could cost millions 
of dollars. 
 
La Prensa pins critical response to sabotage 
 
¶4. (U) Following the incident, La Prensa published two follow-up articles about the sabotage, denouncing the fleeting civil liberties in Nicaragua under the Ortega presidency. In an editorial, La Prensa claimed it had "no doubt" about who was responsible for the sabotage of its printing press and vehemently decried the "ideologues" of "orteguismo" who are fomenting "new ways to control the independent media." Chamorro also condemned government repression of other independent media outlets, highlighting the threats against Radio Corporation, the destruction of Radio Dario's installations, the closure and decommissioning of Radio La Ley, and the radio transmission interference of the station "Radio 15 of September" (see Reftels E,F,G). Chamorro cited instances where vehicles have passed by their offices (and other independent media) blasting "government propaganda songs" and firing homemade explosive devices in an effort to intimidate workers. Chamorro decried the end of tax exemptions for paper, ink, and other printing materials by the Ortega Administration as "unconstitutional," claiming such taxes are barred by Article 68 of Nicaragua's Constitution and point 7 of the 2001 Declaration of Chapultepec signed by Ortega (see Reftel H). According to Chamorro, these taxes have significantly increased his publishing costs and are yet another attempt by the Ortega Administration to silence criticism of his government.
 
Comments 
 
¶5. (SBU) The possible sabotage of La Prensa may mark another 
chapter in an alarming trend of government operatives threatening, 
harassing, or sabotaging independent media outlets critical of 
Ortega.  The Ortega Administration's increasingly hard-line stance 
against dissenting individuals, groups, or media outlets seems to 
be leading to a more motivated civil society as indicated by the 
large numbers who recently turned out in protest of his 
administration (see Reftel A).  The elimination of tax exemptions 
for printing materials and loss of state advertising funds, coupled 
with a shrinking economy, is putting increasing economic and 
political pressure on independent media (see Reftel E, H).  Despite 
these challenges, La Prensa's editorial against Ortega's attack on 
a free press signals the paper's willingness to fight intimidation 
by publically maintaining its critical posture. 
 
NOTE: Attached photo files are SBU/FOR INTERNAL USG USE ONLY. They cannot be disseminated outside the USG without the permission of the photographer. Photo (1) the actual gears damaged by three foreign bolts; Photos (2-3) Location in printing press where gears where damaged by bolts

CALLAHAN