09MANAGUA1083
Libertad Act: Nicaraguan Relations with Cuba
Mon Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1083/01 3201504
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 161504Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0139
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0001C O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001083 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2029/11/16 
TAGS: ETRD ETTC PREL ECON CU NU
SUBJECT: Libertad Act: Nicaraguan Relations with Cuba 
 
REF: STATE 115416 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Robert J. Callahan, Ambassador, U.S. Embassy, Managua; 
REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
Summary 
 
¶1. (C) Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega's association with the 
Cuban regime spans several decades.  Since Ortega returned to power 
in January 2007, Nicaragua has re-established close relations with 
Cuba, especially through common membership in the Bolivarian 
Alliance for the Americas (ALBA).  Ortega frequently lauds the 
Cuban socialist model in his public speeches. He has called for an 
end of the U.S. economic sanctions against Cuba.  While trade 
between the two countries is limited, Cuba sponsors important 
training and exchange programs in health and education. 
 
Cuba, Nicaragua, and the Revolutionary Brotherhood 
 
¶2. (C) Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega's association with the 
Cuban regime spans several decades.  Upon release from prison, 
Ortega spent several months in exile in Cuba during the 1970s. 
When the FSLN rose to power, Ortega looked to Cuban-style socialism 
for direction.  Throughout the 1980s, the two countries enjoyed 
close economic, political, and military cooperation.  After losing 
the 1990 elections, Ortega would travel to Cuba frequently and he 
has maintained close relationships with senior Cuban officials, 
including Fidel Castro.  Ortega and other senior GON official 
frequently voice support for the Cuban regime: 
 
--On October 28, 2009, Nicaraguan Ambassador to the United Nations 
Maria Rubiales described the U.S. economic sanctions against the 
Cuban regime as "cruel, inhuman, illegal, illegitimate, and 
designed to cause famine, illness and desperation among the Cuban 
people." 
 
--In protest over the exclusion of Cuba from the April 17 - 19, 
2009, Summit of the Americas, Ortega joined Bolivia and Venezuela 
in refusing to sign the draft declaration. 
 
--In a televised speech on September 20, 2008, in Managua, 
Nicaragua, Ortega favorably remarked that "Cuba is without question 
an extraordinary example of a socialist project in the Latin 
American and Caribbean context." 
 
The ALBA Nexus 
 
¶3. (C) Reflecting ideological and historical affinities with the 
Cuban regime, Ortega moved immediately after taking office in 
January 2007 to join Cuba, Venezuela, and Bolivia as the fourth 
member of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA).  Through 
ALBA, President Ortega maintains regular contact with high-level 
Cuban officials.  According to open source reporting, Ortega met 
with a number of senior Cuban officials during the last year: 
 
--On October 18, 2009, in Cochabamba, Bolivia, Ortega met with First Vice President of the Cuban Council of State Jose Ramon Machado Ventura during the Seventh ALBA Summit. There, Ortega emphasized the importance of ALBA summits in confronting "northern, capitalist countries, the Europeans, the Americans." He said the ALBA countries are "fighting against these powerful enemies and the model they have imposed with its different forms of control."
  
--On April 21, 2009, in Havana, Cuba, Ortega met with Fidel Castro. 
Ortega also participated in a series of media events and received 
medical treatment while there. 
 
--On April 16, 2009, at an ALBA summit in Cumana, Venezuela, Ortega 
met with Raul Castro. There, Ortega called U.S. sanctions against 
Cuba "a true genocide against the people of Cuba," and he called 
for their removal. 
 
--On April 1, 2009, in Havana, Cuba, Ortega and First Lady Rosario 
Murillo met with First Vice President of the Cuban Council of State 
Jose Ramon Machado Ventura and Minister of Foreign Relations Bruno 
Rodriguez Parrilla. 
 
--On November 26, 2008, in Caracas, Venezuela, Ortega participated 
in an ALBA summit with Ricardo Cabrisas, Vice President of the 
Cuban Council of Ministers.  There, he likened Nicaragua's battles 
against European and "Yankee" interventionism to Cuba's struggle 
against the U.S. trade embargo and international isolation since 
its revolution. 
 
Trade and Investment 
 
¶4. (U) Nicaraguan-Cuban bilateral trade declined steadily from 1991 
to 2005 but has increased since 2007.  During the first ten months 
of 2009, Nicaraguan exports to Cuba totaled $1.3 million.  In 2008, 
exports totaled $2.1 million, up from $700,000 in 2007.  The 
public-private Center for Exports and Investment (CEI) led a 
delegation of 13 small business owners to participate in the Havana 
Trade Fair from November 2 - 7, 2009.  Nicaraguan imports from Cuba 
were $1.6 million in 2008, down from $6.3 million in 2007 that 
included the importation of a large quantity of energy-efficient 
light bulbs.  Nonetheless, two-way trade remains insignificant, 
representing 0.1% percent of Nicaragua's total trade worldwide. 
Nicaragua's investment promotion agency, ProNicaragua, reports no 
significant Cuban  investment in Nicaragua.  In September 2009, 
Nicaraguan Tourism Minister Mario Salinas announced plans to offer 
vacation packages for Russian tourists who would visit Cuba and 
Nicaragua on Aeroflot flights. 
 
Training and Scholarships 

¶5. (C) As a legacy of FSLN rule during the 1980s, Cuba and 
Nicaragua have historically collaborated on health and education 
programs.  Since Ortega took office in January 2007, this 
collaboration has intensified: 
  
-- Cuban Vice Minister of Health Marcia Coba visited Nicaragua in 
October 2009 and met with President Ortega.  She led a Cuban 
medical mission comprising 68 doctors and other specialists who 
would remain in Nicaragua for at least six months to provide 
medical care to patients vetted by Citizen Power Councils (CPCs), a 
local governance structure that bypasses elected municipal 
officials and reports directly to First Lady Rosario Murillo. 
 
--Through "Operation Miracle," Nicaraguan government officials 
claimed in October 2009 that Cuban doctors, with Venezuelan 
funding, have performed cataract surgery for more than 60,000 
Nicaraguans since January 2007. 
 
--Under a long-standing agreement, any member of the Nicaraguan 
military can receive free medical treatment in Havana, though in 
practice most are served by local military hospitals and seek 
specialized care in the United States. 
 
--According to Embassy contacts, Cuba is supporting Nicaraguan 
intelligence gathering, with training and personnel, against 
Nicaraguan and U.S.-based democracy activists. 
 
--For years, Cuba has offered full scholarships to Nicaraguan 
students to attend Cuban universities. According to May 2009 press 
reports, as many as 900 Nicaraguans are currently studying in Cuba, 
700 of them studying medicine. 
 
--Cuban teachers participate in a Cuban-designed rural literacy 
program in Nicaragua called "Yes, I Can."  On October 18, 2009, 
President Ortega credited the assistance provided by Cuba for the 
decline in Nicaragua's illiteracy rate to 3.8%. 
 
Comment 
 
¶6. (C) While President Ortega's ideological and historical affinity 
with the Cuban regime make the two natural allies, it is ALBA that 
provides the framework for the relationship and Venezuelan funding 
that facilitates programs at the operational level.  Ortega and 
other government officials frequently praise Cuban assistance, 
while ignoring - or in some cases criticizing as insufficient - the 
estimated $50 million (excluding MCC) in assistance that the USG 
provides annually to Nicaragua through a variety of programs. 
CALLAHAN