09MANAGUA1055
Nicaragua: The General's New Clothes
Fri Oct 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1055/01 3032016
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 302015Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0049
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001055 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/10/30 
TAGS: ECON ETRD KTEX NU
SUBJECT: Nicaragua: The General's New Clothes 
 
REF: 2009 MANAGUA 324; 2008 MANAGUA 1374 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Robert J. Callahan, Ambassador, U.S. Embassy, Managua; 
REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
¶1. (C) Retired General Alvaro Baltodano, Nicaragua's Presidential 
Delegate for Investment Promotion, briefed the Ambassador on his 
recent trip to Washington to advocate for more flexible textile and 
apparel rules for Nicaragua in the implementation of the United 
States - Central America - Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA-DR).  Local contacts have reported that Baltodano has a 
personal interest in the matter.  When a Taiwanese company pulled 
out of Nicaragua in 2008, the Nicaraguan Free Trade Zone 
Corporation, with the direct participation of Baltodano and another 
former general, bought the company's assets and now take advantage 
of Nicaragua's preferential access to export trousers to the United 
States. 
 
 
 
 
 
Reset the Clock on Nicaraguan Apparel Benefits 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) On October 21, retired General Alvaro Baltodano, who serves 
as Presidential Delegate for Investment Promotion, briefed 
Ambassador Callahan on his trip to Washington the week prior to 
address textile and apparel trade issues.  Baltodano told the 
Ambassador he had met with both Assistant U.S. Trade Representative 
for Textiles Gail Strickler and Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
Commerce for Textiles and Apparel Kim Glas.  He outlined a proposal 
to "reset the clock" on the one-for-one rule, whereby Nicaragua 
must use a certain amount of U.S. fabric so that trousers sewn from 
third-country fabric may enter the United States duty free under 
the Tariff Preference Level (TPL) established that year for 
Nicaragua according to CAFTA-DR. 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) Baltodano argued that apparel manufacturing has not taken 
off in Central America as anticipated when CAFTA-DR was negotiated, 
and that U.S. supplies of fabric are too expensive.  As a result, 
Nicaragua has not met its one-for-one commitment and has seen its 
TPL penalized.  Baltodano is afraid the situation will become 
untenable: U.S. textile mills continue to close, the one-for-one 
requirement is becoming more stringent, and TPLs are scheduled to 
phase out. His solution is to apply 2006 one-for-one requirements 
and TPLs for 2010.  He also suggested trade financing might 
facilitate the sale of U.S. fabric so that local manufacturers can 
meet the one-for-one requirement. 
 
 
 
 
 
Baltodano and the GON Buy an Apparel Factory 
 
 
 
¶4. (C) On October 22, Charles Rogers, General Manager of VF - 
Nicaragua, told Econoff that General Baltodano is motivated by 
personal interests in his efforts to see one-for-one rules relaxed. 
Other apparel industry insiders have made similar comments.  In a 
separate conversation on October 27, Scott Vaughn, General Manager 
of Rocedes Apparel and President of the Nicaraguan Association of 
Textile and Apparel Industries (ANITEC), explained those interests 
in more detail.  Vaughn told Econoff that when Nien Hsing withdrew 
from Nicaragua in July 2008, the Taiwanese company closed five 
plants and eliminated 14,850 jobs (Ref A). According to Vaughn, 
Baltodano, in his role as President of the Nicaraguan Free Trade 
Zone Corporation (CZF)-which owns the Las Mercedes Industrial Park 
where three of Nien Hsing's plants were located-forced the company 
to sell its equipment to the CZF at a fire-sale price of $3.1 
million. The CZF then looked to sell off the assets to a company 
interested in operating an apparel factory in Nicaragua. 
 
 
 
¶5. (C) Baltodano found it difficult to find a buyer at first, but 
finally identified a Mexican company, Kaltex. Vaughn reported that 
Baltodano offered six months of free rent to sweeten the deal. 
 
When that deal fell through, Baltodano, retired General JoaquC-n 
Cuadra, and Mexican Luis Velasquez formed C & C Apparel to operate 
the three facilities located in Las Mercedes.  Several months ago, 
Baltodano and Cuadra forced out their Mexican partner, according to 
Vaughn.  He also alleged that in addition to the private capital 
provided by Baltodano and Cuadra, C&C Apparel operates with funding 
from the CZF.  Vaughn told Econoff that C&C employs 2,100 and has 
shipped 2 million square meter equivalents (SMEs) of trousers so 
far in 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
TPL Administration Lacks Transparency and Fairness 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Vaughn complained that the process by which the Nicaraguan 
Free Trade Zone Commission (CNZF) allocates TPL now lacks 
transparency and fairness, two principles that were in place when 
the system was introduced in 2006.  He said that the CNZF has 
transferred all 9.3 million TPLs formerly in the hands of Nien 
Hsing to C&C. Because C&C is a new company, it should have been 
allocated TPLs from the limited amount set aside each year for 
start-ups.  With TPLs trading among apparel companies in Nicaragua 
for about $.30 an SME, those could provide $1.9 million in revenue 
for C&C this year, assuming that the company uses about 3 million 
TPLs and trades the balance. In addition, Vaughn said C&C does not 
pull its weight in meeting the one-for-one requirement, having 
shipped no trousers to date that use U.S. fabric.  Finally, 
Baltodano has not called a meeting of the TPL Board, on which 
Vaughn sits, for more than a year. 
 
 
 
 
 
Comment 
 
 
 
¶7. (C) During the past few years, Baltodano has been a dogged 
advocate for Nicaraguan textile and apparel manufacturers. As a 
former general, his "mission" was to attract investment and create 
employment for Nicaraguans.  Given the information provided to us 
by these credible sources about Baltodano's new business, it 
appears that his mission has changed. The next time he makes a 
pitch for concessions on textile and apparel issues, we will recall 
that he and the GON now have direct financial interests at play. 
CALLAHAN