09MANAGUA935
NICARAGUA: REGIONAL ELECTION ALIANCES FORMED, FSLN
Mon Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO6273
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0935/01 2711853
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281853Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4593
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL//J2/J3/J5// PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 000935 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN KRAAIMOORE 
DEPT FOR DRL MAGGIO 
DEPT FOR INL/IIA ARCHULETA 
STATE FOR USOAS 
STATE FOR USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/20/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: REGIONAL ELECTION ALIANCES FORMED, FSLN 
KEEPS OPPOSITION SPLIT 
 
REF: MANAGUA 859 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan for reasons 1.4 (b & d) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: On September 17, Nicaragua's Supreme Election 
Council (CSE) published the list of authorized political 
alliances for the March 7, 2010 Regional Elections in the 
Atlantic Coast.  There will be four main political alliances 
and three Christian/Evangelical parties will run 
independently.  Despite previous efforts to foster opposition 
unity, the main Liberal parties have registered separate 
alliances and the CSE permitted a fourth alliance, comprised 
of disgruntled opposition leaders, to run.  Meanwhile the 
Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) has assembled a 
formidable alliance of five political parties and eight 
political movements.  Curious elements of the alliance 
registration process and September 20 PLC primaries indicate 
that the FSLN may be cooperating with the FSLN to ensure the 
opposition remains divided and facilitate an FSLN victory in 
a region that historically is anti-Sandinista.  END SUMMARY 
 
-------------- 
Four Alliances 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (U) On September 17, the CSE published the lists of 
electoral alliances for the Atlantic Coast region elections, 
scheduled for March 7, 2010.  There are four main alliances 
between major political parties, and three political parties 
will run independent of election alliances.  The first 
alliance, led by the FSLN, is also the largest and includes 
five political parties (FSLN, YATAMA, National Liberal party 
(PLN), Nicaraguan Resistance party (PRN), and Alternative for 
Change party (AC)) and eight political/social movements 
(Popular Conservative Alliance (APC), the Conservative 
Traditionalist, Raising the Republic, the Nicaraguan 
Democratic Resistance, Vote of Confidence, Evangelists in 
Convergence, Indians of the Caribbean Coast (led by former 
Contra turned Ortega operative Steadman Fagoth), and Catholic 
Action movement).  The second electoral alliance is the 
Alliance for the Republic (APRE), which includes four 
political parties (APRE, Citizen Action party (PAC), the 
Liberal Independent party (PLI) faction led by Virgilio 
Godoy, and a last-minute addition of the de-registered 
Conservative Party).  The third electoral alliance is that of 
the Constitutional Liberal party (PLC), which includes four 
political parties (PLC, the Neo-Liberal party (PALI), the 
Central American Unionist party (PUCA), and the Multiethnic 
Indigenous party (PIM)).  The final electoral alliance is the 
Liberal Nicaraguan Alliance (ALN), and it includes three 
political parties (ALN, PLI faction led by Indalecio 
Rodriquez, and the Costal Unity Movement party (PAMUC)).  The 
three independent political parties are the Nicaragua 
Christian Way party (CCN), the Christian Democratic Union 
party (UDC), and the Christian Unity Movement party (MUC). 
 
-------------------------- 
No Liberal Unity After all 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) In the regional elections, the opposition is divided 
between two Liberal alliances, the PLC and ALN, and the third 
alliance, APRE, which is comprised mainly of disgruntled 
lesser opposition leaders from the de-registered Conservative 
Party and which is unlikely to draw significant public 
support.  The division between the Liberal parties follows 
months of public calls for Liberal unity in the regional 
elections on the Atlantic Coast and earlier promising starts 
(ref B) at unity between former 2006 presidential candidate 
and current PLI leader Eduardo Montealegre and the former 
President and PLC leader Arnoldo Aleman.  By early September, 
it became apparent that the two main Liberal parties would 
not run jointly in the 2010 elections.  On September 2, 
Aleman told local media that the PLC would "go alone" and 
ruled out publicly an alliance with Montealegre.  On 
September 4, the PLI and ALN reached an agreement to run in 
alliance together under the banner of the ALN, but with the 
PLI holding the legal representation of the alliance.  As 
 
MANAGUA 00000935  002 OF 003 
 
 
late as September 10, one day before the alliances had to be 
registered with the CSE, Aleman changed tactics and publicly 
offered an alliance with Montealegre in the regional 
elections, but on terms that would have greatly favored the 
PLC's candidates.  Montealegre rejected the alliance, leading 
the PLC to publicly blame Montealegre for the Liberals' 
"failure" to form a PLC-PLI alliance in the regional 
elections. 
 
¶4. (C) Our contacts on the Atlantic Coast told us that at the 
local level there was wide agreement that all of the Liberal 
forces should join to form one alliance, reminiscent of the 
UNO alliance that defeated the FSLN in the 1990 elections. 
Meetings between PLC, PLI/VCE, ALN, PAMUC, and even Yatama 
no-Sandinista leaders ensued and in Puerto Cabezas unity 
candidates had even been selected between the parties. 
However, when PLC representatives contacted national party 
leaders about the unity proposals, they were instructed to 
end all negotiations immediately.  One contact, working with 
parties on the Atlantic Coast, lamented that local PLC party 
leaders, while earlier expressing their support for unity, 
were entirely beholden to Aleman for personal, financial and 
political reasons and was therefore not surprised that they 
pulled out of unity talks and backed Aleman's call for the 
PLC to "go it alone." 
 
¶5. (C) Opposition leaders and commentators have been at a 
loss to explain how the CSE could register two separate 
factions within the same political party, PLI, to be divided 
between the APRE and ALN alliances.  (Note: When Montealegre 
joined the PLI earlier this year, a rump faction, led by 
Virgilio Godoy and with support from Aleman, has resisted 
Montealegre's leadership and has filed numerous legal motions 
to regain control of the party. End Note.)  CSE chief of 
staff Rodrigo Barretto told us that they registered both 
factions, in different alliances, so that the CSE "would not 
be accused of interfering in internal party affairs" and 
de-registering what might ultimately be the legal faction of 
the party.  He claimed the CSE wanted to avoid a repeat of 
the crisis in 2008, when the CSE de-registered the 
Conservative Party and the leftist Sandinista Renovation 
Movement (MRS) and prevented them from participating in the 
November 2008 municipal elections.  Other commentators have 
suggested that the third alliance will be used by the 
FSLN-controlled CSE to siphon off votes from the two Liberal 
alliances, especially in historically Liberal areas, to 
ensure a broader FSLN victory. 
 
¶6. (C) The PRN, the political party originally established by 
ex-Contras and historically anti-Sandinista, has also further 
divided the opposition vote by aligning with the FSLN.  The 
announcement, though not a surprise, was a disappointing blow 
to local PRN members on the Atlantic Coast.  The PRN has been 
adrift and marginalized in recent yearsm, often serving as a 
catalyst for Liberal division, and more recently lent its 
overt support to the FSLN in defending the electoral fraud 
during the 2008 November elections.  The party's base has 
been in disagreement with the Managua national leadership for 
years and many members have left for the ALN, PLI/VCE or PLC 
parties.  PRN national leaders defended their decision to 
join with their sworn enemy in the election alliance, 
claiming that the real enemies to their party's continued 
existence are the Liberals. 
 
----------------------- 
Another FSLN-PLC Pacto? 
----------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Montealegre believes the PLC and the FSLN have renewed 
their "pacto" power-sharing agreement to divide up the seats 
in the regional elections.  As evidence, he cited Aleman's 
announcment for the PLC to go it alone and the decision of 
the CSE (currently controlled by the FSLN with the support of 
the PLC) to register two factions of the PLI in separate 
alliances, ensuring that non-Aleman Liberals would be 
divided.  Most recently, reports of widespread fraud and vote 
rigging in the PLC's September 20 "pimaries" reinforce the 
preception of collusion between the PLC and FSLN in the 
 
MANAGUA 00000935  003 OF 003 
 
 
regional elections.  There are growing accounts that the PLC 
refused to include non-Aleman PLC members on the voting rolls 
for the primaries while also permitting FSLN members to be 
recorded on the PLC rolls and to cast votes.  The PLC's 
claims of high turnout in the primaries lends credence to the 
reports of FSLN participation and casts doubts about the 
integrity of the PLC primary process.  The PLC reported on 
September 22 that 55,888 people voted in the primaries, 
approximately 14,000 more people than voted for the PLC in 
the 2006 regional elections.  In one area, the PLC claimed 
three times more people voted in their internal primaries 
than voted in total for the same region in 2006.  According 
to local contacts, the reported turnout is almost certainly 
false, but even a modest increase in turnout would have only 
been possible with the participation of FSLN party members. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) FSLN founder and current Ambassador to Peru Tomas 
Borge told local press in early September that "anything can 
happen in Nicaragua except for one thing - that the FSLN will 
lose power again... We will do everything to remain in power, 
whatever the cost."  In the 2010 Atlantic Coast regional 
elections, the FSLN appears to doing exactly that -- whatever 
is necessary to ensure their victory.  Through their control 
of the CSE, they have manipulated the electoral process (ref 
a) to disenfranchise voters by preventing access to cedulas 
(identification cards) and again on September 17 in 
manipulating the alliance registration process.  In the 
formation of alliances and their collective refusal and/or 
inability to unite, the Liberals have made the FSLN's job all 
the easier. The separate Liberal alliances will likely split 
the opposition vote and increase the FSLN's chances to win in 
both the North and South regions.  Even if the elections in 
the Atlantic Coast were free and clean, the votes will be 
counted by the same CSE that perpetuated the election fraud 
in November 2008, ensuring that the FSLN will have additional 
opportunities to manipulate the final count if these previous 
efforts fail to secure their victory.  And, as happened in 
the November municipal elections, it appears that Aleman is 
once again the willing partner in the effort to subvert 
Nicaragua's electoral process. 
 
CALLAHAN