05ANKARA809
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 000809 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Khatami threatens US - Aksam 
Khatami warns that the US will turn Iran into `hell' if 
attacked - Sabah 
Women stayed at home in first Saudi elections - Aksam 
Nuclear `confessions' from North Korea - Milliyet 
North Korea admits to developing nuclear weapons - Sabah 
Bush expected to oppose Armenian `genocide' bill - Hurriyet 
Saudis hold elections without women - Milliyet 
Rice: We Opened a New Page, Hope Turkey Does the Same -- 
Vatan 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Iran challenges US - Radikal 
Iraq to close borders February 17-22 on Shiites' holy week - 
Radikal 
North Korea increases nuclear tension again - Zaman 
North Korea withdraws from nuclear disarmament meetings - 
Cumhuriyet 
NATO decides to expand ISAF in Afghanistan - Radikal 
US to give $400 million to allies in Iraq, Afghanistan - 
Radikal 
Women investigators use `sexual' tactics against Guantanamo 
inmates - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice interviewed by `Vatan' 
 
SIPDIS 
Vatan's Brussels correspondent Duygu Leloglu reports from 
Luxembourg (2/11):  "In a meeting with eight European 
journalists in Luxembourg, Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice gave some important messages.  The Secretary's answers 
to "Vatan" correspondent Duygu Leloglu, as published and 
translated from Turkish, are as follows: 
 
¶Q.   How do you evaluate the impact of your visit to Turkey 
on bilateral relations? 
¶R.   The reason for my visit was to highlight the importance 
of Turkish-US relations.  Turkish officials also reiterated 
the importance of the relationship.  The US has longstanding 
strategic relations with Turkey, which became stronger after 
Turkey's NATO membership.  Of course, we had disagreements 
over the Iraq issue.  But,I believe that, despite those 
disagreements, the US has now opened a new page in bilateral 
relations.  I hope Turkey will do the same. 
¶Q.   Are you planning any initiative for Turkey's concerns 
regarding Iraq? 
¶R.   The US understands Turkey's concerns over Iraq's 
future.  We are engaged in protecting Iraq's territorial 
integrity. We are committed to an Iraq that has no danger of 
terrorism in its territory and where all minority groups 
will be represented. 
¶Q.   There are allegations that Turkey would intervene in 
Kirkuk in ethnic clashes were to take place.  Do you think 
that there is strong possibility of Turkish intervention in 
Kirkuk? 
¶R.   The integrity of Iraq means that Iraq is a whole and 
cannot be divided.  We want an Iraq in which all Iraqis are 
respected.  It is a requirement that the Iraqis live in 
peace with its neighbors and without any threat of terrorism 
in their own land.  I believe that Iraqis understand this 
very well.  After suffering under the Saddam regime for so 
long, I believe that the Iraqi people are well aware of 
their responsibilities. 
¶Q.   What do you think should be done to prevent ethnic 
clashes in Kirkuk? 
¶R.   Not only the Shiites' and Sunnis', but also the 
Turkmens' and Kurds' rights should be respected.  A 
democratic constitution and democratic institutions will be 
able to provide such respect.  Iraqis lived under a 
tyrannical dictator for a long time.  Saddam tried to 
eliminate the differences in the country.  Now, all of these 
differences should be taken into account, and Kirkuk should 
be city of all  Iraqis. 
¶Q.   Are you planning to take any further steps on the PKK 
issue? 
¶R.   We evaluated the PKK issue with Turkish officials 
during my visit.  The PKK is on the US list of terrorist 
organizations.  In order to avoid Turkey facing danger from 
the PKK, we highlighted the need for Turkey-US-Iraq 
cooperation and the need to revive the trilateral mechanism. 
We will work on this issue when I get back to Washington. 
¶Q.   Are you going to award the countries which sent troops 
to Iraq, and what kind of award will it be? 
¶R.   The American people will never forget the countries 
that joined the international coalition forces against the 
Saddam regime.  Especially, the support given by the UK, 
Poland, Australia, Romania and Bulgaria is worthy of praise. 
They have lost lives in Iraq too.  We will never forget 
that.  But, now we are turning the page and starting a new 
era, to support a democratic Iraq.  Of course, we will 
continue our financial support to our partners in our 
international force. 
¶Q. When does the US plan to start direct trade with and 
direct flights to the TRNC? 
¶R.  We were disappointed that the Annan Plan was rejected. 
We have to work to remove the isolation of the Turkish 
Cypriots.  Former Secretary of State Colin Powell has had 
meetings with the leaders there.  Recently we decided to 
give financial support to the Turkish Cypriots.  We will see 
what else we can do to help.  Nevertheless, it should be 
remembered that we have multilateral obligations.  But, we 
don't want the Turkish Cypriots to be isolated just because 
Cyprus entered the EU. 
¶Q.   If the Iranian Administration gives guarantees on its 
nuclear program, will the Bush Administration improve its 
relations with Iran? 
¶R.   First of all, Iran should fulfill its international 
obligations regarding its nuclear program.  Years ago, the 
US was the first country to warn the world on this issue. 
It would be wrong to speculate how the US would act if Iran 
undertook its obligations.  Let us see if Iran will be 
convincing enough on this issue.  Nuclear weapons pose a 
great danger for world security.  Therefore, the issue 
should be dealt with urgently.  If Iran doesn't fulfill its 
international obligations, a next step will be taken.  This 
next step is to carry the issue to the United Nations 
Security Council. 
 
US Builds Arms Caches in Incirlik AB:  The US has 
constructed two arms depots in the Incirlik Airbase in 
southern Turkey, reports "Milliyet."  The ammunition 
storehouse has a capacity to keep 6,000 weapons, and enough 
supplies to equip a brigade, says the report.  The depots 
also store `tactical nuclear bombs' used against armored 
vehicles and bunkers, claims the paper. 
 
Greek Cypriot Opposition Leader in Ankara:  Nicos 
Anastasiades, chairman of the opposition Democratic Union 
(DISI), met senior AK Party officials, including FM Abdullah 
Gul in Ankara yesterday.  `We will continue to work for a 
solution on Cyprus.  We agree to a bi-zonal, bi-communal 
solution,' Anastasiades, the first Greek Cypriot politician 
to visit Turkey since 1963, told reporters.  Anastasiades 
reportedly suggested to Gul that both sides pull troops out 
of Cyprus.  He also offered free movement of both peoples in 
the island, say papers. 
 
American Companies to Visit North Cyprus:  US Ankara Embassy 
Commercial Counselor Amer Kayani, accompanied by 
representatives of 10 US companies, is to visit north Cyprus 
February 17 for meetings with Turkish Cypriot chamber of 
trade, reports "Zaman."  Halim Neyzi, chairman of the 
American Business Forum in Turkey which organized the day- 
trip of the US companies to `TRNC,' said their delegation 
would be met by the US Ambassador in Cyprus at the Ercan 
Airport in the north of the divided island.  `US Ambassador 
to Ankara, Eric Edelman, said the US has apportioned $30 
million for "TRNC."  We will help Turkish Cypriots to use 
this money for improving the infrastructure in the north,' 
Neyzi said.  He stressed that providing American goods and 
services for northern Cypriots was of crucial significance. 
US companies to visit the Turkish Cypriot sector are 
Shaw/Stone&Webster, El Paso, FedEx, Cushman&Wakefield, 
Comsat, Oracle, GNC, World Trade Center, Raymond James and 
American Express. 
 
Turkey Assigns An Ambassador to Jerusalem:  Turkey, in a 
show of support for Palestine, assigned Ambassador Ercan 
Ozer to the post of consul-general in Jerusalem, papers 
report.  FM Abdullah Gul announced the decision in mid-2004 
as a reaction by Ankara to the Israeli violence against 
civilians in Palestine.  Meanwhile, papers also report that 
Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas, during his visit to Turkey 
some weeks ago, asked Ankara to repair the Gaza Airport. 
Ankara accepted, and Israel agreed to it, say reports. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Anti-Americanism; Saudi Elections; Iraq 
 
"I Will Write Even if I Am the Only One" 
Ertugrul Ozkok observed in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" 
(1/11):  "This column is addressed to those in Turkey who 
have common sense.   I am well aware that it will not mean 
anything to the sworn enemies of the United States, and that 
it will just create yet another opportunity for them to 
write whatever comes into their heads.  But even if I am 
completely alone, I consider it my duty to write these 
things.  Let us first look at the things that have taken 
place within just the last week.   The leaders of Israel and 
Palestine, for the first time in ages, sat down at the table 
and shook each other's hands. 
The entire world, with a hopeful optimism, supports this 
handshake.   There were also the King of Jordan and the 
Egyptian Head of State at the side of that table.  But it is 
as if there were no Muslim Turkey that is rising in the 
regard of the Arabs.  The day before this meeting, the new 
Secretary of State of the United States, which the entire 
 
SIPDIS 
world seems to hate, and the Arabs to hate even more, was in 
Israel.  Moreover, she went to Ramallah and met with the new 
Palestinian Head of State, who came to power via election. 
Let us now look at the other scene.  President Chirac and 
the government of France, the country that prior to the Iraq 
war had engaged in the most arm-wrestling with the United 
States, received the US Secretary of State warmly as "Dear 
Condi".  Palestine was repairing its relations with the 
United States.  The Arab countries were supporting the 
results of the elections in Iraq.  Not a single word against 
the American administration was coming out of these 
countries.  Neither accusations of "genocide" nor anything 
of the sort.  This is the way the Arabs are, but we are 
taking pride in our "high standing", as it were: "The 
society with the greatest hostility toward the United States 
is the society of Turkey."  And what is this?   It's that 82 
percent of the public reportedly see the United States as a 
threat.  Today, in influential corners and in influential 
places, there is an anti-Americanism that the generations of 
the '60s and '70s have not been able to shake off.   The 
leftists, the rightists, and the Idealists [extreme Turkish 
nationalists] are unable to free themselves from this.  And 
if this feeling sometimes exerts pressure, it flows out at 
the first opportunity with outlandish conspiracy theories. 
And the US administration, for its part, sometimes takes 
steps that stimulate such feelings.  To date, Turkey has 
succeeded in restricting such feelings to being the emotions 
of opposition among the intellectual class.  But now these 
feelings are coming to be Turkey's official policy. I know 
that to write the opposite of this would be a more 
profitable, much less risky approach these days.   And there 
would not be the danger of immediately being stamped by 
certain people with the slander of low concepts such as "an 
American lackey", "a supporter of a [foreign] mandate", etc. 
But sensible people who love their country have to be at 
least as bold as the others, and to express their ideas. 
 
Some people may have short memories.   But I, as a citizen 
of Turkey, have not forgotten that we captured Abdullah 
Ocalan, the bloodiest terrorist of our history, through the 
help of this country that we are now taking pride in 
declaring to be our enemy.  Because I have also not 
forgotten that that person, now incarcerated on Imrali, has 
on his hands the blood of 30 thousand of our people.  I 
cannot disregard the assistance that was provided by the 
financial assistance of that country in overcoming 
[Turkey's] 2001 economic crisis.  I am not saying that the 
American administration cannot be criticized, or that its 
clumsy behavior or historic errors should not be exposed. 
But it is one thing to say these things in a manner and 
place that befit an ally, and something else entirely to 
make a show out of them with the mindset of the obsolete 
leftism of the '60s. The new goal of the Foreign Ministry 
was a "multi-focused foreign policy".  And a few effective 
steps were indeed taken, especially at the beginning.  But 
some of the statements made most recently out of the 
government and the AKP [ruling Justice and Development 
Party] take this policy away from one that is multi-focused 
to one that has but a single focus.   And that single focus 
is "a certain sector of the Arab world".   I say "a certain 
sector" because the Arab governments, despite the thinking 
of their publics, proceed with extreme sensitivity in their 
relations with the United States.  Whereas we are a bit like 
the proverbial bull in the china shop. 
 
A foreign policy with a single focus is very easy.  You 
speak in favor of someone, and use the most hostile language 
possible about someone else.  In this way you become the 
dearest friend of the one, and the enemy of the other.  But 
a multi-focused policy is difficult.  For today, a 
successful policy means being able to maintain the same 
distance of respect in terms of the United States, and 
Israel, and the Arab countries.  But unfortunately, when the 
former militants of the '60s and '70s have nostalgic 
flashbacks to the feelings deep inside them, the result is a 
policy like the one we have now." 
 
"Elections and Change in the Middle East" 
Sami Kohen wrote in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (2/11): "The 
Saudi Arabian local elections received international 
attention because they signified symbolic progress.  Even 
though the elections were local and held on a limited basis, 
the event itself showed that the royal rulers have decided 
to share their authority partially for the first time in the 
country's history. . The number of advocates of human rights 
and freedom continues to grow in Saudi Arabia.  The current 
system is an obstacle to their speaking out.  Their attempts 
sometimes end in jail sentences and other punishment under 
the religious rules.  Yet the royal family could not help 
but hear the popular voice for a change. . It is also a fact 
that foreign influence, particularly America's pressure and 
repeated calls for change, played a role in the new steps 
taken by the Saudi family.  Even in their current form, the 
Saudi elections signify important progress in the Middle 
East.  None of the countries there are perfect or capable of 
meeting democratic standards, although elections in 
Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan are all the steps in the right 
direction." 
 
"When Kurds Go Wrong" 
Erhan Basyurt commented in the Islamist "Zaman" (2/11): 
"Iraqi Kurds seem to be pushing for an independent state. 
The elections on January 30 not only turned into a de facto 
vote for independence; referenda depicted Kirkuk as part of 
Kurdistan. . In fact, the conditions are not ripe for an 
independent Kurdish state, either with Kirkuk or without it. 
First, the neighboring countries - Turkey, Iran, and Syria - 
as well as the Iraqi Shiites are all against a separate 
state.  Second, an independent Kurdistan means not only the 
division of Iraq but a change in the regional equilibrium as 
well.  Such a change will increase Iran's influence in the 
region, and the US does not want that. . It remains a utopia 
for Kurds to have Kirkuk or an independent Kurdistan. 
Kurdish leaders should refrain from making unnecessary 
mistakes, and they should not reduce their room for 
political maneuver by placing Turkey in a hostile position." 
 
EDELMAN