05BRATISLAVA78
IRAQ: SLOVAKIA ISSUES POSITIVE STATEMENTS ON
Wed Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Bratislava
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRATISLAVA 000078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO IZ LO
SUBJECT: IRAQ: SLOVAKIA ISSUES POSITIVE STATEMENTS ON 
ELECTIONS 
¶1.   Slovak PM Mikulas Dzurinda (para 2) and the MFA (para 
3) issued congratulatory statements on the Iraqi elections. 
Post placed the IIP-supplied op-ed on the Iraqi elections in 
the daily newspaper Narodna Obroda (readership estimated at 
 
145,000) on January 27 under the CDA's by-line.  The 
headline was "Iraqis take the future in their own hands in 
the elections." 
¶2.   Begin text of the Prime Minister's statement 
February 1, 2005 
Declaration of Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda on the 
Results of the Parliamentary Elections in Iraq 
"Yesterday, January 30, parliamentary elections were held in 
Iraq.  Iraqis spoke in a clear voice.  Through high election 
turn out, they expressed their basic civil position -- they 
rejected terrorism, they rejected intimidation by violence. 
And they voted for a new Iraq. 
"I congratulate the Iraqi people on this clear position and 
on this truly historic success. 
"Slovakia participated in the international coalition in 
Iraq, so the Iraqi people could live in better conditions. 
Our soldiers, policemen, and diplomats present in Iraq are 
carrying our share of responsibility for all of us for a 
better, safer and more peaceful Iraq - and for a peaceful 
region. 
"There is still a long way to restore peace in Iraq. 
Militants are still using every opportunity to disrupt the 
security of the country and threatening their lives of Iraqi 
citizens.  Due to militants' attacks during the election 
day, several tens of Iraqis died.  Coalition soldiers - 
American and British - gave their lives as well. 
"The mandate, given by Iraqi citizens to the new National 
Assembly, is strong and straightforward -- to prepare and 
pass a new constitution for a peaceful and tranquil Iraq. 
And after decades of suffering under a dictator, Iraq and 
its citizens have a real chance." 
End Prime Minister's Text 
 
¶3.   Begin text of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs statement 
 
February 1, 2005 
 
"On January 30, 2005 the first free election after the fall 
of Saddam Hussein's regime took place in Iraq.  According to 
initial estimation around 60 percent (8 million) of Iraqis 
participated in the election process, mainly of Shiites and 
Kurds. 
 
"The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic 
received with pleasure news concerning high turnout of 
Iraqis in the parliamentary election.  The Slovak diplomacy 
congratulates people of Iraq at this historic moment.  By 
their massive turnout the Iraqi voters have expressed their 
support to the worldwide effort of the antiterrorist 
coalition in its fight against terrorism. 
 
"The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic 
would like to express its admiration and respect to all the 
Iraqis who despite the ongoing violence and terrorist 
attacks participated in the election. 
 
"We assume that holding of the parliamentary election is the 
first step to democratization of Iraq." 
 
End MFA Text 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
 
THAYER 
 
 
NNNN