05DJIBOUTI157
UNION FOR PRESIDENTIAL MAJORITY (UMP) CONVENTION IN
Wed Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Djibouti
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DJIBOUTI 000157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR FR DJ
SUBJECT: UNION FOR PRESIDENTIAL MAJORITY (UMP) CONVENTION IN 
DJIBOUTI 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The Union for Presidential Majority (UMP), the 
majority coalition, held its Convention February 6 at the 
Equestrian Club in Djibouti City. The UMP is composed of four 
political parties: People's Rally for Progress (RPP, ruling 
party), Front for Unity and Democracy Restoration (FRUD), Social 
Democratic Party (PSD) and National Democratic Party (PND). Seven 
thousand persons attended the Convention, most of them members of 
the four parties. The technical preparation and the colorful 
arena hinted at foreign assistance for the staging, lighting and 
sound equipment used. Information from a government official 
indicated that the materials used in the Convention were those 
for the Campaign of the President for upcoming elections in April 
¶2005. Songs, poems and cheerful dances followed speeches from the 
four parties' presidents. The Convention, which started at 19:00 
on Saturday, ended around 00:00 AM Sunday morning. Of the 
remaining four parties, the three of the Opposition coalition 
have yet to name a candidate. The leader of the fourth opposition 
party announced his candidacy in late 2004. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Union for Presidential Majority's (UMP) Convention was 
the first of its kind to take place in Djibouti. The goal of the 
Convention was for the four parties to put in place a common 
platform for the Presidential elections, which are scheduled to 
be held on April 8. The four leaders gave speeches explaining why 
they chose Ismail Omar Guelleh to be the UMP sole candidate for 
the election. Idriss Arnaoud Ali, President of the National 
Assembly and Secretary General of the RPP, made the opening 
speech. He congratulated Guelleh for his wise choice of deciding 
to lead the country for a second mandate. Moumin Bahdon Farah, 
President of the Social Democratic Party (PSD) spoke next. He 
stated that the choice of his party to nominate Guelleh as its 
only candidate came after reflection and observation of Guelleh's 
economic, social and political achievements during his first 
mandate. Some of the projects are still under way and it will be 
necessary to re-elect Guelleh in order to finish these efforts. 
Alluding to the current misunderstanding between Djibouti and 
France concerning the death of French judge Borell, whose widow 
claims that Guelleh's entourage assassinated her husband, Farah 
said "one of the major points of agreement with the current 
candidate is that he has allowed us not to be subject to the 
mercy of one power." 
 
¶3. Aden Robleh Awaleh, President of the National Democratic Party 
(PND), also proclaimed PND support of Ismail Omar Guelleh. He 
emphasized that Guelleh is the only person that can lead the 
country safely and that it was a stroke of genius on the part of 
Guelleh to offer military bases in Djibouti to foreign powers. 
This would enable the population to gain substantial financial 
income from the services it provides the troops. According to 
Awaleh, "the sovereignty of Djibouti has been confirmed 
thoroughly after 1999 (first year of Guelleh's mandate), even if 
this feeling does not please a former colonial power. It showed 
that we can discuss and sit with countries bigger than us and 
talk to them equal to equal." Ali Mohamed Daoud, known as Jean- 
Marie, President of Front for Unity and Democracy Restoration 
(FRUD) Party, gave his speech in Afar. He said the choice of FRUD 
to nominate Guelleh as UMP candidate was the result of Guelleh's 
peace loving nature and his having done everything possible to 
strengthen relations among communities. 
 
¶4. (U) Ismail Omar Guelleh, candidate of Union for Presidential 
Majority (UMP), in his speech, expressed delight over the support 
of the four parties. In a long review of 1999 electoral campaign 
promises, he highlighted the importance of beginning the 
decentralization process, the strengthening of integral 
multipartism, and integration of women in the political life with 
a parliamentary quota of 10 percent. He reviewed the reasons for 
organizing the Somali Peace Conference of Arta, and the adherence 
of Djibouti to the international struggle against terrorism. "The 
signature of treaties with foreign powers willing to install 
their bases on our soil were tangible actions which have placed 
Djibouti in the center of this planetary struggle," he stated. 
Guelleh touched briefly on reform of the Nationality Code and 
Family Code. On economic matters, he mentioned that 35 billion Df 
(196 million USD) has been injected into the national economy by 
Arab development funds from 2001 to 2005. Concerning Human 
Rights, he reiterated his "conviction" on the importance of 
freedom of speech and opinion for all. He stated that Djibouti 
will no longer see a political prisoners or individuals jailed 
for their opinions. 
 
¶5. (U) Guelleh also said he will present his program concerning 
all these subjects in detail during the campaign. Referring to 
the Borell affair, Guelleh said, "The defense of national 
sovereignty is not subject to concession. If there are people or 
states that want to disrepute us through issues that we have 
nothing to do with, they shall know that we will make no 
concession in regards to our rights and our sovereignty." 
Regarding projects in the near futures, Guelleh focused on making 
water available for people without easy access to it and making 
accessible to cheap electricity. On this last point, he talked 
about studying investment possibilities in Aeolian (wind) and 
solar energy. He also mentioned power interconnection with 
Ethiopia and a seawater desalinization plant as possibilities for 
fighting scarcity of water.