05KUWAIT768
SYRIAL KILLERS:" MARCHERS IN KUWAIT PROTEST
Mon Feb 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 000768 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR BERNS AT NEA/ARPI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KU LE PDEM
SUBJECT: "SYRIAL KILLERS:" MARCHERS IN KUWAIT PROTEST 
MURDER OF RAFIQ HARIRI 
 
 
¶1. A crowd of 100-200 peaceful protesters chanted anti-Syrian 
slogans, waved Lebanese flags and carried pictures of the 
late Rafiq Hariri near the Embassy of Lebanon in Kuwait on 
February 21, coinciding with a protest through the streets of 
downtown Beirut. This was the second such rally in Kuwait in 
as many days. Kuwaiti police looked on as marchers sang the 
Lebanese national anthem, recited the opening verse 
(al-fatihah) of the Koran and displayed signs (in Arabic, 
English and French) with slogans such as: "syrial killers," 
"Syria out," "leave us alone" and "yes to freedom, no to 
occupation." 
 
¶2. Poloff attended the rally and observed that the majority 
of the protesters ranged in age from 20 to 40 years old. From 
the number of people reciting the Koranic verse, many 
marchers were Muslim although Christians were present, 
identified by the common practice of wearing a cross on one's 
outer garment. The protesters, some of whom donned red and 
white scarves, displayed handwritten and pre-printed signs as 
they walked up and down Istiqlaal Street in the diplomatic 
quarter. Police, however, prevented marchers from approaching 
the embassy itself. The primary role of the police seemed 
traffic control as they were wearing regular uniforms without 
visible body armor. The gathering lasted approximately 30 
minutes before the crowd began to disperse. 
 
¶3. Comment: Such rallies are not common in Kuwait, and this 
gathering is indicative of the high esteem in which Hariri 
was held. A rally organizer is required to obtain prior 
permission from the Ministry of Interior if there will be 
more than 25 participants. Police dispersed February 20's 
rally peacefully indicating that the protesters did not 
possess the proper authorization. Those who returned on 
February 21 apparently were in compliance as police made no 
attempts to end the rally prematurely. End comment. 
TUELLER