05OTTAWA481
AMBASSADOR SPEAKS AT INAUGURAL MEETING OF
Wed Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CAN AND H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECIN ETRD PREL CA
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR SPEAKS AT INAUGURAL MEETING OF 
PARLIAMENT'S BORDER CAUCUS 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  Ambassador Cellucci addressed the first 
meeting of Parliament's new Border Caucus on February 8, 
¶2005.  The Ambassador affirmed our determination to keep the 
border functioning, while sounding a note of caution about 
the potential effects of marijuana liberalization in Canada 
and discouraging visions of a "borderless" North America.  He 
offered the Mission's help in establishing contacts between 
Members of Parliament in the Border Caucus and their 
counterparts in the United States Congress.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) On February 8 Ambassador Cellucci spoke at the 
founding meeting of Parliament's Border Caucus, a group of 37 
Members of Parliament whose ridings are adjacent to the U.S. 
border.  Caucus members had decided late last year to meet 
periodically to consolidate issues and share ideas regarding 
improved management of the border to facilitate trade and 
tourism in both directions.  The formation of this multiparty 
group was the inspiration of Russ Hiebert, Conservative MP 
from British Columbia.  In addition to Hiebert, there are 
three other co-chairs:  Claude Banchand (Bloc, Quebec), Roger 
Gallaway (Liberal, Ontario), and Brian Masse (NDP, Ontario). 
 
¶3.  (U) The Ambassador congratulated the MPs on taking the 
initiative to form a border caucus and pledged that the 
Embassy would do what it could to assist the caucus' efforts. 
 He recounted that for the past three-and-one-half years the 
Embassy's focus has been on keeping the border open for trade 
and closed to terrorists.  The Ambassador noted that much 
progress had been made in speeding the passage of legitimate 
goods and travelers, particularly with programs like FAST and 
NEXUS, but that more needs to be done to increase capacity 
and unlock bottlenecks. 
 
¶4.  (U) During a 15-minute question session, the Ambassador 
was asked if he foresaw a day when Canada and the United 
States would be able to do what Europe has done and eliminate 
the border.  The border will remain, the Ambassador replied, 
but by advancing the process of integration we could create a 
de facto "union," particularly if we achieve free trade for 
individuals (i.e., elimination of customs duties) and labor 
mobility.  Asked what Canada can do to beef up its border 
security, the Ambassador noted that a great deal has been 
done by the new Canadian agencies formed in the past few 
years, and that they are practicing "vigilant cooperation" 
with their U.S. counterparts.  Joint activities like the 
International Border Enforcement Teams protect our countries' 
citizens against terrorism as well as crime. 
 
¶5.  (U) In response to a question about Canada's potential 
decriminalization of marijuana, the Ambassador cautioned 
that, whatever the reality, such an action could create the 
perception that marijuana is easy to obtain in Canada.  That, 
in turn, could cause heightened vigilance and inspections at 
the U.S. border, causing delays and putting pressure on the 
border at the same time as we are trying to speed things and 
reduce pressure through the programs of the Smart Border 
Action Plan. 
 
¶6.  (U) In closing, the Ambassador urged that Border Caucus 
members make contact with their counterparts in the U.S. 
Congress and offered the Embassy's help in facilitating these 
contacts.  He suggested as well that they should try to 
interest more Congressmen in visiting Canada.  Border Caucus 
MPs expressed eagerness to connect with their counterparts in 
the United States but indicated that they were not exactly 
sure how to do so.  (Comment:  Embassy would appreciate any 
assistance Department could offer on how to better connect 
the U.S. and Canadian border caucuses.  This kind of contact 
would be helpful in solving problems, setting policies, and 
directing funding as we seek to continue to promote the free 
flow of goods and people in the safest and most efficient way 
possible.  End comment.) 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
CELLUCCI