05PRETORIA449
SOUTH AFRICA: NEW BANKNOTES ISSUED
Tue Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PRETORIA 000449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: NEW BANKNOTES ISSUED 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  On February 1, the South African Reserve 
Bank (SARB) issued new banknotes with improved security 
features.  The layout and "Big Five" animal theme of each 
banknote remains the same.  Added are the South African Coat 
of Arms and use of all eleven official languages.  The SARB 
began training financial sector employees last year to 
prepare for banknote introduction, and initiated a public 
education campaign in January.  This banknote change follows 
the introduction of the new bi-metal R5 coin in August 2004, 
and is the first change in banknotes since 1992.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On February 1, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) 
issued new banknotes with enhanced security features that 
make it easier to distinguish between genuine and counterfeit 
banknotes.  Current banknotes in circulation will remain 
legal tender as they are phased out over time. 
 
¶3. (U) The new features on the banknotes include: 
 
-- a gold band on the back of the note that reveals 
   the denomination value and South African Coat of 
   Arms when tilted; 
-- color-changing ink on the number value for 
   denominations at and above R50 (approximately 
   $8); 
-- large geometric shapes that differentiate the 
   banknotes for those that have impaired vision; 
   and 
-- a hidden denomination value within the geometric 
   shapes that can only be seen at a horizontal 
   angle. 
 
The SARB also improved several existing features, to include 
the following: 
 
-- a denomination value added to the watermark; 
-- raised printed diamond-shaped spots indicating 
   the banknote denomination that enhances security 
   and assists the blind; 
-- a see-through registration pattern that reveals 
   the denomination value when held up to the light; 
-- unique serial numbers printed on the back of each 
   banknote in differing colors and font size; 
-- micro-sized print of "South African Reserve Bank" 
   invisible to the naked eye; and 
-- an upgraded silver security thread that becomes a 
   solid dark line when held up to the light. 
 
In addition, on banknote denominations of R50 and greater, 
the number value, "SARB," "RAND," and a South African Coat of 
Arms holograph all appear on the security thread.  Smaller 
denominations only include the number value and "SARB" on the 
security thread. 
 
¶4. (U) The "Big Five" animal theme (i.e., leopard, buffalo, 
lion, elephant, and rhino) will remain on the front of 
banknotes, and the back will continue to highlight the South 
African industries of mining, agriculture, manufacturing, 
tourism, transportation, and communication.  However, it will 
be the first time that the South African Coat of Arms and all 
eleven official languages will be displayed.  The words 
"South African Reserve Bank" will be written in English on 
the front of each banknote.  The back will include the same 
phrase written in two of the other 11 official languages, 
depending on the denomination.  The two languages for each 
denomination are as follows:  R10 ) Afrikaans and SiSwati; 
R20 ) Setswana and IsiNdebele; R50 - IsiXhosa and Tshivenda; 
R100 - Sesotho sa Leboa and Xitsonga; and R200 - IsiZulu and 
Sesotho. 
 
¶5. (U) The SARB began training financial sector employees on 
the new banknotes in late 2004.  Beginning in January, the 
SARB launched a campaign to educate the public.  The campaign 
emphasizes that everyone make sure that they have "Makoya 
Moola," i.e., "real money."  Television and radio commercials 
as well as educational radio programs are currently running 
in all eleven official languages.  The campaign is also 
targeting the blind and deaf communities, who were consulted 
during banknote design process as well.  The radio programs 
present a 15-minute skit about the new banknotes followed by 
a question and answer period with telephone callers.  Mobile 
trailers are also moving around the country, setting up 
information booths at bus stops, train stations, taxi stands, 
and shopping centers.  This banknote change follows the 
introduction of the new bi-metal R5 coin in August 2004 and 
is the first change in banknotes since 1992. 
FRAZER