05QUEBEC25
AMBASSADOR'S FAREWELL VISIT TO QUEBEC CITY
Thu Feb 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Quebec
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

171637Z Feb 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD BEXP PINR CA
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S FAREWELL VISIT TO QUEBEC CITY 
 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified 
 
¶1. Summary:   Ambassador Cellucci traveled to Quebec City 
February 9-10 in what was his tenth and parting visit as 
Ambassador.  He spoke to a packed audience at Laval University, 
met with opposition party leaders Bernard Landry and Mario 
Dumont, dined with three pivotal Liberal government ministers 
and also with several business influentials.  Deputy Minister 
Gagnon-Tremblay told the Ambassador that she is hearing much 
frustration from Quebec businesses, especially food producers, 
over delays in quickly getting their products across the border. 
 At his press briefing following the Laval speech and again in 
his interview with Le Soleil, the Ambassador stressed the 
importance of assertive U.S. public diplomacy in the post-9/11 
era. End summary. 
 
The Speech 
---------- 
 
¶2. The Ambassador's speech at Laval University before an 
audience of about 175 people was the centerpiece of and reason 
for the Ambassador's visit.  Contrary to press reports of a 
"tense" atmosphere surrounding the Ambassador's speech, we and 
others in attendance found the audience to be engaged, 
opinionated, and eager to ask questions.  Several students 
wondered whether the U.S. sees Canada as a nation with dwindling 
international influence.  At a press briefing following the 
Laval speech and in an interview the next day with 
French-language daily Le Soleil, the Ambassador stressed the 
need for U.S. public diplomacy assertiveness in the post-9/11 
era. 
 
Quebec Political Scene 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. In separate meetings with center-right Action Democratique du 
Quebec (ADQ) chief Mario Dumont, PQ Leader Bernard Landry and 
three of Premier Charest's cabinet ministers, the Ambassador had 
an opportunity to take the pulse of Quebec provincial politics. 
 
¶4. (SBU) ADQ's Dumont said his party (which only has 5 
provincial assembly seats) had reason for optimism. Premier 
Charest's record is excellent on international affairs but 
"disastrous" on provincial matters, he said.  The Liberal Party 
of Quebec (PLQ) is at a record low seventeen percent approval in 
the polls.  At the same time, the PQ has little to offer voters 
other than another referendum on sovereignty, which Dumont did 
not think the Quebec public wants.  Dumont predicted the PQ 
would become more radical in the next campaign, alienating 
voters.  Although Charest is only two years into a traditionally 
four year mandate, Dumont said the ADQ is not taking any chances 
and his party is readying itself for elections in 2006.  Asked 
what might provoke Quebec elections, Dumont said either fiscal 
imbalance or differences with unions, especially public sector 
employees. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In contrast to Dumont, PQ leader Landry told the 
Ambassador that he did not expect Quebec elections before 2007. 
His party is in the midst of defining its platform and is simply 
not ready, he said.  Landry asserted that Charest's unpopularity 
has reached historic proportions with latest polls showing 
dissatisfaction with the Charest government at 76%.  Landry 
believes Charest's government is unpopular here in part because 
Quebecers like their Liberals to the left-of-center, and 
Charest, originally from the national conservative party, is 
very much a right-of-center Liberal. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In addition to meeting Dumont and Landry, the 
Ambassador sat down for an official dinner at the CG's residence 
with three of Charest's ministers: Monique Gagnon-Tremblay 
(Deputy Premier and International Affairs), Monique 
Jerome-Forget (Treasury Board President and Administration), and 
Sam Hamad (Natural Resources).  The three ministers were aware 
of their government's poor ratings.  They felt their government 
needed to do a better job of going out and talking to Quebecers 
about policy.  Minister Gagnon-Tremblay noted that she has 
embarked on a series of consultations throughout Quebec as her 
ministry puts together a new "strategic plan" for Quebec 
external affairs. 
 
U.S. - Quebec Economic Integration 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Gagnon-Tremblay said that in her trips around the province, 
obstacles to getting products across the border quickly is 
frustrating many Quebec businesses, especially food producers. 
The Ambassador encouraged them to be in contact with our customs 
official at Embassy Ottawa.  In a separate lunch with several 
Quebec business representatives, our guests were unanimous in 
telling the Ambassador that the Boston/Quebec City direct air 
link, which stopped running after 9/11, needed to start up 
again.  (We are told that the only direct flights to the U.S. 
from Quebec City are to Detroit and Newark.) 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN