04ANKARA3673
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, JUNE 1-15, 2004
Tue Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ANKARA 003673 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, JUNE 1-15, 2004 
 
¶1.   (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries about Turkey- 
   specific anti-TIP public information, post provides as 
   examples the following TIP press clips.  Text of any 
   articles originally published in Turkish is provided through 
   unofficial local FSN translation, unless otherwise noted. 
 
¶2.   (U) Versions of the following June 15, 2004 article 
   published in Hurriyet Newspaper (page 5) were also published 
   in editions of Aksam, Cumhuriyet, Milliyet, Vakit, Vatan, 
   and Zaman.  Turkish language articles appeared as half-page 
   or full-page spreads, including photos of alleged 
   traffickers: 
 
     TITLE: Anca's Notebook Burns Celebrities 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: A Romanian-Turkish joint police operation 
     against a gang forcing women for prostitution resulted 
     in the detention of two people, Anton Chelaru Gica and 
     Relu Rotaru, important names in international human 
     trafficking.  The two sent Romanian women to Turkey 
     with the promise of finding jobs but instead forced 
     them into prostitution. 
 
     The arrests came after Romanian police contacted 
     Turkish police with information about the operation. 
     Istanbul police raided Flash Hotel at Tarlabasi 
     district of Istanbul on May 31 and rescued 5 Romanian 
     women ages 17 to 20.  In the operation, Anca Carpusco, 
     the Istanbul leg of the network was also captured. 
     Testimonies by the women also led police to bus driver 
     Fevzi Yesil and driver Cemal Izgi.  Police believe 
     Martinas Andrea Romona and Anca Carpusco controlled the 
     financial portion of the network.  Romona and Carpusco 
     reportedly transferred USD 200,000 from their bank 
     account in Istanbul to Anton Chelaru Gica and Relu 
     Rotaru in Romania. 
 
     Acting upon the testimonies of the girls, including 17- 
     year-old Daniele Ostaci, who is 7 months pregnant, and 
     a notebook kept by Anca Carpusco, 11 people were 
     detained on charges of "having intercourse with 
     minors."  Turkish Rock Star `Akin' was among the 
     detainees.  They were then released after being 
     interrogated by a prosecutor in Beyoglu, Istanbul. 
 
     In a separate box, the daily wrote that Anca Corpusco 
     kept 9 notebooks filled with information about the 
     organization's customers.  She kept very detailed 
     logbooks that included customers' plate numbers, home 
     and cellular phone numbers, references, and particular 
     sexual preferences.  The names of the customers who 
     gave fake money and used force were marked with red 
     ink.  Names of thousands of people including famous 
     soccer players, actors and famous businessmen were in 
     the books.  Also there was information about policemen. 
     Plate numbers of police teams patrolling the district 
     were also noted. 
 
     Under a picture, the daily quoted Pop Star `Akin" who 
     was detained briefly.  He said, "They showed me 
     pictures of some women.  I told them that I do not know 
     any of them.  Maybe we happened to be at the same 
     venues, but I was not with any of them.  In a notebook 
     of one of the women my name was written.  Maybe it was 
     because I am famous.  The most interesting thing was, 
     when we were taken for a health check-up, everyone 
     covered their faces.  As a reflex, I also covered my 
     face.  There were lots of journalists.  After 
     interrogation, I was released." 
 
     In a separate box, the daily wrote that the US State 
     Dept. issued its annual "Human Trafficking Report." 
     The report noted that Turkey had taken important steps 
     against international women trafficking. END TEXT. 
 
¶3.   (U) Published Friday, June 11, 2004 by Aksam Newspaper 
   (FBIS translation): 
 
     TITLE: NATO's Istanbul Cooperation Initiative, by Yavuz 
     Gokalp Yildiz 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: "The decisions NATO will be making at the 
     Istanbul summit will shape world politics. It appears 
     that the decisions will be made in line with the United 
     States' interests. The steps toward involving NATO more 
     extensively in the Greater Middle East are an 
     indication of this. 
 
     In practice, the Greater Middle East is being divided 
     into several regions. There are plans to form a 
     Mediterranean Dialogue group consisting of "Grey Area" 
     countries like Mauritania, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, 
     Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Syria, Lebanon, Kuwait, and the 
     United Arab Emirates. Here is a noteworthy plan to 
     establish military cooperation between Arab countries 
     and Israel. 
 
     These countries will not be included in partnership 
     mechanisms but in a status similar to the Partnership 
     for Peace (PFP). The Istanbul Cooperation Initiative is 
     being formed with this purpose in mind. The plan is to 
     make it possible for willing regional countries to take 
     part in this initiative. The apparent aim is: a) To 
     fight terrorism. b) To prevent the proliferation of 
     weapons of mass destruction c) To fight arms, drugs, 
     and human trafficking. d) To carry out civilian 
     emergency planning. e) To promote international 
     military cooperation. 
 
     Subtitle: NATO in Greater Middle East 
 
     As for the plan to broaden NATO's area of influence in 
     the Middle East, here is what it involves: 
 
     a. Encouraging reforms that will integrate the defense 
     structure of regional countries with NATO. 
 
     b. Stepping up support for the efforts to increase 
     regional countries' capabilities for conducting joint 
     operations. 
 
     c. Establishing NATO "Contact Bureaus" in regional 
     countries. 
 
     d. Appointing a NATO Special Envoy who will be 
     responsible for coordinating activities in the region. 
 
     e. Restructuring the management of the PFP fund. 
 
     f. Establishing a "Multinational Anti-Terror Unit" at 
     brigade level with the contributions of regional 
     countries. 
 
     These plans indicate that NATO's center of gravity is 
     shifting out of Europe. Another indication of this is 
     the United States' plan for the deployment of its 
     troops outside the US homeland. The United States is 
     abandoning its current basing policies, which entail 
     big investments. It is planning to intervene rapidly in 
     crises by establishing Forward Operation Bases with 
     ready infrastructures and resources close to crisis 
     areas. The United States will maintain a smaller number 
     of troops here to be rotated every six months. Places 
     like Cyprus are important from the viewpoint of this 
     plan. END TEXT. 
 
¶4.   (U) Published Thursday, June 10, 2004 by Turkish 
   language Hurriyet Newspaper, page 3: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Fatimat Magomedova from Dagistan and 
     Anastasia Kuznetsova from Russia, were lured last 
     weekend to Antalya with false promises of work as 
     babysitters, and then forced to go to Bursa.  The two 
     women were put in a house in the Nilufer district and 
     were marketed at high prices to Bursa's rich and 
     famous.  During the last two days they were locked in 
     the house and prevented from going out. 
 
     In broken Turkish, the two women wrote the following 
     note on a piece of paper, 'Friends, please call.  Tell 
     them this number.  My name is Anastasia.  Pimps 
     kidnapped us.' They threw the note out from the 
     balcony.  A resident of the same apartment complex 
     found the note and took it to the police station in 
     Nilufer. 
 
     Police came with a locksmith and opened the door and 
     saved Magomedova (34) and Kuznetsova (26). 
 
     Recep Tan (34), who allegedly locked the women in the 
     house, was detained.  In the search police found five 
     passports that belonged to foreign women. 
 
     The two women who were saved said that the person who 
     was mediating for prostitution was Nilgun Tanguc (30). 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶5.   (U) Published Tuesday, June 8, 2004 by English language 
   Turkish Daily News: 
 
     TITLE: Ankara Chamber of Commerce: Turkish mafia is a 
     serious domestic threat 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  According to an Ankara Chamber of Commerce 
     (ATO) report, "Our lives are mafia," and organized 
     crime is involved in 100 sectors in Turkey. 
 
     Turkish black market operations equal almost one- 
     quarter of Turkey's national income, says the report, 
     which notes that while Turkish national income is $238 
     billion, Turkish black-market operations are estimated 
     at around $60 billion per annum. 
 
     Approximately 17,000 individuals were taken into 
     custody by the police between 1998 and 2002 for being 
     members of organized crime, with 4,182 of them arrested 
     for involvement in 3,012 criminal acts. 
 
     The report notes that the capital of organized crime is 
     Istanbul. Police records show that Istanbul's Anti- 
     organized Crime Bureau, which was founded in 1998, had 
     eliminated 454 criminal gangs by 2003. These gangs were 
     party to 325 criminal acts, only in Istanbul, the 
     report noted. 
 
     Other cities in which the mafia presence can be felt 
     are reportedly Adana, Ankara, Aydin, Antalya, 
     Balikesir, Bursa, Gaziantep, Icel (Mersin), Kayseri, 
     Kocaeli and Samsun. 
 
     The biggest organized criminal activity is the 
     collection of parking fees on major streets in large 
     cities. Those who fail to pay the fee are beaten or 
     their cars are damaged. It was noted in the report 
     that, assuming that parking fees range between TL 2 and 
     TL 10 million, the annual revenue of such gangs 
     approach trillions of lira. 
 
     Bodily organs, property, check, children and bid mafias 
     are also noted as being common, said the report. Drugs, 
     gold, gambling, rent collection, prostitution, 
     transportation, construction, licensing, cigarettes, 
     arms, bazaars, beggars, shanty houses, coffee houses, 
     human trafficking, pornography, books, music, 
     historical artifacts, phone tapping and jails are some 
     of the other areas the mafia is involved in, said the 
     report. 
 
     The methods the mafia employs include murder, wounding, 
     beating, raids, threats and rape. Having a criminal 
     record of beating or wounding is considered an 
     advantage in the mafia. 
 
     The Turkish mafia has some special characteristics, 
     which include total obedience to the leader, an 
     organizational structure close to a corporate system 
     and the place of origin figuring prominently in 
     advancement. Those with a record usually obtain a phony 
     passport. 
 
     Media reports on the top people of mafia usually work 
     in favor of the organization, creating either fear or 
     respect. 
 
     Policeman Mahmut Cengiz's survey of people linked to 
     the mafia was also included in the report. According to 
     it, 54 percent are married, three-quarters come from 
     families larger than four members, 10 percent are 
     university graduates and the TV shows they watch are 
     devoted almost entirely to the mafia. If they had had 
     the opportunity, they would have wanted to become 
     engineers or bureaucrats. 
 
     ATO President Sinan Aygun said that the mafia had 
     become a threat to domestic security in recent years, 
     noting that gaps within the system produce both 
     criminals and victims. He said people had started to 
     think that following laws were foolish, when things 
     could run more smoothly with the help of the mafia. END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶6.   (U) Broadcast Tuesday, June 8, 2004 by Turkish news 
   television station NTV: 
 
     TITLE: Mafia major factor in economy: report 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: June 8 - The Turkish mafia has control of a 
     significant part of the country's economy, according to 
     a report released on Monday. 
 
     Illegal activities are weighing down the legitimate 
     economy, the report said. 
 
     According to the study, undertaken by the Ankara 
     Chamber of Commerce, mafia activities are equivalent in 
     value to almost 25 percent of the Turkish economy. More 
     than 100 separate sectors of the economy have been 
     penetrated by illegal organisations, the report said. 
 
     The direct value of mafia related activities was 
     estimated at approximately $60 billion, more than half 
     the state budget for 2004, the report stated. 
 
     Not only was the mafia involved in trafficking, 
     prostitution and loan sharking, it also kidnapped young 
     children from poor families and sold them and bought 
     and sold organs for transplants and operations. 
 
     "The mafia has in the past few years become one of 
     Turkey's main internal threats," Sinan Aygn, the head 
     of the ATO, wrote in the study. "The mafia economy is 
     weighing on the national economy." END TEXT. 
 
¶7.   (U) Published Tuesday, June 8, 2004 by the 
   International Herald Tribune, Al-Jazeera, the Guardian, 
   Atlanta Journal Constitution, Miami Herald, Fort Worth Star 
   Telegram, Houston Chronicle, Seattle Post Intelligencer, and 
   regional papers throughout the United States. 
 
     TITLE: Turkish mafia tightens grip on economy 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: ANKARA: The Turkish mafia has an 
     increasingly vice-like grip on the country's economy 
     and its tentacles are reaching out into ever increasing 
     areas of activity, a report revealed on Monday. 
 
 
     According to the report, drawn up by Ankara's Chamber 
     of Commerce, organized-crime activities currently 
     generate over $60 billion in the black economy in about 
     100 different sectors each year, equivalent to a 
     quarter of the entire national income. 
 
     Apart from the mafia's traditional activities such as 
     trafficking in women and children, people smuggling and 
     drugs and arms dealing, the Turkish mafia has branched 
     out into less orthodox areas like organ and baby 
     trafficking and the organization of fixed soccer 
     matches. 
 
     An organ such as a kidney purchased from a poverty- 
     stricken donor for a derisory sum can be sold for 
     between $61,500 to $123,000 in Turkey or abroad, the 
     report said. 
 
     Organs are often removed from individuals kidnapped 
     specifically for that purpose, according to the report. 
 
     Very young children from poor families purchased or 
     abducted from their families are sold to rich couples 
     or forced into a life of begging on the streets of 
     Istanbul or Ankara. 
 
     One of the most lucrative areas of activity for the 
     gangs involves the purchase of plots of urban land 
     cheaply - often through intimidation - which are then 
     transformed into car parks, in short supply in the 
     major cities. 
 
     The report said television was to blame for painting a 
     false picture of mafia members in popular programs as 
     Robin Hood characters who simply rob the rich to help 
     the poor, thereby encouraging impressionable youngsters 
     to follow in their footsteps. END TEXT. 
 
¶8.   (U) Published Tuesday, June 08, 2004 by English 
   language Turkish Daily News: 
 
     TITLE: Aksu: 10,000 policemen will be brought in for 
     NATO summit 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu said on 
     Sunday that 10,000 policemen from outside Istanbul 
     would be deployed in order to provide security during 
     the NATO summit. 
 
     Speaking to journalists after the ruling Justice and 
     Development Party (AK Party) Istanbul bureau assessment 
     meeting, Aksu said the NATO summit in Istanbul was very 
     important for Turkey, noting that heads of state and 
     government and chiefs of general staff from between 60 
     to 65 countries would be attending the meeting. 
 
     He said they had thought about every detail of the 
     summit and that a guiding committee, headed by a 
     Foreign Ministry diplomat, would oversee the 
     proceedings with the Gendarmerie, police and coastguard 
     all cooperating to ensure the security of the event, 
     adding that 10,000 additional policemen from outside 
     Istanbul would be brought in to boost security. 
 
     It was only natural for groups and individuals to air 
     their democratic grievances during the summit, said 
     Aksu, noting that in addition to the meeting places 
     assigned for such gatherings, they had listed 16 more 
     such areas that could be used to stage rallies. 
 
     At the same press conference, Aksu stated that 
     terrorist groups were involved in international drug 
     trafficking and that Turkey had signed agreements with 
     48 countries to cooperate in preventing this illicit 
     trade. 
 
     Turkey had made significant strides in the past year to 
     eliminate this crime, said Aksu, before revealing that 
     the largest drug seizures were made in Istanbul. 
     Apart from terrorism, the entire world was united in 
     combating human and drug trafficking, said Aksu, who 
     went on to say that in the past five years, 470,000 
     illegal migrants and 4,000 people involved in people- 
     smuggling had been caught. The human traffickers so far 
     arrested represented 63 different nationalities, said 
     Aksu, explaining that these people cooperated with 
     terrorist groups from time to time. 
 
     He said due to precautions taken by Turkish police, the 
     main route of human trafficking had moved to the north 
     of the Black Sea and to the south of the Mediterranean. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶9.   (U) Published Monday, June 07, 2004 by Turkish language 
   Cumhuriyet Newspaper page 3: 
 
     TITLE: "Boss Ainura of Kyrgyistan" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Ainura Tusunbekova was arrested as the 
     leader of a prostitution gang luring Kyrgyz girls with 
     an ad "Employment for those who want to serve as 
     helpers (bakici) in Turkey" and sending them to Turkey. 
 
     Operations are due to begin at the Kyrgyistan leg of an 
     international prostitution gang disclosed in Istanbul. 
     The police got in touch with their Kyrgyz counterparts 
     in order to capture Ainura Tusunbekova who is the gang 
     leader. 
 
     The Istanbul police conducted an operation when a while 
     ago a woman speaking in broken Turkish called from a 
     house in the Fatih district and claimed that she was 
     kept in the house, raped and sold to other men. 
 
     Halim Akgun, a pimp, was captured in a three-story 
     house in Fatih and eight Kyrgyz-citizen women who were 
     raped and sold to men were liberated. 
 
     Testimonies of the women demonstrated the bitter face 
     of the gang involved in international prostitution. 
 
     Women who were deceived and were forced into 
     prostitution in Turkey said, "In a Kyrgyz newspaper 
     there was an ad for nannies for kids in Turkey.  When 
     we called the number, a woman said that her husband in 
     Turkey would arrange a nanny job.  s eight women we 
     came to Istanbul  Halim Akgun met us and took us to a 
     house in Fatih.  When we entered the house he said, 
     'You all owe me $4000.  I'll sell you to men for you to 
     pay me back.'  Akgun tied up the arms and legs of the 
     girls and raped us threatening us with arms.  Many of 
     us were virgins." 
 
     Akgun was captured during the operation in Fatih and 
     after completing police procedures he was sent to the 
     judiciary.  He was arrested and put into jail. END 
     TEXT. 
 
     COMMENT: The newspaper published the pictures of the 
     girls, as well as Tusunbekova and Akgun. A caption said 
     that the eight girls were returned to their countries. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶10.  (U) Published Monday, June 6, 2004 by Zaman Turkish 
   language newspaper (nationwide distribution): 
 
     TITLE: The Ubiquitous Mafia 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: According to "Our Life, Mafia report," 
     prepared by the Ankara Chamber of Commerce, the mafia 
     is active in over 100 localities. 
 
     The report estimated that throughout the world, 
     organized crime roughly earns US$1trillion annually. 
 
     Organized crime in Turkey makes US$60 billion annually, 
     a quarter of the total national income and half of the 
     government's 2004 budget. 
 
     The mafia has its greatest presence in Istanbul where 
     in 2002, 1,637 were committed in Istanbul alone. The 
     Istanbul Organized Crime Directorate, in response to 
     the high level of activity, busted 454 criminal 
     organizations, and caught 325 gang leaders. 
 
     Other provinces where networks of criminal activity 
     exist are in Adana, Ankara, Aydin, Antalya, Balykesir, 
     Bursa, Gaziantep, Icel, Izmir, Kayseri, Kocaeli and 
     Samsun. The report concluded that the most common, 
     illegal activity of criminal organizations is parking 
     lot fee collection. 
     The report found that the mafia shared the streets and 
     roads of big cities and collected parking fees via 
     parking attendants they hired. When considered that 
     there are around two million cars in Istanbul, Ankara 
     and Izmir -- the three largest cities in Turkey -- and 
     the parking fees in these cities vary between 2-10 
     million Turkish liras, the annual turnover of a single 
     mafia network is over trillions of Turkish liras. 
 
     "Land mafia, check-bond mafia, organ mafia, child mafia 
     and tender mafia" follow the parking lot mafia in 
     presence. 
 
     A questionnaire conducted among mafia members by Mahmut 
     Cengiz, a security forces employer known for his 
     scientific studies on the mafia, is also included in 
     the report. The questionnaire found that 54 percent of 
     mafia members are married. Three fourths are from 
     families with at least 4-members, and 10 percent are 
     university graduates.  The TV series they watch the 
     most are about the mafia. If they have the chance to 
     study, they would become bureaucrats or engineers. END 
     TEXT. 
 
¶11.  (U) Published Sunday, June 6, 2004 by Anadolu News 
   Agency: 
 
     TITLE:  Aksu: Turkey Captured 470 Thousand Illegal 
     Immigrants In Last Five Years 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  ABANT - Turkish Interior Minister 
     Abdulkadir Aksu has said, "our security forces captured 
     470 thousand illegal immigrants in the last five years 
     as they were trying to proceed to European countries 
     via Turkey." 
 
     Replying to questions from journalists, Aksu said on 
     Sunday, "our security forces captured 470 thousand 
     illegal immigrants from 63 different countries in the 
     last five years as they were trying to proceed to 
     European countries via Turkey. Also, 4 thousand human 
     smugglers were captured. Human smugglers often co- 
     operate with terrorist organizations." 
 
     Noting that illicit drug trafficking happened among the 
     most important sources that finance terrorist 
     organizations, Aksu added, "following the September 
     11th attacks, the United States have exerted great 
     efforts to improve co-operation in fight against 
     terrorism. Turkey has signed agreements with 48 
     countries to co-operate in fight against illicit drug 
     trafficking and terrorism."  END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  (U) Published Saturday, June 5, 2004 by the Associated 
   Press: 
 
     TITLE: N.J. not immune to human trafficking problems, 
     congressman says; By DONNA DE LA CRUZ, The Associated 
     Press 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: WASHINGTON - The small New Jersey towns of 
     Brigantine and Plainfield tout themselves as family 
     friendly places. The two towns also share the infamous 
     distinction of being linked to the worldwide problem of 
     trafficking young girls and women who are forced to 
     work as prostitutes or domestic servants. 
 
     "Human trafficking has become a negative suburban 
     phenomenon," Rep. Chris Smith, R-N.J., said in a recent 
     interview in his Capitol Hill office. 
 
     Smith, vice chairman of the House International 
     Relations Committee, said millions of young girls and 
     women are trafficked each year. He said many of these 
     victims are smuggled into the United States to work in 
     large cities and small hamlets, like Brigantine and 
     Plainfield, two of several New Jersey communities where 
     trafficking victims have been found. 
 
     Earlier this year, a Malaysian citizen was arrested for 
     allegedly operating a brothel he ran from his 
     Brigantine home, employing women smuggled into the 
     country from Asia. And in the summer of 2002, federal 
     authorities charged several people with luring Mexican 
     girls and women to work as prostitutes in Plainfield. 
     Two of the defendants later pleaded guilty and were 
     sentenced to 210 months in prison. 
 
     Smith wrote the Victims of Trafficking and Violence 
     Protection Law, the nation's first law that deals 
     specifically with human trafficking. The law provides 
     investigators with resources to prosecute offenders and 
     money to help victims. He also authored the Trafficking 
     Victims Protection Act that expanded on the 
     government's abilities to fight human trafficking. 
     President Bush signed both laws in 2000 and 2003. 
 
     The laws also require the State Department to issue an 
     annual "Trafficking in Persons Report" to Congress - 
     known as the TIP Report - that identifies countries 
     that are found to have significant human trafficking 
     problems. 
 
     The fourth annual report, due to be issued June 14, is 
     a diplomatic tool that the U.S. government uses to 
     encourage countries to crack down on human trafficking, 
     which is third only to drug and arms trafficking in 
     terms of reaping financial benefits for criminals, said 
     John Miller, head of the State Department's Office to 
     Combat and Monitor Trafficking in Persons. Countries 
     that do little or nothing to deal with the problem can 
     face sanctions, Miller said. 
 
     In the 2003 report, 15 countries, including U.S. allies 
     Greece and Turkey, were deemed to have made no 
     significant efforts to stop human trafficking. 
 
     "The public is becoming more aware in the last couple 
     of years but you still have large elements of the 
     public that would say 'Slavery? Didn't that end with 
     the American Civil War?' And that's true abroad as 
     well. This doesn't affect a lot of people, and it comes 
     to a shock to them," Miller said. 
 
     The U.S. government estimates that between 18,000 to 
     20,000 young girls and women are trafficked into the 
     United States, but that number could actually be 
     higher, said Avaloy Lanning, director of the New Jersey 
     Anti-Trafficking Initiative. 
 
     "It's such a hidden phenomenon," Lanning said. "It's so 
     hidden, because there are cases that may not lend 
     themselves to arrest or prosecution." 
 
     Some victims are afraid to cooperate with authorities, 
     fearing retribution against themselves or their 
     families back home, she said. 
 
     Human trafficking in New Jersey is widespread because 
     of the state's makeup, Lanning said. 
 
     "We have a high concentration of factory labor and 
     commercialized workers in the north and a huge 
     concentration of farm labor in the south," she said. 
     "And the state's proximity to New York City and 
     Philadelphia makes New Jersey ripe for the problem." 
 
     The International Institute of New Jersey started the 
     anti-trafficking initiative one year ago in an effort 
     to establish guidelines on how to identify victims and 
     help them. The institute held its first statewide anti- 
     trafficking conference in March, bringing together 
     human rights and other community organizations, and 
     legal and law enforcement personnel, Lanning said. 
 
     From that conference, the New Jersey Coalition Against 
     Human Trafficking was formed, and there will be two 
     meetings held at the end of June - one in north Jersey 
     and one in the southern part of the state - to discuss 
     ways to battle human trafficking, Lanning said. 
 
     Lanning and Miller credit Smith for taking a leading 
     role to battle human trafficking. 
 
     "He took charge of drafting the bills and he pushed it 
     through the House of Representatives," said Miller, a 
     former Republican congressman from Washington State. 
 
     "Because of that, the United States has been able to 
     assume a leadership role in opposing slavery around the 
     world. And more importantly, thousands of victims have 
     been freed and hundreds of traffickers have been thrown 
     in jail." 
 
     "This sort of work that he is doing ... mankind will 
     thank him for in future generations," Miller said. 
     Smith has traveled extensively to discuss the problem 
     of human trafficking with other government officials, 
     and has met many victims. 
 
     "You just have to look into one of those young girls' 
     eyes just to see the despair," Smith said. "So many get 
     sick, get AIDS or other kinds of sexually transmitted 
     diseases, become throwaways and they die." 
 
     Smith says his Catholic faith is why he became involved 
     with human rights issues ever since he was elected to 
     Congress in 1980. He recited part of the Gospel 
     scripture that motivates his work. 
 
     "Whatever you do to the least of my brethren you do 
     likewise to me," Smith said, quoting scripture. "For 
     me, it's all about caring for those who are 
     disenfranchised - that's what government should be all 
     about." END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  (U) Broadcast May 29, 2004 by Islamabad PTV World (FBIS 
   Transcribed Text): 
 
     TITLE: Pakistan, Turkey Joint Commission to Boost 
     Security Cooperation, Fight Terrorism 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Pakistan and Turkey have agreed to form a 
     joint commission to gear up cooperation in the field of 
     security and counter-terrorism.  This was announced by 
     the interior ministers of the two countries at a joint 
     news conference in Islamabad.  The commission--to be 
     headed by the interior secretaries of Pakistan and 
     Turkey--will meet twice a year to review the 
     implementation of the agreements on fighting global 
     terrorism, drug abuse, and human trafficking. 
 
     Earlier, the two leaders held a meeting to discuss the 
     regional and international situation.  Federal Interior 
     Minister Syed Faisal Saleh Hayat said Pakistan and 
     Turkey had agreed to work closely in various fields to 
     boost mutual cooperation.  Turkish Interior Minister 
     Abdulkadir Aksu said Pakistan and Turkey would jointly 
     play a positive role in countering international 
     terrorism. END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN