04BRUSSELS2502
EU ROLLS OUT STRATEGY FOR PROGRESSIVE ENGAGEMENT
Thu Jun 10 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brussels
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 002502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA, NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2009 
TAGS: PREL EAID IZ EUN USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: EU ROLLS OUT STRATEGY FOR PROGRESSIVE ENGAGEMENT 
WITH IRAQ 
 
REF: A. A. THE HAGUE-EUR/USEU FAX 6/10/2004 
 
     ¶B. B. USEU 0239 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF LEE LITZENBERGER; REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
 ¶1.  (C) Summary.  EC Commissioner Patten, with the full 
support of EU HighRep Solana, has proposed an ambitious 
strategy for rapidly ramping up EU relations with Iraq 
following the transition to sovereignty.  In a private letter 
that complements the public strategy, Patten and Solana call 
on the EU to send election observers, help draft a 
constitution, train police, work with Iraq's neighbors to 
promote regional stability, and consider co-hosting an 
international conference on Iraq.  The strategy, boosted by 
the creation of the Interim Iraqi Government, UNSCR 1546 and 
the G-8 summit, will be considered by EU Foreign Ministers in 
Brussels on June 14.  The strategy is forward-leaning and 
pushes the envelope of what EU ministers will be able to 
support.  End Summary. 
 
EU Releases Strategy for FM's to consider 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  (C)  On June 9, the European Commission released a 
three-phase medium term strategy for progressive engagement 
with Iraq before, during and after elections.  In a joint 
cover letter transmitting the strategy to EU Council 
President Irish FM Cowen, Commissioner Chris Patten and EU 
High Rep Javier Solana elaborate an ambitious program to 
build close EU-Iraq ties.  The cover letter, obtained by 
embassy The Hague (ref A), has not been made public.  The 
letter and strategy will be considered for endorsement by EU 
Foreign Ministers, who meet June 14-15 in Brussels. 
 
EC Strategy:  Three phases 
------------------------------ 
¶3.  (SBU)  The EC proposal, available online at 
http://europa.eu.int/com/external relations/iraq/news, calls 
for engaging Iraq in three distinct phases:  pre-election, 
post-election and medium term.  Apart from being keyed to the 
elections, the phases do not have specific time limits.  This 
is primarily due to uncertainties related to the security 
situation that may affect timing of the phases. 
--Pre-election:  Election support (through civil society 
development, rule of law programs, and voter education); a 
Troika visit (possibly in the fall, in Baghdad, Amman or 
Brussels); launching a regional dialogue with Iraq's 
neighbors; and disbursement of 305 million euro 
reconstruction/humanitarian assistance package approved last 
fall. 
 
-- Post-election:  Launch formal political dialogue with 
provisional government, issue EU/Iraq Joint Declaration, and 
disburse CY 2005 reconstruction assistance (requested 200 
million euros).  The 2005 assistance request will be debated 
in the European Parliament this fall. 
 
-- Medium Term:  Begin negotiation of a Trade and Cooperation 
Agreement (TCA); support creation of a "framework" to enhance 
regional security; offer European Investment Bank lending. 
 
Solana-Patten Letter Lays Out Ambitious Agenda 
-------------------------- 
¶4.  (C)  The Solana-Patten letter elaborates on each of these 
phases, and lays out an ambitious agenda of comprehensive 
political engagement with Iraq's interim and provisional 
governments.  For example, the letter suggests a possible EU 
election observer mission, help in drafting a constitution, 
and police training as ways to support free elections.  It 
also suggests sending an exploratory mission to Iraq to 
identify other areas where EU assistance would be appropriate. 
 
Regional Security and an International Conference 
------------------ 
¶5.  (C)  The Solana-Patten letter also highlights the 
opportunity for the EU to promote security and stability in 
the region by sponsoring regional confidence-building 
measures.  As a first step, it calls on consulting countries 
in the region bilaterally; ultimately, the letter states, 
"some form of ad hoc group might be required to support 
efforts by the region."  The letter notes that the idea of a 
regional conference to include Iraq's neighbors has been 
raised, and says the EU, "in agreement with the Iraqi Interim 
Government, should support and consider co-sponsoring such a 
conference." 
 
Deepening Engagement 
--------------- 
¶6.  (C) The Solana-Patten letter also calls for increased 
visits and exchanges to "lay the foundation for longer-term 
relations."  Addressing the issue of EU representation on the 
ground -- as the security situation permits -- the letter 
calls on those member states with diplomatic missions in Iraq 
"to foster... a collective EU approach..."  The Commission 
plans to open an office in Amman by July 1; this should move 
to Baghdad "when conditions permit" and the EU should 
consider appointing a Special Representative to Iraq. 
Negotiating a Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) with 
Baghdad will cap the process by institutionalizing EU ties 
with Iraq. 
 
Budget Notes 
------------ 
¶7.  (C)  Although the strategy is not a budget document, the 
outlines of EU assistance beyond 2004 is emerging.  The 
Commission has requested 200 million euros for reconstruction 
for 2005 (matching the pledge made at Madrid for 2004).  The 
European Parliament should debate and vote on this request in 
the fall; the security situation at that time (and the extent 
to which it has delayed disbursement of the 2004 package) 
will be key considerations.  Early in 2005, the Commission 
will prepare a proposal for 2006; Patten has hinted that it 
is likely to also be for 200 million euros.  A commission 
official has told us the EC will be looking at the expected 
growth in Iraq's oil revenues by then when formulating the 
2006 request. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶8.  (C)  The EU strategy for Iraq is a political declaration 
of intent to progressively deepen EU engagement with Iraq. 
It reflects the personal conviction of Patten and Solana that 
the EU can't stay on the sidelines; a stable, democratic Iraq 
is essential to European security.  Given the EU's past 
divisions over the Iraq intervention, it is an ambitious and 
far-reaching proposal that the U.S. should welcome. 
 
FOSTER