04MADRID2259
CLARIFICATION ON NEWS STORY REGARDING SECRET
Wed Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 002259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/IP, DS/IP/EUR, EUR/EX, PARIS FOR USSS MANNY 
FERNANDEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC
SUBJECT: CLARIFICATION ON NEWS STORY REGARDING SECRET 
SERVICE INCIDENT WHILE ON JENNA BUSH PROTECTIVE DETAIL IN 
SOUTHERN SPAIN 
 
¶1.  News articles have just been released relating to an 
incident that occurred in the southern town of Tarifa, Spain, 
on June 10, at 1630 hours, between several organized crime 
street criminals and two Secret Service Agents who were 
working a protective detail on President Bush's daughter 
Jenna.  The facts have been misrepresented in the local press 
and the following are the correct salient details regarding 
the incident. 
 
¶2.  While USSS Agents were attempting to keep their 
appropriately remote but responsive distance from the 
vacationing Ms. Bush, a couple of them took up a vantage 
point at a sidewalk cafe.  One Agent's cell phone was on the 
table when three thugs in their early twenties sauntered by 
and picked up his phone and began to walk away assuming that 
they were impressively intimidating enough to prevent the 
Agent from coming after his phone.  It was later learned that 
these youth were part of an organized gang that demanded 
protection money from local vendors and ruled the small area 
with fear.  The Secret Service Agent immediately went after 
his necessary means of communication.  The three youth faced 
him down and challenged his demand for his cell phone.  A 
scuffle ensued which led to the two USSS Agents demonstrating 
their superior resolve and capability, the recovery of the 
cell phone, and a bloody nose and lip for the leader of the 
pack.  In addition, one of the gang members was thrown into 
the side of a car and crumpled the metal.  At one point, one 
Agent's weapon holster came unsnapped and the handgun fell 
onto the street.  The Agent quickly recovered it and 
re-snapped it in his holster.  The handgun was never pointed 
at anyone nor used to intimidate.  The police were called. 
The gang returned shortly thereafter with a fourth member and 
hand-made batons.  The two USSS Agents were still present and 
before the next scuffle could evolve, the police arrived and 
arrested the youth gang. 
 
¶3.  As is customary, the police wanted to take the USSS 
Agents in for questioning as well, but Ms. Bush, who was 
completely unaware that anything had occurred, was beginning 
to change locations and the Agents needed to continue their 
work.  The RSO office had provided an FSNI, Juan Diaz, to act 
as liaison on this detail and moments like this are when a 
great FSNI really pays off.  Juan used his previous police 
experience and contacts to convince the police to deal with 
the gang members only and to allow the Agents to go about 
their job.  Those police will be properly thanked by the RSO 
office.  As the USSS Agents began to leave, vendors from the 
area and some general public came up to them to offer their 
appreciation and thanks for standing up against this group 
who had been terrorizing them. 
 
¶4.  It was impractical for the Agents to stay and press 
charges against the gang since they would not be in Spain two 
months later for the court hearing.  However, the man who 
owned the car with the crushed side did file a police 
complaint against the thugs.  In summary, first, Jenna Bush 
was completely uninvolved and unaware that it even occurred 
until later.  Second, all Agents acted professionally and 
with restraint and deserve congratulations.  Third, the gun 
was never drawn against anyone including the criminals 
because the situation did not call for it.  It was 
unfortunate that the gang chose the wrong person to steal 
from but it was in no way instigated or amplified by the USSS 
Agents.  There are several versions to this incident in 
different papers all looking to make their dramatic mark but 
these are the facts. 
ARGYROS