05BAGHDAD5053
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 005053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major theme of today's editorials was 
Thursday's parliamentary election. 
 
Analysis: The majority of the day's editorials continued, 
for the second day running, addressing the success of 
Thursday's election. Quasi-independent daily As-Sabah 
highlighted the importance of establishing the Council of 
Representatives as soon as possible while independent Az- 
Zaman focused on how the election successfully unified all 
components of Iraqi society. Other editorials, such as the 
one that appeared in Democratic Al-Wifaq criticized the 
political and electoral process, arguing that honest 
elections cannot be held under the presence of U.S. 
occupation. SCIRI affiliated Al-Adala's editorial dealt with 
the preliminary results of the elections showing that the 
UIA has won according to it own projections. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. We Want a Strong Government and a Balanced Harmony" 
(Baghdad, 12/19) 
¶B. "Results" (Al-Adala, 12/19) 
¶C. "Nobody Can Laugh at the Iraqi People Anymore" (Az-Zaman, 
12/19) 
¶D. "Democracy. Yes, But It's Terrible" (Democratic Al-Wifaq, 
12/19) 
¶E. "Fraud and the Democracy of the Elections" (As-Siyada, 
12/19) 
¶F. "Reminder" (As-Sabah, 12/19) 
¶G. "Do Not Spoil Our Happiness" (Ad-Dustoor, 12/19) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. We Want a Strong Government and a Balanced Harmony" 
(Baghdad, affiliated with the INA, led by Iyad Allawi, 
published a front-page unattributed editorial about the 
Iraqi election and the irregularities that coincided with 
the election. In part, the editorial reads) 
 
"The Iraqi National List participated in the election to 
establish a strong, national unity government that includes 
all segments of Iraqi society. This government must also be 
able to achieve political and social harmony; this harmony 
will attain social justice and balance. The Iraqi people are 
looking forward to forming a government that is able to save 
them from their difficult suffering. Concerning 
deba'athification, Dr. Iyad Allawi has asserted that this 
law must not be a tool for punishing both innocent and 
guilty people. This is exactly what our list is aiming to 
establish. However, members of our list have been targeted 
and some of them were martyred. In addition, pictures of our 
candidates were ripped down in Baghdad and other provinces. 
These violations must not be ignored and we must inform the 
relevant authorities so that the electoral process will not 
be rigged, lest the future of Iraq be in danger." 
 
¶B. "Results" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, published a third-page 
editorial by Dr. Ali Khalif about the preliminary results of 
the elections, which indicate that the UIA won most of the 
votes. In part, the editorial reads) 
 
"The preliminary results of the elections were neither 
expectations nor surprises; rather, they are facts. There is 
an overwhelming majority in Iraq and this majority supports 
a specific entity and we know that it is impossible for all 
entities to have the same popularity. The UIA is afraid that 
there may be vote tampering. If vote counting is 
transparent, the UIA will win more votes than in the 
previous election." 
 
¶C. "Nobody Can Laugh at the Iraqi People Anymore" 
(Az-Zaman, independent, published a front-page unattributed 
editorial about the success of the Iraqi elections. In part, 
the editorial reads) 
 
"The success of the elections shows that the Iraqi people 
have deep roots in civilization and history. Perhaps after 
the election the Iraqi people will be able to end terrorism. 
The Iraqi people practice democracy by expressing their 
opinions or through peaceful demonstrations. We recently saw 
demonstrations in the city of Kut against the government's 
decision to raise fuel prices. It seems that Iraqi 
politicians are benefiting at the expense of the hungry, 
deprived and wounded. However, the elections have proven 
that the Iraqi people will say to their politicians, `beware 
of stealing the votes of the people because it's the people, 
not politicians who are owners of the real power.' Thus, 
those who seek legitimacy must satisfy the people's will." 
 
¶D. "Democracy. Yes, But It's Terrible" 
(Democratic Al-Wifaq, independent, weekly, anti-coalition, 
published this front-page editorial by Editor-in-Chief Salah 
Omer Al-Ali about the Iraqi elections under U.S. occupation. 
In part, the writer comments) 
 
"Regardless of any negative viewpoints or irregularities 
that might have occurred during the parliamentary elections, 
these elections will determine the future of Iraq for the 
coming four years. This period began with a forged 
constitution and in any case, most political forces that 
participated in the elections were supported by the 
occupation. In brief, the political choices in Iraq have 
changed but the main content and goal remains unchanged. 
There is no independence, sovereignty, or stability under 
occupation. The Iraqi national resistance will not stop 
fighting and join the political game of the occupation. The 
United States is depending upon the post election period 
because it wants to reduce pressures on American forces 
through obtaining legitimacy from an elected Iraqi 
parliament and government." 
 
¶E. "Fraud and the Democracy of the Elections" 
(As-Siyada, affiliated with Iraqi Republican Assembly led by 
Sa'ad Assem Al-Janabi published a second-page editorial 
about the parliamentary elections and vote rigging. The 
editorial remarks in part) 
 
"The honeymoon period of the election has ended and we find 
ourselves observing and worrying that this democratic 
practice will be violated. Unfortunately, people did not 
vote freely and instead chose specific electoral lists 
because of threats and intimidation. In fact, we must put an 
end to attempts to rig the real Iraqi willpower. We must put 
an end to those who claim to speak on behalf of Iraqis while 
in fact they are trading them. In this way, Iraq will be 
able to live in peace and prosperity." 
 
¶F. "Reminder" 
(As-Sabah - Iraqi Media Network, government financed, pro- 
coalition, published this front-page editorial by Editor-in- 
Chief Muhammad Abdul Jabbar on the necessity to form the 
next Council of Representatives as soon as possible. In part 
the editorial reads) 
 
"The parliamentary elections were a tremendous success. 
However, we must remind ourselves of the mistakes of the 
former election that was held on the 30th of January with 
results announced a long period afterward. Moreover, the 
National Assembly held its first session two months after 
the election. In any case, the incoming Council of 
Representatives has four years [in office] and this figure 
may hint at laziness and numerous members being absent from 
attending sessions. The next Council of Representatives will 
have huge responsibilities. For this reason, it must be 
convened quickly and it must also move rapidly. This council 
must enforce laws promptly so that we will not repeat the 
former mistakes and waste time." 
 
¶G. "Do Not Spoil Our Happiness" 
(Ad-Dustoor, independent, published a front-page editorial 
by Editor-in-Chief Bassim Al-Sheikh about the elections and 
recent exchange of accusations among political parties about 
electoral fraud. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"The Iraqi election on December 15 has been very successful. 
However, we have noticed that the big electoral lists have 
exchanged accusations about electoral fraud and the lack of 
transparency. This will spoil our joy from the election. We 
do not want to say that the election was entirely fair and 
that there were no violations or vote rigging. But, if we 
compare this election with other elections throughout the 
world, we will see that our election was more developed and 
honest than any other election in the world. It seems that 
some of the political entities did not gain what they had 
expected in terms of seats. But, we hope that these parties 
will not push to ruin the political success that was 
achieved thus far. We call on all political groups to let us 
enjoy this happiness without any problems." 
 
KHALILZAD