05BAGHDAD4926
AMBASSADOR CALLS ON MINISTER OF CULTURE,
Sat Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 004926 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR ECA (IVES,KOUROUPAS), NEA 
PARIS FOR US MISSION TO UNESCO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL PGOV KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON MINISTER OF CULTURE, 
DISCUSSES NEW SUNNI POLITICAL PARTY, CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Ambassador met with ITG Culture 
Minister Nuri Al-Rawi on November 30.  They reviewed 
the impact of Iraq's security situation on Iraqi 
cultural heritage sites and the promotion of Iraqi 
culture generally.  Fourteen Iraqi cultural centers 
are planned worldwide (three in the U.S.).  Al-Rawi 
also seeks return of Adhamiyah Palace in Baghdad for a 
UNESCO-supported library project.  Al-Rawi offered his 
moderate Sunni Iraqi People's Movement as a vehicle to 
reach out to Sunni tribes in the Ramadi area.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
CULTURAL AFFAIRS DIFFICULT; 
BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP POSITIVE 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On November 30, Ambassador met with Minister 
of Culture Nuri Al-Rawi to discuss both the state of 
cultural affairs in Iraq and Al-Rawi's political 
aspirations.  Al-Rawi, a moderate Sunni from Ramadi, 
is a candidate in the December 15 election. He thanked 
the Ambassador for the visit, his first to the 
Ministry of Culture. The Minister spoke positively of 
his interactions with the Embassy's Public Affairs 
Section and of his support for the U.S. presence. 
 
¶3.  (U) When the Ambassador asked Al-Rawi about the 
work of his ministry, he replied that, "it is going 
well and (focusing on) true Iraqi culture. We are 
starting with the children, to keep them from becoming 
involved in violence."  He explained that his ministry 
is present in all of Iraq's governorates and often 
cooperates with the Ministry of Education.  According 
to Al-Rawi, Iraq is a paradise for archaeologists, 
with at least 16,000 known sites and a potential 
150,000 sites (after further exploration).  Al-Rawi 
stressed that, because of Iraq's past, cultural 
programming is essential to help Iraqis accept a new, 
more peaceful future. 
 
¶4.  (U) Even though financing is difficult, Al-Rawi 
explained, cultural events are needed to introduce 
Iraqi culture to the world.  Unfortunately, the 
security situation has hampered the Ministry's ability 
to conduct events inside Iraq.  He noted some recent 
events outside of Iraq, including a cultural fair in 
Denmark, and announced that 14 Iraqi cultural centers 
worldwide have been planned and budgeted for, three of 
them in the U.S.  The Ambassador and Al-Rawi discussed 
the possibility of an Iraqi cultural event in the 
U.S.: perhaps a traveling exhibit of traditional Iraqi 
dress, which Al-Rawi also offered to organize for 
Baghdad's International Zone residents. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Ambassador raised the issue of 
protecting historical and archaeological sites like 
Babylon, telling the Minister that one day, "cultural 
tourism could be bigger than oil" in Iraq, the 
birthplace of civilization. Al-Rawi responded that 
there are still problems with looting in Babylon and 
other historical areas.  Al-Rawi requested vehicles 
and weapons to assist ministry guards in protecting 
these areas.  He also requested an armored car for 
himself.  The Ambassador promised that he would look 
into the possibility of MNSTC-I providing training for 
the ministry guards. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Al-Rawi related that, with the assistance of 
the Italian government and UNESCO, much of Babylon has 
been restored and is now designated a "World Heritage 
Site."  He suggested that future restoration work done 
in Iraq always be supervised by UNESCO.  He also 
praised the Italian government for its assistance to 
the Iraqi Museum in computerizing its collections, 
given that the security situation still prevents the 
Museum from opening to the public. 
 
------------------------------ 
LEADER OF MODERATE SUNNI PARTY 
OFFERS ASSISTANCE IN RAMADI 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Al-Rawi then shifted to describe his new 
political party, the Iraqi People's Movement (IPM), as 
moderate and Sunni.  Its slogan, he said, is 
"agreement, not difference."  According to Al-Rawi, 
the party's list contains 75 names and is active in 
ten governorates, especially in Mosul, Ramadi, Kirkuk, 
Salah ad-Din, Baghdad, Kut and Diwaniyah. He predicted 
his party will win 15 seats in the upcoming election. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Al-Rawi stressed his support for the 
democratic process and expressed a willingness to have 
his party work with tribes in Al-Anbar (especially in 
Ramadi, his home town) to improve the situation there. 
According to Al-Rawi, Syria finances terrorist acts in 
Ramadi, and the local people feel defeated by Zarqawi 
and the Ba'athists.  Al-Rawi believes that Iraqis in 
Ramadi want to stand up but are afraid that the U.S. 
might desert them one day.  If they could be sure the 
U.S. would stay, he added, they would be willing to 
cooperate more, even more than with the ISF. (NOTE: 
Al-Rawi's allegation that Ramadi locals want coalition 
forces to stay is completely contrary to the general 
opinion of Ramadi leaders relayed repeatedly to 
visiting EmbOffs.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Ambassador responded that he is willing 
to speak with the citizens of Ramadi to improve the 
situation, assuring Al-Rawi that it is important that 
the old regime and the insurgents not be allowed to 
destabilize the region.  Al-Rawi repeated both his 
offer to arrange a meeting between the Ambassador and 
the Ramadi sheiks and his overall support for the U.S. 
effort.  Then he wondered aloud what assistance the 
U.S. might give his party.  He asked the Ambassador to 
intercede on behalf of two detainees being held in the 
area. 
 
¶10. (SBU) COMMENT:  After the opening discussion on 
cultural issues, Al-Rawi's ministry assistants slipped 
out of the room, leaving behind a journalist for the 
political discussions, who subsequently asked to 
interview the Ambassador.  Clearly, this was at Al- 
Rawi's instigation on behalf of his party.  Al-Rawi's 
attitude throughout the visit, including the political 
discussion and the media interview, remained upbeat 
and positive.  His commitment to helping improve the 
situation in Ramadi seemed genuine, and he may in fact 
be able to organize a meeting for the Ambassador with 
local Ramadi leaders (several of whom Al-Rawi said he 
had met with that same day). END COMMENT. 
 
KHALILZAD