05BAGHDAD5156
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Thu Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 005156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major themes in today's editorials were the 
political discussions and conflicts surrounding 
parliamentary elections, the formation of the next 
government, and specifically the Kurdish initiative to 
establish a national unity government. 
 
In its front-page editorial entitled "Maram's Teenagers," 
Hezbollah-affiliated Al-Bayyna discusses the recently-formed 
political bloc called "Maram," whose members oppose the 
election results that have been announced thus far. In its 
third-page editorial entitled "Kurdistan's Meetings 
Represent the First Step toward Harmony among Iraqis," PUK- 
affiliated Al-Ittihad focuses on the Kurdish initiative to 
push key political leaders toward an agreement concerning 
the formation of the next government. SCIRI-affiliated Al- 
Adala discusses the political process and its developments 
in the past year in its third-page editorial entitled "Main 
principles"; the editorial highlights the three electoral 
processes that were held in 2005, considering them three 
victories against terrorists and extremists. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Iraq before Positions" (Al-Fourat, 12/29) 
¶B. "Political Crisis and Harmful Agendas" (Dar As-Salam, 
12/29) 
¶C. "If Maram Said So" (Al-Bayyan, 12/29) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Iraq before Positions" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti-coalition, published a front- 
page editorial by editor in chief Shakir Al-Jibouri about 
the current political crisis. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"It is very good for Iraq to see the leaders of political 
parties using dialogue to end the current political crisis. 
However, it is better for Iraq to see those politicians 
forget their disagreements and their personal interests for 
the sake of reinforcing national unity. Some may say that 
Iraq is about to reach an intersection that leads to 
nowhere, but we say that this country will stay united and 
politicians should encourage this unity." 
 
¶B. "Political Crises and Harmful Agendas" 
(Dar As-Salam, affiliated with the Iraqi Islamic Party, 
published a front-page unattributed editorial about the 
current political crisis. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"Some political groups want to present their special and 
controversial agendas despite the fact that the country has 
just exited a political crisis that arose from the fraud in 
the last election. Those agendas can deepen the political 
and sectarian division in the country. The current period is 
not suitable for discussing the issue of forming federal 
territories. We announce to the Iraqi people that we reject 
any agreement among political groups that may target the 
unity of the country. Today, Iraq needs unity. Presenting 
sectarian and sensitive issues will not be useful for any 
part-even for those who imagine they will gain profit from 
the current political crisis." 
 
¶C. "If Maram Said So" 
(Al-Bayyan, affiliated with the Islamic Ad-Dawa Party, 
published a fifth-page editorial by Salim Rasoul about the 
Maram Movement, which was formed after the election to 
oppose the election's results. The editorial reads in part) 
 
"Maram is a movement composed of those who reject the 
elections for a variety of reasons. Those groups that formed 
Maram lost the election and for this reason they accused the 
IECI of being biased in favor of a specific list in an 
attempt to justify their loss. But if we hold elections 
again, will Maram accept the result of the elections? The 
democratic game needs an opposition that monitors the 
government in a positive way. Maram has two options: either 
participate in forming a national unity government or 
organize an opposition in the parliament." 
 
KHALILZAD