05CAIRO9388
American Author Promotes Dynamic View of US
Wed Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 009388 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/T/IS (PLATT), IIP/G/NEA-SA (SCOTT), NEA/PPD 
AND NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958: NA 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC OIIP EG
SUBJECT: American Author Promotes Dynamic View of US 
Foreign Policy 
 
REF: A) STATE 83422 B) 2004 STATE 261067 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  American foreign policy expert Walter 
Russell Mead engaged Egyptian audiences with his 
dynamic vision of U.S. foreign policy during three 
days of lectures, roundtable discussions, and media 
interviews November 27-29.  Meads visit coincided 
with the Embassys release of the Arabic translation 
of his acclaimed book Special Providence: American 
Foreign Policy and How It Changed the World, 
providing an opportunity to publicize his work and 
the Regional Arabic Book Program.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  Following paragraphs are formatted per reftels. 
 
¶A. NAME OF SPEAKER AND DATE OF PROGRAM: Walter 
er 
Russell Mead, Senior Fellow, Council on Foreign 
Relations; November 27-29, 2005. 
 
¶B.  SUMMARY OF TOPICS/VENUES/AUDIENCES: Mead analyzed 
current trends in U.S. foreign policy, discussed the 
historical perspective of his book Special 
Providence, reflected on the place of religion in 
foreign policy, and responded to a wide range of 
questions on issues such as Iraq, the Egyptian 
elections, and U.S. promotion of democracy in the 
Middle East.  He addressed 200 students and faculty 
at Cairo University, participated in a roundtable 
discussion with 30 members of the Diplomatic Club 
organized by the Egyptian Council for Foreign 
Affairs, and addressed 75 students, professors, 
judges and business leaders at American Center 
Alexandria. 
 
¶C. EFFECTIVENESS OF THE SPEAKER: Mead is insightful, 
engaging, and personable, whether in a television 
interview, a high-level discussion with diplomats, or 
one-on-one discussion with students.  During this 
visit and past visits to Cairo, students found him 
m 
approachable and surrounded him with questions, often 
critical of US foreign policy.  He responds 
assertively and with the credibility of an 
independent observer. 
 
¶D. QUALITY OF IIP SUPPORT: Excellent.  Post very much 
appreciates IIPs notification that Mead would be in 
Egypt and available as a speaker. 
 
¶E. IMMEDIATE RESULTS: Meads appearance and press 
interviews presented a picture of the United States 
as fully engaged as a positive force in international 
affairs.  At a time when Egyptians were focusing on 
parliamentary elections and continuing strife in 
Iraq, Meads historical perspective reminded young 
people, influential opinion-makers, and media 
audiences of the long U.S. tradition of engagement 
with the world, helping to counter conspiracy 
theories about nefarious short-term agendas.  The 
timing of his arrival on the day the translation of 
Special Providence was released helped us publicize 
his acclaimed work and the Regional Arabic Book 
Book 
Program.  Cairo and APP Alexandria have followed up 
his appearances by sending out personalized copies of 
the Arabic edition of Special Providence to key 
contacts. 
 
¶F.  PRESS PLACEMENT: 
 
Mead appeared on Dream TV for a lengthy interview on a 
wide range of foreign policy issues, focusing on U.S. 
relations with the Middle East after September 11. 
The pro-government weekly Al-Mosawer magazine 
published a two-page article with photos mentioning 
his new book.  In the article, Mead responded to 
questions on the Egyptian elections, Muslim Brothers, 
and political reform in Egypt.  He also discussed 
differences between President Bushs first and second 
terms, commenting that policy toward the Middle East 
has improved.  The leading independent newspaper Al 
Masry al Yom (circulation 15,000) published a story on 
his lecture at Cairo University. The leading 
government daily Al Ahram (circulation: 800,000) and 
the pro-government daily Rose Al Youssef (circulation: 
n: 
15,000) also published stories.  Several publications 
have also promised to publish reviews of the book. 
 
 
JONES