05CAIRO9071
Media Themes In Egypt, November 28  December 4:
Tue Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 009071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC AL EG
SUBJECT:  Media Themes In Egypt, November 28  December 4: 
Rounds Two And Three Of Egyptian Parliamentary Elections - 
Violence, More Muslim Brotherhood, And Judges Rebel. 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: As Egypt entered the turbulent third round of 
its parliamentary elections, commentators discussed the 
violence that marred them, as well as the significance of 
the continued gains of the Muslim Brotherhood (MB).  Some 
"lack of civic awareness" was seen as a contributing to 
success of the MB, as well as the low turnout and chaos 
during the polling.  News outlets also reported the 
official results of the second phase of voting in which 
150 candidates won seats, including:  75 from the NDP, 38 
independents (including MB), and 2 from Al-Wafd.    On the 
economic side, papers continued to speculate over the pace 
of negotiations for a potential Free Trade Agreement 
between the U.S. and Egypt. 
 
¶2.  Violence mars the elections:  As the country ended the 
second phase of voting for parliament, the opposition 
press continued its charges that voters supporting the 
opposition were being jailed, while pro-government daily 
Al-Ahram (circ. 750,000), on November 29, stated that the 
second phase of the elections was "fair and transparent," 
and that the reporting of violence was exaggerated.  As 
Egypt entered the third and final phase of the 
Parliamentary elections, however, the press reported 
widely on the large number of security forces on hand, 
ostensibly to deal with acts of violence and bullying that 
occurred during the polling.  All papers reported on 
gunfire at polling stations, and the closure of some 
voting stations. Columnists and talk shows continued to 
debate the success of the MB and the outbreak of violence. 
A columnist in pro-government daily, Al-Ahram, on November 
28, suggested that the people of Egypt lack sufficient 
understanding of elections and democracy, and need 
educating. 
 
¶3.  Gains of the Muslim Brotherhood (MB):  Columnists from 
several papers expressed the opinion that the success of 
the MB is due to the NDP's failure to support its people 
combined with its lack of vision, the people's desire for 
change, and the extremely well-disciplined organization of 
the MB. There was also considerable debate on the future 
of religious tolerance in Egypt if the MB were to gain a 
majority.  Viewpoints ranged the spectrum from 
characterizing the MB as Islamic extremists to pro- 
democracy moderates. Popular Orbit satellite TVs evening 
program, "El-Qahira el-Yom" hosted a leading figure of the 
opposition movement who, when asked what his position on 
Israel would be if the MB were ever to gain a majority in 
government, stated "the Camp David accord would have to be 
reconsidered" and "it does not matter if that led to war." 
Meanwhile, Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, a pan-Arab magazine, 
featured MB Supreme Guide Mahdy Akef calling for dialogue 
with Coptic intellectuals on issues of mutual importance. 
Talk shows hosted academics and strategists who 
characterized the MB as "secretive and dishonest about 
their true plans," and said that the MB will "turn toward 
the Turkish model of Islamic rule; that they are a fascist 
organization, and that nobody has the right to regulate 
people's relationships with God." 
 
¶4.  Judges:  The press focused intensely on the actions of 
local judges in their role as election monitors.  All 
papers, and the pan-Arab newspaper, Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, 
published the Supreme Council of the Judiciary's calls for 
bringing certain judges to account for allegedly insulting 
the judiciary and fellow judges in comments they made to 
the media on the elections.  Several papers also carried 
the story that an estimated 120 judges, in protest against 
election violations, submitted requests to be excluded 
from supervising the third round of elections.  Pro- 
government daily, Al-Ahram, reported Minister of Justice 
Mahmoud Aboul Leil's statement that measures will be taken 
to protect judges and to secure the electoral process. 
Over the weekend, after violence erupted during the third 
round of voting, pro-government daily Al-Akhbar reported 
on its front page that judges in polling stations had been 
attacked by citizens and police, and opposition paper Al- 
Wafd reported that Egyptian security forces had attacked 
nine judges, and that the president of the Judges 
Association had called for canceling elections in those 
stations. 
 
¶5.  Other issues:  All papers continued their ongoing 
coverage of the Ayman Nour trial, and reported his 
detention pending resumption of his trial on Saturday. 
Several stories ran regarding a police assault on four 
journalists from the pro-government newspaper, Al-Akhbar, 
during their coverage of the elections.  Both satellite 
channels, Al-Jazeera and Al-Arabiya TV, broadcast stories 
of the U.S. ambassador to Iraq holding talks with Iran. 
All papers published stories that a new round of 
discussion would begin between Egypt and the U.S. on the 
Trade and Investment Framework, which will lead to talks 
on a Free Trade Agreement.  Al-Ahram reported that 
"Foreign Trade Minister Rachid, while in the U.S. officially 
declared the beginning of FTA talks with the U.S.," while 
Al-Akhbar reported that "Egypt is determined to continue 
economic and political reform." 
 
Ricciardone