05CAIRO9249
ASD RODMAN DISCUSSES FMF, REGIONAL AFFAIRS, AND
Tue Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 009249 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/13/2015 
TAGS: PREL KDEM KPAL EAID IS IZ SY EG
SUBJECT: ASD RODMAN DISCUSSES FMF, REGIONAL AFFAIRS, AND 
THE ELECTIONS WITH DEFMIN TANTAWI 
 
Classified by Ambassador Francis Ricciardone for reasons 
1.4(b) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Minister of Defense Field Marshal Tantawi and 
Assistant Secretary of Defense Rodman discussed the 
vulnerability of Egypt's Foreign Military Financing (FMF), 
regional affairs, and internal politics during their December 
1 meeting, held while Mr. Rodman was in Cairo for the annual 
Military Cooperation Committee meetings with Egyptian 
counterparts.  The Ambassador, LTG Kohler, RADM Moeller, OMC 
Chief MG Bagby, and DATT Seel attended. Mr. Rodman urged 
Tantawi to develop a transformation strategy and publicize 
Egypt's contributions to regional stability and the Global 
War on Terror.  On regional matters, Tantawi said that Egypt 
would like to see more progress in the Peace Process.  He 
also urged the U.S. to engage President Asad because a 
post-Asad regime could be worse than the status quo.  Tantawi 
said that Egyptian progress toward democracy is proceeding at 
an appropriate pace and cautioned the U.S. against rushing 
the process or presuming that a formula for reform that may 
have worked elsewhere would be suitable for Egypt.  Tantawi 
asked the U.S. team to use its influence to persuade the 
Administration and the Congress of the importance of both the 
broader bilateral relationship and the military assistance 
component of the relationship with Egypt.  End summary. 
 
------------------- 
Military Assistance 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)   FMF Debates in Congress:  Field Marshal Tantawi 
thanked Assistant Secretary of Defense Rodman during their 
December 1 meeting for Rodman's efforts and those of the U.S. 
mission in Cairo to ensure that Congress earmarked Egypt's 
FMF.  When the Field Marshal predicted that the debate over 
FMF would continue in Congress next year, Rodman stressed 
that Egypt must persuade Congress that the U.S. - Egyptian 
military relationship matters.  The MoD, Rodman urged, should 
develop its transformation strategy (including a review of 
threats and objectives, doctrine, training, organization, and 
materiel) to show that Egypt's military can and will 
transform to increase its efficiency and support common 
strategic interests.  Tantawi asked for a clarification of 
Congress's request that the Department of State report on the 
proper balance of military and economic assistance.  The 
Ambassador suggested that the MoD proactively partner with 
other Ministries to gather the information on Egypt's 
political/military/economic strategy that the Embassy needs 
to draft this report. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Public Affairs:  Rodman also encouraged the Field 
Marshal to bolster the MoD's public image by allowing the 
media to cover events such as the recent donation of MI-17 
helicopter parts to Pakistan to assist earthquake relief 
efforts, the delivery of arms and ammunition to Afghanistan, 
and the work of Egypt's peacekeepers in Sudan.  Tantawi 
promised to consider the advice, but noted that Egypt depends 
greatly on the U.S. to carry its water on the Hill and asked 
the Administration to support Egypt more strongly next year. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Importance of FMF to Civil Society:  Tantawi told 
the U.S. team that because of the military's active role in 
development projects (including, for example, building 
schools, roads, and health clinics), reducing or redirecting 
Egypt's FMF would have a direct impact on this aspect of the 
economy and consequently on civil society's view of the 
military. The Egyptian people love the military because the 
military's development work improves their everyday lives, 
Tantawi explained.  But if the military loses U.S. assistance 
and cannot participate in such projects, the people will not 
be happy.  "I don't want to say it is dangerous," Tantawi 
warned, "but the impact will not be good." 
 
---------------- 
Regional Affairs 
---------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Iraq:  Tantawi said that the GOE is committed to 
supporting the political process in Iraq and will encourage 
Sunnis to participate in the political process.  However he 
also underlined that not all of the insurgents are Sunni. 
Iraq's unity is critical, Tantawi stressed, and a break up 
would be "disastrous". 
 
¶6.  (C)  Tantawi urged the USG to maintain momentum on the 
Peace Process.  He warned that the recent agreement on Gaza 
cannot be the end of our efforts and said we must all work to 
take another step in the process.  Syria presents another 
problem, Tantawi acknowledged, but the U.S. should give Asad 
a chance to cooperate because he is better than the 
alternatives.  When Rodman pressed that Syria must not allow 
its territory to serve as a sanctuary for terrorists, Tantawi 
responded that things are better handled between Syria and 
Iraq.

------------------- 
Mil/Mil Cooperation 
------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  RADM Moeller asked Tantawi to consider participating 
in Task Force 150, which works to stop the flow of terrorists 
and related materials in the Red Sea, Arabian Sea, and the 
Gulf of Aden. Observing that Pakistan would be commanding the 
Task Force in 2006, RADM Moeller said that there may be a 
possibility that Egypt could command at some point in the 
future.  Declining to make a commitment, Tantawi instructed 
his Chief of Staff, LTG Samy Enan, to study the matter and 
find a way for Egypt to participate. 
 
----------------- 
Internal Politics 
----------------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Tantawi said that Egypt had made a "good start" on 
democracy, but noted that the process would take time as it 
had in the U.S.  Rodman remarked that democratization would 
be a force for moderation.  Nonetheless, Tantawi said, 
democracy-building is not a one-size-fits-all initiative, and 
what works in other countries may not be palatable in Egypt. 
The Ambassador explained that the USG agrees that democracy 
must develop in a way that works for Egypt and Egyptians, but 
the people still need to feel that they own the government 
and have a voice.  He then noted that GOE treatment of the 
political opposition (such as Ayman Nour) will generate great 
interest in Washington.  The Ambassador stressed the need to 
avoid a political backslide that would affect the bilateral 
relationship.  Speaking in Arabic, Tantawi asked the U.S. 
team to support Egypt by exerting its influence to ensure 
that the relationship retains the importance it has always 
had. 

RICCIARDONE