05KIRKUK288
SBU) ELECTORAL COMPLAINTS HEAT UP IN KIRKUK
Wed Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Kirkuk
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KIRKUK 000288 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM IZ
SUBJECT: (SBU) ELECTORAL COMPLAINTS HEAT UP IN KIRKUK 
 
REF: KIRKUK 284 
 
(U) SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)SUMMARY AND INTRODUCTION.  RC and PolOff heard 
differing electoral complaints in meetings with Kirkuk 
Provincial Council Chairman Rizgar Ali and several Turcoman 
council members plus one Arab member on December 12, 2005. The 
Kurdish Chairman (affiliated with PUK) expressed frustration and 
distrust with the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq 
(IECI) over the removal of approximately 81,000 names from the 
Kirkuk voter rolls and the subsequent omission of many more. 
Several Turcoman and one Arab council member complained that the 
IECI was opening the door to Kurdish fraud by allowing the 
81,000 removed registrants to vote if they provided proper 
identification and proof of registration.  END SUMMARY AND 
INTRODUCTION. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  REMOVED REGISTRANTS. Kirkuk Provincial Council 
Chairman Rizgar Ali criticized the Baghdad IECI for the deletion 
of 203,898 names from the voter register list in Kirkuk.  (NOTE: 
 Based on our communications with the Embassy and information 
from the IECI, we understand that IECI removed around 81,000 
voter-registrations from August because many of them were 
suspected to be fraudulent; more recently, IECI discovered that 
many more names had failed to be printed on the voter rolls for 
Kirkuk province, apparently due to errors during transfer of 
data to the print file.  END NOTE.)  Chairman Rizgar Ali told us: 
 
--Baghdad IECI is trying to disenfranchise Kurds, adding yet 
another "great insult" to Kirkuk. 
 
--The voter lists for Shwan and Qarah Anjir have largely blank 
pages and if Kurdish leaders accept this, they are not 
representing the Kurdish people. 
 
--The Chairman accused the Baghdad IECI of falsifying data in 
some neighborhoods to favor non-Kurdish groups. He wanted to see 
voter lists by polling center. 
 
--The high number of voter-registrations in August could appear 
suspicious, but it simply consisted of:  internally displaced 
persons (IDPs) expelled under Saddam who have returned to Kirkuk 
since the January elections, plus young people who have turned 
18 since January, plus many of the 108,000 late-registrants who 
were allowed to vote in January subject to re-registering before 
the next election.  (NOTE:  As we understand it, IECI did not 
act based simply on the strikingly high number of new 
registrations, it found extensive evidence of fraud in those 
registrations.  END NOTE.)  Ali claimed the returned IDPs are 
caught in a no-win situation if they are not allowed to vote in 
Kirkuk, because they gave up their former voter-registrations 
when they moved back to Kirkuk.  The December 15 election will 
be the third time the Kurdish people have had to fight for the 
right to participate in the electoral process. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  BATTLING BAGHDAD IECI.  Rizgar Ali vowed to do battle 
with the Baghdad IECI after the election is complete.  He 
presented the RC with a CD that reportedly shows a top IECI 
official praising the Ba'ath party - a clear indication, 
according to Ali that the IECI leadership is not independent. 
(Comment: He has fixed this problem locally: the head of IECI in 
Kirkuk is a PUK Kurd.  End Comment.) 
 
-- He called for a complete review of all names on the voter 
rolls after the election, and for measures to find a solution to 
Baghdad IECI's biases. 
 
--The Kurdistan Alliance List prefers to act legally to solve 
problems, but will not accept violations by others.  It wants 
success in the electoral process and will support the process in 
Iraq.  However, he noted that winning seats in the National 
Assembly is not as important as human rights. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  TURCOMAN AND ARAB COMPLAINTS.  Several Turcomans and 
one Arab on the Provincial Council complained to RC and PolOff 
in a separate meeting about the Baghdad IECI decision to allow 
removed registrants to vote with proper identification and proof 
of registration.  They were incensed at the decision, viewing it 
as totally discrediting the IECI. 
 
--IECI allowed the 81,000 voters to register, then declared them 
fraudulent, and now says they can vote after all if they produce 
the proper credentials. 
 
--Turcoman PC Member Ali Mehdi stressed that identification 
documents are easily forged, so the IECI's decision opens the 
door to massive fraudulent voting (see also reftel). 
 
--The group demanded that the names be removed once and for all, 
to create confidence in the Turcoman and Arab communities. 
Council Members Hassan Turan (Turcoman) and Rakan Said (Sunni 
Arab) said fraudulent elections would fuel terrorism in Kirkuk. 
They asserted that they wanted peace but with justice. 
--They demanded a reply from the USG within 24 hours, or else 
they might hold protests or a hunger-strike. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  NEED FOR COMPLIANCE AND RESTRAINT. In both meetings, 
RC stressed the importance of transparency in the election, and 
the necessity for all to abide by the decisions reached by the 
Baghdad IECI, which was working closely with UN electoral 
experts.  He highlighted the need for all the political lists to 
make their observers aware of the latest IECI decisions so they 
could detect improper conduct at the polling stations.  If they 
saw problems, they should report them immediately. 
BELL