05OTTAWA3726
TRILATERAL REGULATORY COOPERATION MEETING UNDER
Wed Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 003726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO COMMERCE FOR GERI WORD, OMB/OIRA FOR ALEX HUNT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD PGOV CA MX SIPDIS
SUBJECT: TRILATERAL REGULATORY COOPERATION MEETING UNDER 
SPP: INFORMATION SHARING 
 
REF: OTTAWA 1199 
 
¶1.  On December 9, Canadian, Mexican and U.S. officials met 
in Ottawa to discuss possibilities for regulatory cooperation 
under the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North 
America (SPP).  The Canadians, who had proposed and organized 
the meeting, seem enthusiastic about the prospects for 
engagement under the SPP.  The discussions focused on 
explaining the three countries' regulatory systems, and 
during the course of these explanations delegates noted 
similarities and differences.  Mexico's regulatory system is 
different from the U.S. and Canadian systems (which are 
parallel in many ways), and this difference could pose 
challenges. 
 
¶2.   At the meeting, the participants agreed to provide 
comments by mid-January 2006 on Canada's draft proposal 
"North American Regulatory Cooperation Framework: The Way 
Forward" (for the USG, OMB's Office of Information and 
Regulatory Affairs representative will coordinate.) 
Participants anticipate the creation of a core working group 
by late January or early February.  This core working group 
will focus at first on mapping out current cooperative 
arrangements between the three governments that can be used 
as examples and test cases in the SPP regulatory cooperation 
process.  The core working group will also look at other 
frameworks (such as the U.S.-EU regulatory cooperation 
framework) for insights into trilateral options under SPP. 
At the meeting, participants tentatively agreed to plan a 
trilateral symposium for sometime in the Spring 
(March/April), to be held in either Washington, DC or Mexico. 
 While representation at the symposium has not been decided 
(e.g. government, industry, academics or a combination 
thereof), participants were tasked with collecting 
suggestions of possible participants in the symposium. 
 
¶3.  The United States delegation was headed by Alex Hunt from 
the Office of Management and Budget's Office of Information 
and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA); Embassy and Department of 
Commerce officials also participated in the meeting. Mexican 
representatives included officials from the Mexican Embassy 
in Ottawa, from Mexico's Federal Regulatory Improvement 
Commission (COFEMER), as well as an official from the Mexican 
Office of the Treasury.  The Canadians, who proposed and 
organized the meeting, included officials from the Privy 
Council Office, Industry Canada, and International Trade. 
Embassy econ staff also met with Ottawa-based representatives 
from this meeting at their invitation on December 14, to 
clarify the timeline for the proposed working group and 
regulatory cooperation framework, to further explore the role 
of the Canadian Parliament's Joint Standing Committee on the 
Scrutiny of Regulation, and to discuss general options for 
going forward. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS