05PARIS8659
AIR FRANCE DISCUSSES ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENTS FOR
Tue Dec 27 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 008659 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/TRA/OTP, EUR/WE, CA/VO/I 
DHS FOR TSA, ICE/CBP, AND ICE/FOREIGN OPS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR CVIS PTER FR
SUBJECT: AIR FRANCE DISCUSSES ALTERNATIVE ARRANGEMENTS FOR 
PROCESSING FLIGHT CREW VISAS 
 
REF:  Paris 7216 
 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1.   (SBU) SUMMARY:  In a meeting with Emboffs December 21, 
Air France officials expressed concern about the cost of 
processing visas for crewmembers.  Air France estimates that 
it requires approximately 6000 visas per year at a cost in 
lost crew time and other expenses it claims could reach five 
million euros.  Air France proposed a number of possible 
alternatives, and said they would also be raising the issue 
directly with DHS.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.   (SBU) Guy Tardieu, Air France Vice-President for 
External Relations and Chief of Staff to Chairman Jean-Cyril 
Spinetta and two staffers met with Emboffs December 21 to 
discuss their concerns about the logistics and costs of 
providing crew visas to its 12,000 flight crewmembers who 
might need to enter the U.S.  Air France estimates that its 
crewmembers will need 5-6,000 visas per year, at a total 
annual cost to the airline of approximately five million 
euros. (Its unions insist that Air France foot the bill for 
wages and travel expenses due to the U.S. requirement that 
applicants personally appear for a fingerprint scan). 
 
¶3.   (SBU) After noting that Air France was moving ahead 
with its own program of creating a biometric database of all 
its employees, Tardieu and his staff reviewed a number of 
alternatives for visa processing that they believed could 
save them time and money.  Most involved collection and/or 
processing of biometric data for crewmembers at Air France 
facilities, (using either Air France or USG equipment), 
followed by secure transmission to U.S. authorities for visa 
adjudication and issuance.  Collection could be supervised 
by French police or a U.S.-appointed supervisor (at Air 
France expense).  One transmission option would be to embed 
fingerprints in the Master Crew List, which Air France 
already provides to the USG on a regular basis via the 
French Border Police. 
 
¶4.   (SBU) Emboffs noted a number of potential difficulties 
any such proposal raised.  While technically possible, 
indirect collection of biometric data outside of channels 
directly controlled by the USG could be seen as implying 
mutual recognition of security arrangements, a broad and 
sensitive issue that would need high-level negotiation and 
decision.  A more viable option might be to link fingerprint 
scans of crewmembers done at entry by USG officials to visa 
applications; it was unclear to us however if this was 
technically possible.  Even use of prior scans for visa 
renewals would require changes in DHS regulations currently 
in force, we warned. 
 
¶5.   (SBU) Moreover, Emboffs argued that if special 
arrangements were made for Air France, other airlines would 
surely request them, including those with less than sterling 
reputations for screening and security.  It would perhaps be 
preferable for Air France to envisage a collective solution 
in cooperation with other large airlines.  Tardieu agreed 
that this was a common problem.  Following Air France 
Chairman Spinetta's October proposal to the Ambassador 
(reftel), he had recently talked to CBP about having Air 
France serve along with other airlines as a pilot tester of 
DHS's program to allow transmission of passenger data to the 
U.S. for name-checking before take-off (Secure Flight). 
Perhaps the issue could be raised in that context as well, 
he said. 
 
¶6.   (SBU) COMMENT:  Post passes along Air France's ideas 
for information purposes only at this time.  We would 
appreciate any additional information that emerges from Air 
France discussions with CBP or other USG agencies about 
participation in the DHS pilot program.  END COMMENT. 
 
STAPLETON