05QUITO2889
Results Report: Andean Parliamentarian
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ECA/PE/V/F/A, WHA/PDA; WHA/AND 
GUAYAQUIL FOR NOUHRA 
 
E.O. 12958: 
TAGS: SCUL KPAO OEXC EC
SUBJECT: Results Report: Andean Parliamentarian 
Study Tour (October 16-23) 
 
¶1. Summary:  Participants reported that the trip 
provided excellent insight into how democracy functions 
in the US, the role of multilateral institutions and 
impressions of Latin America.  They were particularly 
struck by the influence and independence of the Congress 
and the US system of checks and balances.  They also 
were impressed by how much research goes into 
formulating legislation and how, ultimately, national 
interests overcome political partisanship, at least as 
compared to Ecuadorian politics.  They also found 
meetings with the World Bank and other multilateral 
institutions to be especially useful. End summary. 
 
¶2. Date: October 16-23, 2005, first quarter, FY 06. 
 
¶3. MPP Theme and Audience Reached: Strengthening 
Democracy. 
 
¶4. Justification and Objective:  To expose open-minded 
members of congress to the US, with a focus on 
constituent outreach and political reform. 
 
¶5. Description of Activity:  One week study tour in 
Washington, D.C. organized by the National Democratic 
Institute through a grant from the Office of Citizen 
Exchanges. 
 
¶6. Result/Impact: Excellent. Highlights follow: 
 
The Ecuadorian participants said they felt privileged to 
have been chosen to participate in this study tour. 
They learned a great deal about the US political system 
and also found it extremely beneficial to talk to fellow 
members of congress from other Andean nations.  This 
contact with foreign counterparts helped to highlight 
the advantages Ecuador enjoys over its neighbors, most 
importantly the lack of violent conflicts. 
 
One visitor, Carlos Kure, remarked that the US Congress 
has much more power than its Ecuadorian counterpart, and 
noted the importance of the system of checks and 
balances in ensuring better government.  Another 
participant, Diego Monsalve, was impressed by the level 
of research done during the legislation drafting 
process.  He noted that, for example, in the US economic 
experts help formulate economic policy whereas in 
Ecuador, economic policy decisions are driven by 
political motivations. 
 
Omar Simon, who accompanied the members of congress as a 
representative of local NGO Citizen Participation, noted 
that the US has political influences, but that the 
strength of its institutions overcomes political 
partisanship. 
 
The participants found meetings with multilateral 
institutions such as the World Bank and IDB to be very 
useful.  They reported that the meeting at USAID was the 
least productive, though Sandra Sandoval remarked that 
it was interesting to learn how the US views Latin 
America and to see that other Andean nations share some 
of Ecuador's challenges.  As a whole, the group found 
the experience very useful both in understanding the US 
and in shaping how they approach policy-making in 
Ecuador. 
 
¶7. Media Coverage:  N/A. 
 
¶8. Non-USG Support:  N/A. 
 
¶9. Quality of Support: Excellent.  The visitors said the 
program was very well organized. 
 
JEWELL