05QUITO2892
Results Report: Sub-regional IV program
Mon Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002892 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ECA/PE/V/G/W, WHA/PDA; WHA/AND 
GUAYAQUIL FOR NOUHRA 
AMEMBASSIES FOR PAO/CAO 
 
E.O. 12958: 
TAGS: SCUL EC KPAO OEXC
SUBJECT: Results Report: Sub-regional IV program 
"Transparency and Good Governance" for Andean 
Municipal Leaders, Sept. 19-Oct. 7 
 
REFTEL: A) Quito 1386  B) Quito 2704 
 
¶1. Summary:  Esmeraldas Mayor Ernesto Estupinan found 
the program on "Transparency and Good Governance" to be 
useful overall, but noted that the program lacked focus 
on issues of direct relevance to mayors.  He felt this 
was a significant weakness, and that future programs 
should include meetings with U.S. mayors on such 
specific topics as waste management, infrastructure and 
other responsibilities shared by municipal leaders.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. Date: September 19-October 7, 2005, fourth quarter, 
FY 05. 
 
¶3. MPP Theme and Audience Reached:  Strengthening 
Democracy. 
 
¶4. Justification and Objective: See reftel. 
 
¶5. Description of Activity:  Three-week program for 
Andean municipal leaders on "Transparency and Good 
Governance."  Visitors traveled to Washington, D.C., 
Boston, MA; Kansas City, MO; Denver, CO; and Atlanta, 
GA. 
 
¶6. Result/Impact: Good. Highlights follow: 
 
Ernesto Estupinan, mayor of largely Afro-Ecuadorian 
Esmeraldas, reported that the trip was a positive 
experience overall.  (Note: Ref B contains the Results 
Report from a second Ecuadorian participant in the 
program, Alberto Coles).  Estupinan noted that it was 
valuable to get an overview of the representative 
democracy practiced in the U.S., and said he now has a 
much better understanding of how various levels of 
government function.  Simply being in the U.S. with 
fellow mayors of Andean countries was beneficial. 
 
However, he said he felt the program was not 
sufficiently tailored to the interests of the 
participants, i.e. mayors of Andean towns.  He would 
have like more substantive discussions with U.S. mayors 
on topics that confront all municipal governments such 
as waste management, transportation, maintaining 
infrastructure and other city services.  He regretted 
that there were not more opportunities to exchange ideas 
with U.S. mayors, to discuss common challenges and to 
share common solutions.  He felt that "though our 
systems of government are different, the problems are 
the same." 
 
Mr. Estupinan also would have liked to meet with 
multilateral institutions and NGOs, particularly those 
that have programs in Ecuador.  He wanted to find out 
more about what programs are available in Ecuador.  The 
mayor felt that some of the topics in the program were 
of little interest to mayors, though when asked he could 
not cite any examples. 
 
Overall, the trip was "a positive experience" despite 
what Mr. Estupinan saw as some weaknesses.  He is in 
contact with the participants from other Andean cities, 
and hopes they will come to Carnival in Esmeraldas. 
 
¶7. Media Coverage:  N/A. 
 
¶8. Non-USG Support:  N/A. 
 
9.Quality of Support: Excellent.  The participant said 
the program was well-organized and the participants 
"very well cared for." 
 
JEWELL