05SOFIA2123
BULGARIA: BASING PROSPECTS ON TRACK DESPITE PUBLIC
Fri Dec 30 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SOFIA 002123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR AND PM - AMBASSADOR LOFTIS 
OSD FOR PETE NAJERA AND LESLEY YOUNG 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/28/2015 
TAGS: MARR PGOV PREL KPAO BU RU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA: BASING PROSPECTS ON TRACK DESPITE PUBLIC 
SKEPTICISM 
 
REF: SOFIA 2025 
 
Classified By: CDA Jeffrey Levine for reasons 1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
1.(C) SUMMARY.  The government of Bulgaria remains committed 
to concluding a shared basing agreement with the U.S. despite 
widespread public opposition.  As previous Bulgarian 
governments have done on issues such as Iraq and Kosovo, this 
government is prepared to lead public opinion rather than 
follow.  The extreme nationalist Ataka party, with suspected 
Russian advice and assistance, has negatively influenced 
press coverage of the negotiations, but its calls for a 
referendum have failed to gain traction.  Given the relative 
dearth of anti-American sentiment in Bulgaria, we believe the 
best antidote to public skepticism is the rapid conclusion of 
an agreement.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C) According to recent U.S.-sponsored public opinion 
data, 69 percent of Bulgarians disapprove of the U.S. 
military using military bases in Bezmer and Novo Selo. 
However, on December 8, two days after Secretary Rice signed 
a basing agreement with Romania, the MFA's official 
spokesman, Dimitar Tsanchev, issued the following 
announcement: 
 
"Negotiations on the deployment of joint Bulgarian-U.S. 
military installations continue, and at this stage there are 
no serious problems hindering the talks.  An agreement is 
expected to be reached in the near future taking into 
consideration the countries' common interests." 
 
On December 27, an MFA official privately confirmed that we 
are "very close to an agreement on the Status of Forces 
package." 
 
¶3. (C) The willingness of Bulgaria's political leadership to 
move ahead in the face of public opposition is a phenomenon 
we have observed before.  In 1999, there was widespread and 
vocal public opposition to the Kostov government's decision 
to grant blanket overflight clearance to U.S. aircraft 
engaged in military operations against neighboring 
Yugoslavia.  In 2003, Parliament approved the deployment of 
an infantry battalion to Iraq despite polls showing that only 
eight percent of Bulgarians fully supported participation. 
Even more telling was the GOB's determination to continue its 
participation in the coalition for two years despite 
suffering 13 killed and 80 wounded.  The Socialist-led 
government elected last summer continues to buck public 
opinion, first by reneging on its pledge to immediately 
withdraw the infantry battalion from Iraq and then by 
all-but-officially accepting the follow-on mission favored by 
the U.S. military.  We expect a formal decision on the Iraq 
follow-on mission as soon as CENTCOM and the Bulgarian 
military agree on the technical terms of reference. 
 
¶4. (C) The extreme nationalist party Ataka is a leading 
critic of the basing negotiations (reftel).  Although Ataka 
has not had a significant impact to date, its hard-line 
stance puts pressure on the Bulgarian Socialist Party, whose 
core electorate shares many of the same views on foreign 
policy.  Ataka's calls for a national referendum on the 
basing agreements have failed to gain traction, and it 
remains on the fringes of the political scene.  However, 
there are indications that the Russian embassy in Sofia may 
be supporting Ataka and encouraging negative press coverage 
of the basing issue.  The Russian CHOD also received 
substantial local press coverage in early December when he 
raised the prospect of U.S. missile defenses in Bulgaria 
(sic) and said, "God forbid if downed foreign missiles fell 
on the Kozloduy nuclear power plant" in Bulgaria.  Baluevski 
also reportedly said he was "astounded" that the U.S. was not 
going to pay rent for the use of Bulgarian bases since this 
was "the normal practice around the world." 
 
¶5. (C) COMMENT: While the GOB has a track record of taking 
controversial foreign policy decisions in the face of public 
opposition, the negative poll numbers highlight the need for 
a sustained public diplomacy effort on our part.  In 
November, during the last bilateral negotiating session, we 
arranged television and print interviews with the lead U.S. 
negotiator, Ambassador Robert Loftis. Perhaps more 
importantly, we successfully urged a number of Bulgarian 
opinion leaders from the Left side of the political spectrum 
-- where opposition is most concentrated -- to speak out in 
support of the basing agreements.  Our Public Affairs section 
has commissioned a reputable polling agency to conduct focus 
groups to pinpoint Bulgarians' specific concerns.  And in an 
effort to reach a wider audience, we are facilitating a visit 
by a Bulgarian television crew to a U.S. military base in 
Western Europe to show the Bulgarian public what a U.S. 
military presence looks like and how the local population 
interacts with American service members.  Our most effective 
means of countering Ataka and its sponsors, however, will be 
the presence of U.S. boots on the ground in Bulgaria.  Given 
the absence of strong underlying anti-American sentiment, we 
believe public attitudes will change once the agreements are 
signed and our troops begin deploying here. 
 
LEVINE