03SANAA2428
DEMOCRACY SMALL GRANT FOR THE NATIONAL WOMEN
Sun Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 002428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/PPD:DMACINNES, JKINCANNON, JDAVIES, 
NEA/RA:BKEARY, NEA/ARP: MMILLER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KPAO AFIN KWMN PHUM YM HUMAN RIGHTS
SUBJECT: DEMOCRACY SMALL GRANT FOR THE NATIONAL WOMEN 
COMMITTEE/ ADEN 
 
REF: A) STATE 187026 B) SANAA 5295 
 
¶1.  Embassy Sanaa requests funding for a grant from the 
NEA Democracy Small Grants Program to the "National Women 
Committee/ Aden" to conduct the "Early Marriage 
Phenomenon Study and Awareness Workshop." 
 
¶2.  The National Women Committee is quasi-governmental 
and receives much of its funding from the ROYG, and its 
head in Sanaa is government-appointed. In most other 
respects, it functions as an NGO and works closely with 
women's NGOs throughout Yemen. The fact that it is well 
organized and properly staffed gives us confidence that 
the Aden branch will be able to implement this project. 
 
¶3.  Project description: The project titled "Early 
Marriage Phenomenon Study and Awareness Workshop" will 
address the early marriage phenomenon and risks and 
effects, among young girls in the rural areas of 6 
southern governorates: 
Lahj, Abyan, Adhalie, Hadramout, Shabwa and Almahra. 
The study will focus on how early marriage is denying the 
rights of young girls and preventing them from enjoying 
the life of childhood, education, freedom to choose their 
partners, and the right to build their personalities. 
The study will search this phenomenon and call for 
identifying such problem, its causes, and impacts on 
family conditions. A discussion group will be formed to 
discuss the study results and work on the formulation of 
adequate solutions that eradicate this phenomenon, with 
the cooperation of all concerned, the government, civil 
society, individuals, NGO's and International donors. 
The purpose of such cooperation is to ensure that women 
in general and young girls in particular are enjoying 
their rights and promote the exercise of these rights 
without violence. 
Discussion groups will include judges, lawyers, religious 
men, doctors and specialist groups such as social 
experts, psychologists and social leaders. 
Following the research and study team, public awareness 
mobile workshops will be organized by the specialist 
team, visiting the families in the study areas, girls 
schools and women centers.  The purpose of this method is 
to educate and make the public aware about the risks and 
impact of this phenomenon on both sexes, and to get their 
comments and opinions. This method is considered to be 
participatory. 
Workshop will use posters and signs to get the message 
across and reach people. 
 
¶4.  Project objectives: 
-To raise awareness about early marriage risks. 
-To assert girls right to education 
 
¶5.  Project justification: Yemen has one of the highest 
rates of early girl marriages in the region due to strict 
traditions that make parents the ultimate decision 
makers. According to traditions, parents in most Yemeni 
provinces especially in poor and tribal remote areas, 
take their daughters out of school and force them into 
marriage either to follow family tradition, or to get the 
marriage dowry which will help the family economically. 
The continuation of this tradition has caused many risks 
to young girls whose rights to education, freedom of 
expression and choice have been violated. It also has 
affected their physical well being since they bear 
children at a young age and are unable to cope with 
marriage responsibility, therefore get divorced and bear 
the social and economical responsibilities of their 
circumstances. 
 
Project supports mission key MPP goal of promoting girls 
rights to education, freedom of choice and intellectual 
and physical development. 
 
¶6.  The total amount requested for this project is US 
DOLS 9247 
 
¶7.  Project dates: March-December 03 
 
¶8.  Budget details: 
 
6 Governorates study research needs: 
Questionnaires for six selected areas (200 x 6) 
1200 
Transportation for questionnaire distribution 
600 
Researchers fees (100 x 12 two for each governorate) 
1200 
Discussion group meeting needs: 
Discussion team fees (10 experts x 60)             600 
Workshop needs in six governorates: 
3 lecturers in each governorate (3 x 70 x 3 days x 6 
governorates)                                     3780 
Awareness messages posters (100 x 6 governorates) 
600 
Coordinator fees for the project                   500 
Administrative Fees                                767 
Total                                             9247 
HULL