04PANAMA2452
PANAMA PLANS ASSERTIVE, COHERENT FOREIGN POLICY
Wed Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 PANAMA 002452 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN/PIERCE 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/20/2014 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR PM POL CHIEF
SUBJECT: PANAMA PLANS ASSERTIVE, COHERENT FOREIGN POLICY 
 
REF: A. PANAMA 1849 
     ¶B. PANAMA 2362 
     ¶C. PANAMA 236 
     ¶D. PANAMA 2274 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Linda E. Watt for reasons 1.4 (b) & (d). 
 
 
------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 

¶1.  (C) The Torrijos administration plans to run a much more 
ambitious foreign policy than its predecessor, aiming to sell 
the Panama "brand" to the world.  First Vice President and 
Foreign Minister Samuel LEWIS Navarro has repeatedly 
indicated to the Ambassador and EmbOffs that the Torrijos 
team intends to establish a "coherent" foreign policy that 
will feature especially close cooperation with the United 
States and Colombia and higher profile relations with 
important Western European countries, such as France and 
Spain.  "We need to make Panama a world player," he told 
PolCouns in a recent meeting.  Lewis and other GOP officials 
have emphasized that Panama's most important international 
partner is the United States.  To that end, MFA intends to 
establish a wholly new North America Desk solely responsible 
for managing Panama's relationship with the U.S. and Canada. 
(Note: Canada currently maintains a two-person Embassy in 
Panama.  End Note.) 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Also with an eye on closer cooperation with Mercosur 
and on attracting Western-European investors and tourists, 
the Torrijos administration has sought high-level 
consultations with European and Latin American leaders even 
before winning the May 2 election, and more intensively in 
the transition period before Torrijos' September 1 
inauguration.  Both the President and the FM see Panama's 
foreign relations program as a motor to drive to their 
domestic agendas of increasing tourism, local employment, 
economic growth and investment, security and Canal expansion. 
 Lewis also has spoken of making Panama's UN votes more 
"predictable" although we doubt that they will be more U.S. 
or Israel-friendly than in the past.  End Summary. 
 
 
-------------------------- 
FM'S FOREIGN POLICY VISION 
-------------------------- 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Foreign Minister Lewis mapped out the Torrijos 
administration's determination to make Panama a "global 
player" to attract foreign investment and create jobs. 
"Panama has not had a foreign policy for years," Lewis 
complained during a recent meeting with PolCouns.  "One day 
it's one thing, the next day it's different."  Lewis 
described the recent whirlwind of foreign visits that 
Torrijos has made, saying, "We just wanted to touch base with 
all these (foreign leaders) to begin to form a coherent 
policy, and make Panama an ally of all peaceful, democratic 
nations."  Today, the world ignores Panama, Lewis continued. 
Lewis and Torrijos want Panama to start playing a more 
visible role in world politics, to help Panama in Canal 
expansion, attracting investment, and creating jobs.  Lewis 
plans to use foreign policy to promote Panama as a friendly 
country, a good place to invest and to visit. 
 
 
------------------ 
PANAMA AND THE USG 
------------------ 
 
 
¶4.  (C) MFA Foreign Policy Director General Dario Chiru 
(Undersecretary for Political Affairs) expanded on plans for 
establishing a new Directorate General to manage Panama's 
relationship with the United States and Canada during a 
September 20 lunch with PolCouns.  Chiru said the MFA wants 
to establish a sole interlocutor to manage bilateral 
relations on a day-to-day basis (like a State Department 
country desk).  Noting Panama's oft-mentioned "special 
relationship" with the U.S., Chiru explained that the MFA 
should try to ensure consistent policy coordination with its 
largest and most important partner.  (Comment: Panama's 
strict top-down management culture makes it difficult to 
imagine that this system would be entirely effective or that 
MFA's not-yet-identified North America office director would 
have sufficient clout to rapidly respond to multiple daily 
USG to GOP requests.  Nonetheless, the decision to dedicate 
human resources to managing Panama's relations with the U.S. 
is a promising step consistent with FM Lewis' vision and 
repeated overtures to EmbOffs.  End Comment.) 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
HONORING INTERNATIONAL COMMITMENTS TO FIGHT CORRUPTION 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
¶5.  (C) The GOP has acted quickly on a U.S. anti-corruption 
priority consistent with its own "zero corruption" campaign 
pledge, by opening investigations against former Nicaraguan 
President Arnoldo Aleman and nine of his relatives and former 
officials.  The Aleman group is allegedly connected with 40 
Panamanian bank accounts containing some $60 million, and is 
under suspicion of money laundering.  Ambassador Watt has 
reinforced to FM Lewis the A/S Noriega September 1 message to 
Torrijos (delivered during the inauguration) that an all-out 
push on the Aleman case will help Panama show its seriousness 
on corruption.  (Reftel B) 
 
 
------------------- 
PANAMA AND COLOMBIA 
------------------- 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Torrijos has visited President Uribe in Colombia 
twice recently, Lewis told PolCouns, once immediately after 
the May 2 election, and discussed a possible Panama-Colombia 
Free Trade Agreement (FTA).  Maintaining close relations with 
its big neighbor to the southwest is crucial for Panama 
because of immigration, trade and investment, 
counter-terrorism, money laundering, and narcotics issues. 
In a Sept. 13 meeting with A/DCM and PolCouns, MFA Secretary 
General Daniel Delgado confirmed that Colombia has been 
pushing the idea of finishing the last uncompleted stretch 
(108 km) of the Pan-American highway to establish a 
high-speed link between the two countries.  Panama has agreed 
to "study" the idea for the new road, which would bisect its 
Darien National Park.  But Delgado signaled that Panama is 
much more interested in Colombian proposals to build 
electrical transmission lines to link the two nations, power 
grids than a road.  (Comment: Panama,s concerns about its 
150,000-200,000 illegal Colombian residents decrease its 
enthusiasm for a road.  End Comment.) 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
PANAMA AND THE AMERICAS 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Just prior to his inauguration, Torrijos and Lewis 
completed a southern cone Latin America tour (using Lewis' 
private executive jet), meeting with five presidents in six 
days. They discussed participation in Mercosur in meetings 
with President Kirchner in Argentina and President Da Silva 
("Lula") in Brazil.  Also in Argentina, Torrijos and Lewis 
met with Uruguayan President Batlle.  They stopped in Chile 
to meet with President Lagos.  During a fuel stop in Lima, 
they met unexpectedly with President Toledo when he invited 
them to the Palace.  Prior to his July 2004 visit to Europe, 
Torrijos stopped in Mexico to meet President Fox, Lewis said. 
 (Note: President Fox has announced his intention to visit 
Panama for its 101st birthday, November 3.  Torrijos and Fox 
apparently intend to resurrect a previously failed attempt at 
a Free Trade Agreement during the visit. End Note.)  Torrijos 
also has met with Costa Rican President Abel Pacheco. 
 
 
¶8.  During an August 6 press conference in Buenos Aires, 
Torrijos detailed Panama's interest in playing a more 
prominent role in Mercosur, drawing on its strengths as a 
logistics, transportation and re-shipment hub.  Torrijos 
emphasized Panama's advantages as a natural conduit for 
channeling and processing Latin American goods intended for 
the U.S. and other nations.  Torrijos stressed Panama's 
service industries and security, explaining that Mercosur 
should think hard about using Panama as a hemispheric 
merchandise distribution center.  Torrijos also stressed the 
pending FTA talks with the U.S. and future FTAs with other 
nations as an added reason that Southern Cone companies 
should trust their products to Panama's distribution 
capabilities.  (Note: La Prensa reported September 27 that 
Panama intends to become a member of Mercosur. End Note.) 
 
 
----------------- 
PANAMA AND EUROPE 
----------------- 
 
 
¶9.  (C) During his summer 2004 Paris meeting with Torrijos, 
President Chirac confirmed plans to visit Panama in 2005, 
Lewis told PolCouns.  The Canal remains an investment option 
in France, Lewis explained, as a French/Belgian company has 
been involved in Canal expansion studies.  Increasing French 
tourism is important to Panama, Lewis said, and Chirac and 
Torrijos proposed the start of a new Paris-to-Panama KLM 
route.  Torrijos also met with the King Juan Carlos I of 
Spain and Spanish President Jose Luis Rodriquez Zapatero. 
(Note: Direct Madrid-to-Panama flights will begin in October. 
 End Note.) 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
IMPROVE SECURITY TO INCREASE INTERNATIONAL APPEAL 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
¶10.  (C) The Torrijos administration is keenly interested in 
international security cooperation (read: with the USG) and 
came to power with explicit (if vague) intentions to improve 
Panama,s security posture.  Panama,s wide areas of concern 
range from Canal, port, and container security to the 
integrity of its ship registry (the world,s largest) and the 
security of its identity documents for tens of thousands of 
mariners.  For Minister of Government and Justice (MOGJ) 
Hector Aleman, the link between domestic security and foreign 
investment could not be more clear.  The GOP wants companies, 
foreign investors, and tourists to feel safe in Panama.  MOGJ 
is well aware of Panama,s current shortcomings.  "If 
terrorists came to Panama right now, we would sell them 
candy," MOGJ aide Severino Mejia told PolOff September 15. 
"Panama has never had a mind to think about security issues 
like terrorism, but we must."  Mejia said that MOGJ hopes to 
write or re-write organic laws to re-organize the 21 social 
and security institutions -- including the Panamanian 
National Police -- that comprise MOGJ to maximize law 
enforcement and security.  (Note: MOGJ Hector Aleman, MFA 
Secretary General Daniel Delgado, and Consejo Director (NSA 
equivalent and intelligence chief) Javier Martinez Acha 
traveled to Washington during the week of September 27 to 
meet Department of Homeland Security, Coast Guard, and 
Department of Defense officials, including Deputy Assistant 
Secretary Roger Pardo-Mauer.  Aleman and Acha likely will 
soon make concrete proposals to Torrijos on security.  End 
Note.) 
 
 
------------------------------ 
CUBA, CHINA, TAIWAN, VENEZUELA 
------------------------------ 
 
 
¶11.  (C) To the dismay of the Torrijos administration, Cuba 
has proved unwilling to quickly repair bilateral relations 
that were severed following President Moscoso,s August 2004 
pardon of four Cuban-born prisoners convicted in connection 
with an alleged attempt to kill Fidel Castro in 2000.  The 
prospect of renewed relations with Cuba will likely remain 
stalled for weeks, if not months.  Many are speculating that 
Castro may be trying to extract as yet unspecified favors or 
concessions from the GOP exchange for re-establishing 
relations.  Panama continues to maintain relations with 
Taiwan, although unfounded rumors of an imminent switch to 
China (PRC) continue.  Meanwhile, a political scandal is 
unfolding regarding Taiwan's financial support to President 
Moscoso's government.  The press and the new administration 
are wondering loudly, "Where exactly did all that money go?" 
(See Reftel D.)  The Venezuelan ambassador to Panama, Flavio 
Granados, arrived in Panama less than one week after the 
September 1 inauguration, patching the rift with Venezuela, 
also dating from the pardon of the four Cubans.  Panama has 
not yet selected a new ambassador to Venezuela. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 

¶12.  (C) The Torrijos administration seems determined to 
multiply its options internationally, especially its economic 
and investment opportunities.  The new GOP has announced 
intention to "clean up" its far-eastern consulates (such as 
Hong Kong, Manila, Tokyo), long a lucrative source of graft 
from the sale of mariner identifications and ship 
registrations.  Although FM Lewis has spoken of the need to 
make Panama,s UN votes "more predictable," we doubt that 
they will become notably more congenial to USG imperatives. 
With regard to Israel, for instance, Panama B,nai B,rith 
President Joseph Harari recently told PolCouns that, at a 
meeting with Torrijos and Lewis, Harari asked whether Panama 
will adopt a more pro-Israel stance at the UN.  Torrijos and 
Lewis replied that doing so could make Panama a 
higher-profile target for terrorist attacks, a risk they are 
unwilling to contemplate. 
 
 
WATT