05PANAMA2490
PANAMA NAMES TWO NEW SUPREME COURT JUSTICES
Thu Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

291813Z Dec 05...UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PANAMA 002490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND INR/B 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM POLITICS FOREIGN POLICY
SUBJECT: PANAMA NAMES TWO NEW SUPREME COURT JUSTICES 
 
 
Summary 
-------- 
¶1. (SBU) On December 28, President Torrijos submitted the 
names of Harley James Mitchell and Victor Leonel Benavides 
Pinilla to the National Assembly for ratification as Supreme 
Court magistrates.  In a fast legislative session that 
evening, the National Assembly ratified both magistrates 
along with three nominated supplentes, or substitute Court 
magistrates.  Mitchell and Benavides will fill the positions 
of justices Jorge Lee and Arturo Hoyos, respectively, whose 
terms expire December 31.  Two supplentes will back the 
in-coming magistrates and one is appointed as supplente to 
sitting justice Jose Troyano.  None of the appointees have 
spent much time in the public eye, and Mitchell and Benavides 
have reputations among legal professionals and the GOP for 
being competent.  Mitchell and Benavides have not been the 
subjects of corruption allegations.  It remains to be seen 
whether their appointment and the departure of Hoyos from the 
Court marks the beginning of a turn-around in questionable 
Court rulings.  End Summary. 
 
The Justices 
------------ 
¶2. (SBU) Harley James Mitchell, DOB: July 22, 1947, was born 
in Panama's western Bocas del Toro province and has worked 
for 27 years in the Judicial Branch.  He is designated as the 
magistrate presiding over civil issues.  Mitchell is a member 
of Torrijos' majority Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), 
and as a one-term legislator, represented Bocas del Toro in 
the National Assembly from 1978-1982.  He has also held a 
number of senior staff positions in the Assembly including 
Secretary General of the National Assembly from March 
 
SIPDIS 
1998-August 1999, and was appointed Director of Legal Affairs 
in September 1999, when the Panamenista party held the 
Presidency and a legislative majority.  He graduated from the 
University of Panama Law School in 1976 and has a 
post-graduate degree in Public Law from National University 
of Colombia and Commercial Law from Javier Pontific 
University in Colombia.  He is a member of Panama's National 
Bar Association and has taught legal courses in local 
universities for 14 years and has been a primary education 
teacher.  He has held some diplomatic positions, including 
Political and Judicial Counselor in Bogota, and has published 
writing on legal issues.  Mitchell is Afro-Panamanian and has 
been married for 34 years to Margarita Moran.  The couple has 
one son and one daughter.  Some local observers question 
whether Mitchell's links to the National Assembly might taint 
his impartiality in a system that already lacks checks and 
balances between the Court, the Assembly and the Presidency. 
Embassy contacts in legal circles had no reservations about 
his nomination. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Victor Leonel Benavides Pinilla was born in 
Santiago, Veraguas on May 22, 1951.  He has worked almost 40 
years in the public sector, 31 of which he spent working in 
the Office of the Solicitor General, and has held a number of 
faculty positions at the University of Panama.  He is 
designated to preside over administrative issues, in which he 
is considered to be an expert.  He holds an undergraduate 
degree in Law and Political Science and a post-graduate 
degree in Mediation and Arbitration from the University of 
Panama and a Master's in Public Management from Carlos III 
University in Madrid.  He is a member of a number of national 
and regional legal associations, including Panama's National 
Bar Association and has published works on legal issues. 
Benavides' portfolio as a Court magistrate would include 
labor law, an area in which he lacks expertise.  Despite his 
reputation for being "very academic," he is generally 
well-regarded in legal circles. 
 
The Supplentes 
-------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Delia Carrizo Arauz de Martinez, Mitchell's 
supplente, was born in Penonome, Cocle on August 10, 1955. 
She graduated from the University of Panama Law School and 
holds a doctorate in Procedural Law.  She worked briefly in 
the Public Ministry.  She has worked for 26 years in the 
Judicial Branch during which time she held several positions 
as judge and is currently serving as Superior Magistrate in 
the Second Judicial District, covering Cocle and Veraguas. 
Carrizo Arauz de Martinez is a member of both the National 
Bar Association and the Judges and Magistrates Association of 
Panama.  She is married with two children, one in high school 
and one in college. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Janina M. Small A., Benavides' supplente, was born 
in Panama City on January 15, 1945.  She is a specialist in 
Procedural Law and Labor Administration Law.  She has worked 
in the Judicial Branch for 36 years and has experience 
working in public ministries including the Attorney General's 
office.  She was supplente to the Attorney General from 
1990-1994.  She graduated from the University of Panama Law 
School and has worked on various National Bar Association 
commissions.  She has a "no-nonsense" reputation and is 
respected among her peers. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Juan Francisco Castillo, Troyano's supplente, was 
born in Panama City on February 19, 1962.  He has worked in 
the Judicial Branch for 23 years.  He first served as first 
judge of Panama City municipality and is currently serving as 
Superior Magistrate.  Castillo studied law in Spain on a 
scholarship, and has been teaching legal courses for ten 
years at the University of Panama, Latin University and 
Panama Technical University.  He is also a member of the 
Judges and Magistrates Association of Panama. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶7. (SBU) Torrijos has chosen non-controversial nominees that 
were all easily approved by the National Assembly.  Reactions 
by civil society and opposition legislators to the 
appointments have been mixed.  Some civil society leaders 
worry that Torrijos' choice of PRD loyalists represents a 
missed opportunity to depart from business as usual. 
Mitchell's appointment has been the only mildly contested one 
with some civil society groups expressing disappointment in 
the appointment of a nominee with such close PRD and National 
Assembly ties.  Opposition legislators, however, praised his 
appointment.  The five nominees bring with them extensive 
experience in the Judicial Branch and good reputations among 
their peers.  Upon their appointment, Mitchell and Benavides 
promised to restore public confidence in the Court.  Time 
will tell whether Torrijos, with his appointments, has 
changed the face of the Court and its track record of 
questionable rulings. 
 
ARREAGA