06PANAMA1793
PANAMA'S OFF SHORE CORPORATION INDUSTRY
Wed Sep 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #1793/01 2561646
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131646Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8940
INFO RUCNSTF/TERRORISM FINANCE PRE NOTIFICATION COLLECTIVE
RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DCUNCLAS PANAMA 001793 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV ETRD KCRM
SUBJECT: PANAMA'S OFF SHORE CORPORATION INDUSTRY 
 
This is Part I of a two part series on Panama's 
off-shore corporation regime.  Part I describes the 
incorporation process, and Part II (septel) will discuss who 
benefits and how. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Panama is the second most popular 
jurisdiction in which to form offshore corporations 
(sociedad anonimas or anonymous societies) after Hong 
Kong.  The advantages to incorporating in Panama include: 
the ease and flexibility of forming a corporation, 
well-established corporation law, and a tax regime 
that taxes only Panamanian derived income. 
This incorporation regime ensures secrecy, avoids taxes, 
and shields assets from the enforcement of legal 
judgments.  Along with its sophisticated banking 
services, Panama remains an environment conducive to 
laundering the proceeds from criminal activity and 
creates a vulnerability to terrorist financing. 
END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------------------ 
FORMING A PANAMANIAN COMPANY IS EASY 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) According to a 2005 World Bank report, Panama 
is the easiest and fastest country in Latin America 
in which to incorporate.  On average it takes seven 
procedures and 19 days.  Forming a Panamanian 
corporation typically costs less than $2,000, 
inclusive of legal fees.  There is no minimum capital 
requirement, and non-resident Panamanian corporations 
are not required to have a commercial business 
license to operate internationally.  Panamanian 
corporations are marketed widely on the internet 
and in the financial media.  Panama's Public Registry 
currently lists over 350,000 off-shore corporations 
registered in Panama. 
 
¶3.  (U) To establish a Panamanian corporation, two or 
more persons of legal age and capacity, of any 
nationality or domicile (the subscribers), execute 
the articles of incorporation before a notary public 
in Panama.  The articles of incorporation state the 
names and addresses of the directors, officers and 
resident agent, but are not required to list the 
shareholders.  The resident agent must be a Panamanian 
lawyer or law firm and usually acts as the subscriber. 
The directors and officers of a Panamanian 
company need not be shareholders or Panamanian 
residents. 
 
¶4. (U) The subscribers have the right to own one share 
of the corporation's capital stock and are typically 
the only shareholders that may be listed in the 
articles.  Once executed the articles are filed with 
the Public Registry and the corporation acquires its 
legal existence. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
HIDDEN DIRECTORS, OFFICERS AND SHAREHOLDERS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Once a corporation is formed, the initial 
shareholders can assign, transfer, or relinquish 
their shares to successive individuals and/or other 
off-shore corporations without any reporting 
requirements.  Panamanian law requires the 
maintenance of a shareholder registry, but the 
physical location can be anywhere.  Panama also 
allows the issuance of "bearer certificates." 
These physical shares in a company entitle 
the "bearer" to open a bank account and transact 
on behalf of the company. 
 
¶6. (U) Many Panamanian companies and law firms offer 
resident agent services, along with nominee directors 
and officers.  The advantage to nominee directors and 
officers is that they have no connection to, or 
knowledge of, the shareholders.  These directors 
and officers operate pursuant to a power of attorney 
granted by the shareholders that is not required to 
be filed with the Public Registry. 
 
¶7. (U) There is no legal requirement for resident agents 
to have direct contact with or information concerning 
a corporation's directors, officers or shareholders. 
While a "know your customer" obligation is imposed 
on Panamanian lawyers, the resident agent normally 
does not maintain any corporate records. In many 
cases, neither the resident agent nor the law firm 
know the identity of the shareholders. 
 
------------------- 
AVOIDING THE TAXMAN 
------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Panama taxes only income derived within 
the territory of Panama only.  The following 
are neither taxed nor required to be reported 
to any Panamanian authority: 
 
- Dividends or other distributions by a 
Panamanian corporation but sourced from 
non-Panamanian income. 
 
- Interest income. 
 
- Salary or other compensation received by 
non-Panamanian residents from a Panamanian 
corporation. 
 
Accordingly, the function performed by 
Form 1099 in the US of linking income to 
its recipient does not exist in Panama. 
 
¶9. (U)  Panama's favorable corporate tax 
environment is complemented by its sophisticated 
banking infrastructure.  To bypass the "know your 
customer" requirement of Panama's banking laws, 
the newly formed Panama corporation opens its bank 
accounts outside Panama in any of 100 banks from 30 
countries that have branch offices in Panama. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU)  The money laundering process of: 
placement (putting money into a legitimate 
financial institution), layering 
(distancing the money from its origin) and 
integration (causing the money to re-enter the 
economy in legitimate-looking form) is perfectly 
replicated in Panama. Panama's status as a major 
commercial and banking center (placement), 
corporation law and tax regime (layering) create 
an environment conducive to illicit finance. 
ARREAGA