07PANAMA1867
PANAMA: PMG'S DAY OF MOURNING RESOLUTION "WILL NOT
Thu Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #1867/01 3472207
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 132207Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1550
INFO RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 001867 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SNAR PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: PMG'S DAY OF MOURNING RESOLUTION "WILL NOT 
PASS" 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador William A. Eaton.  Reasons:  1.4 (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) "Pedro Miguel's bill to declare December 20 a National 
Day of Mourning will not pass," First VP and FM Samuel Lewis 
assured Ambassador in a December 13 telcon.  The day before, 
National Assembly Deputy Juan Manuel Peralta, at the behest 
of National Assembly President Pedro Miguel Gonzalez (PMG), 
presented draft legislation to establish December 20 -- the 
anniversary of the initiation of OPERATION JUST CAUSE -- as a 
National Day of Mourning.  (Note:  PMG is under federal 
indictment on several counts in connection with the 1992 
murder of a U.S. serviceman.)  Ambassador expressed his 
relief at Lewis' reassurance, adding that such a bill signed 
by President Torrijos would complicate our bilateral 
environment.  Lewis said he fully agreed, reiterated that 
this resolution would be stopped, and noted that this latest 
incident highlighted the difficulties that the Torrijos 
Administration faced in dealing with PMG.  Post strongly 
recommends against any effort to take PMG head on as it is 
precisely a clash with the U.S. that PMG seeks to propel 
himself politically. 
 
-------------------------- 
Justification for the Bill 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) In six paragraphs, the justification (exposicion de 
motivos) required by National Assembly rules to accompany any 
proposed draft bill (anteproyecto) goes on a polemical, 
anti-American tear.  The opening paragraph, presenting Panama 
as a jilted U.S. ally, provides a good sample of the vitriol 
behind PMG's initiative: 
 
"During a historical period of our national life fraught with 
political and social transformation, homes pummeled by the 
economic crisis caused by the economic siege imposed by our 
ever ally, the United States of America, and at a time when 
thousands of Panamanian homes were preparing to celebrate, 
with the best that they had within their reach, the birth of 
the Savior of the World, Jesus Christ, the most powerful army 
in the world, in an irresponsible manner, lashed out vilely 
against the men, women, and children of El Chorrillo (a 
neighborhood in Panama City) and nearby areas, that at the 
moment in which they were dreaming of presents from the 
heavens jumped to their feet." 
 
¶3. (U) The justification goes on to assert, "Blows when they 
come from friends or relatives hurt for all eternity."  The 
purpose, therefore, of the proposed resolution is to give an 
outlet for the mourning "in the hearts of the Panamanian 
people," and to reflect on the facts and circumstances that 
led to JUST CAUSE so that "no such act is ever repeated."  To 
achieve these goals -- mourning and reflection -- the bill 
would: 
 
-- order the flag to be flown at half-mast; 
-- prohibit the sale of liquor; 
-- urge all churches to pray for "justice and peace;" 
-- dedicate one hour of class time to the "study and 
analysis" of the events of December 20; and 
-- ask that "murals alluding to the date" by displaying the 
"culture of peace among all Panamanians" be displayed. 
 
-------- 
The Bill 
-------- 
 
¶4. (U) The National Assembly promptly admitted the draft 
proposed bill (anteproyecto) as a draft bill (proyecto) on 
December 12 and referred it to its first of three required 
debates.  The draft bill would decree that December 20 be 
declared annually to be a Day of National Mourning during 
with the Panamanian flag would be flown at half-mast on which: 
 
-- Radio and television broadcasters would not broadcast 
"raucus" music; 
-- The sale and consumption of alcohol would be banned; 
-- Public music "spectacles" not be allowed; 
-- It would be also a Day of Reflection; 
-- Public offices would display "murals" underscoring "the 
culture of peace and fraternity among all inhabitants of the 
Panamanian isthmus; 
 
 
The draft bill also calls for the Statistics and Census 
Directorate of the Comptroller General's Office, for the 2010 
census, to provide the number of Panamanians that perished in 
the "December invasion" and for the Attorney General's Office 
to investigate whether "other" mass graves exist in which the 
fallen from the invasion are buried and, if they are found, 
exhume the bodies to account for these fallen individuals. 
(It would, however, be a work day.) 
 
------------------ 
Negative Reactions 
------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Opposition Panamenista Party members are considering 
a bill to make June 10 a Day of National Mourning.  (Note: 
June 10, 1987 -- known as Black Friday -- was the date on 
which Noriega thugs lashed out at a peaceful demonstration by 
the Civil Crusada with clubs, dogs, tear gas and live 
gunfire.)  Some business groups are upset that this National 
Day of Mourning would quickly become a paid, day-off only 
five days before Christmas. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (C) .  In addition to pushing his National Day of Mourning 
resolution, PMG yesterday also called for the abrogation of 
the Salas-Becker Maritime Cooperation Agreement, a 
cornerstone of the U.S.-Panamanian counternarcotics 
cooperation, on the grounds that it "unconstitutionally" 
allowed a foreign power to seize Panamanian nationals aboard 
Panamanian flagged ships. 
 
¶7. (C) .  PMG is desperate for attention.   Since discussion 
here of the impact of PMG's election on the U.S.-Panama Trade 
Promotion Agreement (TPA) has ebbed away, PMG has found 
himself unable to sustain the public profile that he desires. 
 Taking shots at the U.S. and striving to put Torrijos in an 
awkward position with respect to his relationship with the 
U.S., PMG is attempting to recuperate a measure of public 
notoriety.  Most Panamanians are scratching their head about 
PMG's shenanigans and accept, though perhaps not as vocally 
as they could, that JUST CAUSE removed a dictator and 
restored democracy.  PMG's political maneuverings will also 
test the patience of PRD deputies who wished to exert the 
independence of the National Assembly by electing PMG 
president to the consternation of Torrijos but who are not 
comfortable with PMG's retrograde and backward looking 
antics.  Finally, this incident also highlights the depths to 
which legislative-executive relations have sunk since PMG's 
election.  Post recommends strongly against any frontal 
assault on PMG's antics.  If pressed for comment, a pithy 
reminder that the U.S. wishes to look forward, not backward, 
and is very heartened to have had a democratic partner for 
these past seventeen years to work with on a a broad, deep, 
and mutually shared agenda should suffice. 
 
EATON