08PANAMA944
PANAMA POST: THE WATER COOLER REPORTS
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0944/01 3591755
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 241755Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2756
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L PANAMA 000944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO WHADP COLLECTIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/22/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA POST: THE WATER COOLER REPORTS 
 
Classified By: POLCOUNS Brian R. Naranjo.  Reasons:  1.4 (b), 
(c), and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU/NF) Welcome to the second edition of the revamped 
Panama Post, a new collaborative effort between Embassy 
Panama's Political Section (POL) and the Open Source Center 
(OSC), that we are going to call "The Report from the Water 
Cooler."  OSC provides POL a steady stream of current news, 
the kind of fodder that serves as the nucleus for the chatter 
around POL's water cooler where we banter about the latest 
tidbits that we have collected from our contacts.  OSC and 
POL hope to provide you, our loyal readers, an opportunity to 
listen in to some of the highlights from our water cooler 
chatter.  In this edition of the Panama Post, our headlines 
are: 
 
-  Democratic Change (CD) presidential candidate Ricardo 
Martinelli cruising on 10  point lead as speculation 
regarding VP pick increases; 
-  Governing Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) reacts with 
criticism over surprise naming by Balbina Herrera of Panama 
City Mayor (and former contender for the PRD's presidential 
nomination) Juan Carlos Navarro as her VP running mate; 
-  Gaffe by Panamanian Ambassador to Belgium (and brother of 
PRD presidential candidate Balbina Herrera) Pablo Garrido may 
cost GOP USD 30 million; and 
-  As Panamenista presidential candidate Juan Carlos Varela 
lags badly in polls, are panamenistas getting itchy feet? 
 
Those not familiar with OSC's excellent unclassified 
summaries of open source media should log on to 
www.opensource.gov and set up an account for daily updates on 
issues, regions or countries of your choice.  OSC analysts 
follow open source material on a daily basis providing 
translations of timely news stories and analysis.  OSC can 
also be a partner in providing contributions across the 
Hemisphere and around the world.  Those of you not signed up 
for OSC accounts are missing out on their daily reporting on 
developments in your own backyard.  We here in POL, hope that 
our colleagues at posts throughout the Hemisphere can tap 
into OSC's resources to more effectively track the day-to-day 
in their countries; contact POLCOUNS Brian Naranjo to find 
out how to get started. END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Martinelli cruises on 10  Point Lead; VP Pick? 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. (SBU//NF) If the elections were held in December, 
Democratic Change (CD) presidential candidate Ricardo 
Martinelli would win by ten or more points over governing 
Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) presidential candidate 
Balbina Herrera, according to polling data published in 
Panama City media over the past couple of weeks (SEPTEL). 
Martinelli, in December, was the preferred presidential pick 
of roughly 40 percent of voters, reflecting a steady growth 
of three to four points monthly since September.  Front 
runner Martinelli could not be reached for comment on this 
surge in the polls as he was enjoying a brief vacation aboard 
Royal Caribbean's Enchantment of the Seas on its maiden 
voyage from Colon, Panama to Cartagena and the Netherlands 
Antilles.  Herrera's hoped for bounce in the polls in the 
wake of naming Panama City Mayor and her former contender for 
the PRD nomination Juan Carlos Navarro did not materialize. 
Instead, Herrera who trailed Martinelli and took in only 31.4 
percent support in the Dichter and Neira poll, fell 2 points 
from November.  Panamenista presidential candidate Juan 
Carlos Varela garnered only 16.8 percent support trailing in 
a distant third place.  Moral Vanguard of the Nation (VMP) 
presidential candidate and former president Guillermo Endara 
just barely beat the margin of error by 0.1 percent with 3.0 
percent support.  Speculation now turns to whom Martinelli 
will select as his VP running mate.  Patriotic Union (UP) 
president and former FM Jose Raul Mulino put down a marker 
that, in keeping with CD's alliance with UP, Martinelli's VP 
had to be a UP member and added that he himself would be 
willing to take the job, if offered.  Other names mentioned 
in the press include UP VP Anibal Galindo, former Panamenista 
presidential nomination contender Alberto Vallarino, and TVN 
morning news show star Lucy Molinar.  Vallarino published a 
letter in multiple Panama City dailies asserting his loyalty 
to Panamenista primary victor Varela and underscoring that he 
could not legally switch parties to enable him to accept the 
VP nomination. 
 
¶3.  (C) Comment:  "We want to win," Martinelli campaign 
advisor Jimmy Papadimitriu scoffed when asked by POLCOUNS on 
December 17 whether Mulino would get the VP nod.  Mulino, who 
walked into Papadimitriu's office moments later, was 
ebullient and told POLCOUNS, "Martinelli is going to beat 
Balbina."  Later, Papadimitriu explained that any VP 
candidate would simply need to register as a UP member if not 
already part of the party; "Ricardo is strong right now, and 
the 'patrioticos' really do not have the strength to dictate 
the veep slot."  Before ducking into a strategy session with 
Mulino and Galindo who had just arrived, Martinelli himself 
subsequently confirmed that he was courting Oprah-esque 
Molinar to run with him.  "She would a really strong force 
against Balbina," Martinelli explained.  "She's black, 
educated, successful, from Colon, and has built a reputation 
on her show as somebody who has the average Panamanians 
interests at heart."  The Panama Post hears though that 
Molinar, to date, has not been interested in a life in 
politics.  Martinelli must make his VP choice before the 
CD-UP convention on January 11. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
PRD Reacts to Surprise Naming of Navarro as VP Candidate 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU/NF) PRD presidential candidate Balbina Herrera's 
unexpected late-November decision to name Panama City Mayor 
and former PRD presidential nomination challenger Juan Carlos 
Navarro as her VP running mate drew criticism from within 
this party's normally disciplined and unified ranks.  One 
unnamed campaign advisor told the press that he was surprised 
that that the decision had been made so quickly despite 
Herrera's earlier statements that she would not name her 
running mate until late December or early January and that 
other VP candidates were still being evaluated.  Boris 
Moreno, who claimed to be an insider on Herrera's strategy 
team, stated that Navarro's appointment was "a high-risk 
political move that was not discussed" within the party. 
Allegedly, Herrera's weakening ranking in the polls pushed 
Herrera to move up her VP announcement.  Other PRD insiders 
-- unnamed, of course -- told the press that that Herrera was 
trying to distance herself from President and PRD SecGen 
Martin Torrijos by signaling that she, not the President, was 
calling the shots for her campaign.  Navarro is widely 
believed to want to run for president in 2014 while rumors 
resurfaced that Torrijos would seek a constitutional reform 
to allow him too to run in 2014, five years earlier than 
currently permitted.  Torrijos' remarks that he would not 
"allow" Herrera to lose the election, drew fire from the 
opposition:  former President Mireya Moscoso asserted that 
Torrijos' remarks were "mistaken" and raised suspicions; CD 
talking head Roberto Henriquez said the CD would "defend its 
votes like lions" despite the PRD's history of fraud, ballot 
box theft and other electoral crimes; Varela said Torrijos' 
remarks "smacked of trickery;" and Martinelli said Torrijos' 
remarks did not worry him as he Martinelli was focused on 
generating jobs and addressing Panama's rising crime. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: To date, Herrera does not appear to have 
benefited from any "Navarro effect" by naming the more 
moderate, business friendly, upper class, Panama City mayor 
to her ticket.  Polling from early December suggest that 
one-fourth to one-third of the PRD believed that adding 
Navarro to the ticket would unify the party, while voters at 
large believed that naming Navarro to the ticket forebode an 
opposition victory (SEPTEL).  "The real battle being waged 
right now inside the PRD is for control of the party," PRD 
leader and former Executive Secretary of the Council for 
Public Safety and National Defense (CSPDN) Javier Martinez 
Acha told POLOFFs December 19.  "Torrijos is weak, so Balbina 
and Juan Carlos are angling for control of the party." 
(Note:  Herrera is PRD President, and Navarro is the PRD 
National Executive Committee (CEN) First Sub-Secretary.)  "If 
Herrera loses, Navarro wins," explained Martinez Acha. 
Acknowledging POLCOUNS's remark that that would be a highly 
cynical political strategy, Martinez Acha responded, "Juan 
Carlos is a highly cynical politician."  Navarro's primary 
campaign manager Ivan Gonzalez told POLCOUNS on December 23 
that Navarro himself was surprised when Herrera actually 
offered him the VP slot.  "Juan Carlos told Balbina on 
November 25 that he would accept the vice presidential 
nomination if she offered it to him by November 30; after 
that he would not and she'd be on her own," Gonzalez 
explained.  "Balbina is so weak in the polls that she had no 
other option than to offer the job to Navarro.  She needed to 
stop the bleeding."  Gonzalez also portrayed the 
Herrera-Navarro alliance as an effort to counter Torrijos and 
First VP and FM (and Navarro's cousin) Samuel Lewis in the 
struggle to take control of the PRD.  Absent from Gonzalez's 
remarks was any sense of true warmth and affinity between 
Herrera and Navarro.  Indeed, POLCOUNS was left with the 
impression that Navarro was content with his position as 
regardless of whether Herrera wins or loses, Navarro would 
come out on top.  Whether Herrera wins or loses, Navarro 
would have positioned himself as a valiant PRD loyalist who 
did his duty to resurect a flagging Herrera candidacy, weaken 
Torrijos' standing in the party, and position himself to run 
in 2014 as the PRD standard bearer. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Balbina's Brother Throws Her a Doozie 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU//NF) Widely believed to have been asleep at the 
switch, Panamanian Ambassador to Belgium and Herrera's 
brother Pablo Garrido failed to notify the MFA and Ministry 
of Industry and International Commerce (MICI) in a timely 
manner that Panama needed to file to renew its General System 
of Preferences (GSP) privileges with the European Commission. 
 Trade relations with the EU became strained when the GOP 
issued a paid communique in the local media effectively 
blaming the EU for the mistake.  On December 11, the EU 
announced that Panama's exclusion from the preferential trade 
provisions program was "irrevocable" and that Panama could 
re-apply in 2010.  Attempting to restore its standard with 
Panamanian exporters, the GOP announced that it would expend 
some USD 30 million to compensate exporters for the higher 
duties that they would face.  Stating that Garrido received 
his ambassadorial appointment because of his ties of kinship 
with Herrera, not because of his talent, Varela demanded 
Garrido's removal. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment:  Garrido's gaffe will not lead directly harm 
Herrera's standing per se, but it will contribute to a 
growing perception that Torrijos' PRD government is the gang 
that cannot shoot straight.  Add Garrido's gaffe to the pile 
of PRD-negative stories like Panama City's growing crime 
wave, problems in the Darien, and high prices for food 
staples.  According to MFA insider Ernesto Cerrud, Garrido 
and Herrera's daughter who also works at the Embassy in 
Brussels were both AWOL working on Herrera's campaign when 
the GSP issue came to a head.  Herrera's kin, Cerrud 
explained, had left the embassy's cultural attache at the 
helm in their absence.  Other similar stories of incompetence 
and/or malfeasance have also dogged Herrera's son and 
campaign advisor Virgilio Perpinan including:  a lingering 
court case over two shipments of dioxin tainted onions and 
her son's possible involvement in the importation of 
mislabeled toxin diethylene glycol that wound up in 
Panamanian cough syrup resulting in dozens of deaths.  While 
able to choose her VP running mate, Herrera is also probably 
wishing she were able to choose her kin. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
MOLIRENistas, Panamenistas Begin to Jump Ship 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU//NF) Panama City-based media are rife with 
speculation that Panamenista opinion leaders are abandoning 
Varela's ship. Panamenista member and former Director General 
of the Technical Judicial Police (PTJ, now party of the 
Panamanian National Policy and called the Directorate for 
Judicial Investigations or DIJ) Jaime Abad publicly enrolled 
as a member of the CD.  Abad cited his interest in advancing 
a new security plan to fight rising delinquency, crime, and 
drug trafficking.  Martinelli declared that Abad's decision 
to join the CD underscored that his administration would be 
comprised of the best and the brightest from all political 
walks of life:  PRD, Panamenista, or independent. 
 
¶9.  (C) Comment:  Abad's public enrollment with CD is only 
the tip of the iceberg.  Members of Panamenista alliance 
partner MOLIRENA are increasingly becoming restless too. 
MOLIRENA National Assembly Deputy Marylu Vallarino would soon 
switch party affiliation and join CD, Papadimitriu told 
POLCOUNS December 17.  Other Panamenista leaders are also 
quietly and not so quietly reaching out Martinelli including: 
 former Panamenista presidential nomination candidates Jose 
Miguel Aleman (2004) and Alberto Vallarino (2008), National 
Assembly deputies Jose Luis Varela (also Varela's brother) 
and Alcibades Vasquez, and former president Mireya Moscoso. 
As the Panama Post went to press, rumors abounded that 
MOLIRENA would break its alliance the Panamenista Party 
paving the way to join with the CD and UP.  Press speculation 
alleged that MOLIRENA President Sergio Gonzalez Ruiz would 
make a final run at Varela on December 23 to urge him to step 
back from his presidential aspirations. Well, on the night of 
December 23, MOLIRENA's National Executive Committee (CEN) 
voted (17-yes, 3-no, 3-abstain, 4-absent) to break its 
alliance with the Panamenista party and to enter into 
alliance with CD. 
STEPHENSON