09PANAMA252
PANAMA: LIMITED WINDOW FOR FTA RATIFICATION
Thu Mar 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0252/01 0851912
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 261912Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3196
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2788
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 2004
RHMFISS/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DIRJIATF SOUTH
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000252 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DNG: CO 03/23/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: LIMITED WINDOW FOR FTA RATIFICATION 
 
REF: A. A: PANAMA 00704/08 
     ¶B. B: PANAMA 00058/08 
 
Classified By: Charge David R. Gilmour for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
----------------------- 
No Time Like the Present 
------------------------ 
 
¶1.  (S//NF)  The U.S. and Panama need to resolve several 
complicated issues 
in order to meet congressional concerns associated with the 
Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA) between the two countries. With three months 
left until 
the end of the  Torrijos administration, it may be tempting 
to put 
negotiations with the GOP on hold and wait for the seemingly 
inevitable 
victory of the "pro-American" Ricardo Martinelli before 
attempting to move 
forward. Such a move would be a major mistake. The Torrijos 
government at 
the end of its five year term is still likely to be the best 
bet to get 
the necessary legislation passed in the National Assembly, 
and to wring 
needed concessions from powerful domestic lobbies. President 
Torrijos and 
VP/FM Samuel Lewis see the FTA as part of their legacy and 
will do 
everything they can to get the needed changes passed by the 
National 
Assembly, which is controlled by their Democratic 
Revolutionary Party 
(PRD). While Torrijos is a lame duck, he is not really 
powerless, given 
his well known intention to seek election again in five or 
ten years, and 
his position as PRD Secretary General. While there may not be 
enough time 
left to resolve all issues, there is still an experienced, 
coherent, and 
committed partner in Panama with whom we can work towards a 
resolution of 
the outstanding issues. 
 
------------------------ 
Careful What You Ask For 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (S//NF)  As for the prospects of a Martinelli government 
(Note: 
Martinelli continues to have a comfortable lead in the polls 
over Balbina 
Herrera of the PRD. End Note), it is time to take a closer 
look at what a 
Martinelli government may mean for U.S.-Panamanian relations. 
While 
Martinelli is exuberantly pro-American, this creates a 
problem for us, as 
he gives us no "top cover." The Torrijos government has 
developed robust 
security cooperation with the USG (see reftel A) without 
drawing much 
attention, or opposition, to it. The PRD's robust nationalist 
credentials 
and Torrijo's control over the party's left wing elements, 
have shielded 
the USG from criticism. Martinelli, on the other hand, will 
be very 
exposed in his dealings with the U.S., and may not even have 
support from 
all his coalition partners on some issues. He will also have 
to face an 
opposition PRD that knows exactly what kinds of cooperation 
are taking 
place, and will be able to draw attention to them if the PRD 
can draw 
political advantage from it.  Given the fact that Martinelli 
will probably 
not control the National Assembly, all of this may make it 
very difficult for Martinelli to actually deliver on his pro-American 
instincts, and may 
end up curtailing some security cooperation, rather then 
expand it. It is 
also likely to effect his ability to make concessions on 
economic issues 
for the same reasons. 
 
---------------------- 
Hydra-Headed Coalition 
---------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S//NF)  Martinelli will also have to govern with a very 
complicated 
coalition behind him. While Torrijos has had the support of a 
disciplined 
PRD and a deep talent pool to draw from, Martinelli will need 
to balance the wishes of four parties (his Democratic Change 
(CD) party, 
the Panamenistas, Patriotic Union (UP), and MOLIRENA) and an 
evangelical 
movement, none of which is very deep in talent. This group 
will spend a 
lot of time at the beginning of the government fighting over 
positions and 
responsibilities. Many more people in the Martinelli 
coalition think they 
deserve high level positions than can possibly get them, 
which will create 
dissatisfaction and resentment within the coalition from day 
one. CD 
itself is very small and will give Martinelli very few people 
he can truly 
trust, as several of its high profile members have dubious 
pasts. This may 
make a future Martinelli government ineffectual, at least 
until the power 
relations are decided. It will also take some time to fill 
the vast number 
of political positions within the GOP. Given that the GOP has 
limited 
bandwidth on the best of days, this may make it very 
difficult for a 
Martinelli government to tackle any complex issues for 
several months. 
 
----------------------- 
Whom Does He Represent? 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S//NF)  Besides the emerging issue of corruption, it is 
not yet clear 
what economic interest groups Martinelli represents. He has 
publicly 
announced his support for the so-called "Ley de Retorsion", 
which is a law 
authorizing the GOP to retaliate against governments that 
discriminate 
against Panama (by placing Panama on blacklists, for 
example). If 
Martinelli is tied more closely to groups that oppose some of 
the reforms 
we are seeking, such as the elimination of bearer shares 
which some 
lawyers here bitterly oppose, we may find it harder to make a 
deal with 
Martinelli than with the Torrijos government. 
 
------------------------------ 
Labor Problems on the Horizon? 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (S//NF)  As we move forward with the FTA, it also bears 
noting that 
Martinelli has no bridges to the non-traditional left. There 
are 
increasing fears that there could be serious social 
disturbances early in 
a Martinelli presidency. Groups like the radical construction 
workers 
union SUNTRACs and the radical social movement FRENADESO (see 
reftel B) 
will looking for an excuse to start a fight, and reforms of 
the labor code 
could set them off. In addition, the PRD's left-wing faction, 
the 
"Tendencia", will no longer be tied to the government, and 
may well be 
spoiling for a fight. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (S//NF)  The window is closing on the Torrijos 
administration, and we 
need to use these last three months to get the needed changes 
in Panamanian labor law approved by the National Assembly for 
FTA, and to get 
as far along as we can on a constructive solution on the OECD 
"tax haven" 
issue. After July first we will be entering uncharted 
territory as we 
build a partnership from scratch, probably with a 
pro-American president 
with a lot of problems to deal with. The more we get taken 
care of now, 
the better. 
GILMOUR