09PANAMA701
MARTINELLI: PRESIDENTIALISM OR POPULISM?
Fri Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0701/01 2611946
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 181946Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3753
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2857
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0004
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 0659
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3868
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 2055
RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR 1588
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0454
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000701 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/01/2029 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR PM
SUBJECT: MARTINELLI: PRESIDENTIALISM OR POPULISM? 
 
REF: A. A. PANAMA 657 
     ¶B. B. PANAMA 639 
     ¶C. C. PANAMA 692 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reasons 1.4 (b) and 
 (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S//NF)  President Ricardo Martinelli has begun his five 
year term by energetically taking on a number of vested 
interests, from powerful local businessmen perceived to be 
abusing state concessions, to major international businesses 
(ref A), civil society leaders, and officials of the former 
governing Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD).  To do so, he 
has exercised the wide powers available to him as president, 
in addition to influencing other state institutions such as 
the Supreme Court, the National Assembly, the Attorney 
General's office, and the press. Martinelli's power over 
these nominally independent institutions is based on the 
preponderant power the Presidency has in the Panamanian 
political system, his expansive view of his authority, and 
his powerful personality. While many of Martinelli's moves 
have been met with widespread public support, this extreme 
concentration of power in the hands of one man, together with 
Martinelli's attempt to push the Embassy into illegal 
activities (ref B) and reports of his intimidation of 
judicial authorities (ref C), are cause for concern over the 
stability of Panama's democratic institutions in the medium 
term. End Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
Firmness, Not Finesse 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C//NF)  In his inauguration day address on July 1, 
Martinelli made plain what his governing style would be; his 
promise to govern "with firmness, but not finesse" (con 
firmeza pero sin fineza) indicated that he would govern with 
a strong hand, but without "excessive" concern for 
"legalisms." Almost immediately after assuming power, 
Martinelli personally led a group of ministers and police to 
seize a controversial land-fill from businessman Jean Figali. 
Figali was a perfect foil, having long been pilloried in the 
press for violating zoning laws, benefiting excessively from 
government concessions, and using political connections to 
circumvent regulations.  Martinelli then began a campaign 
against other businessmen, companies and international 
investors who had benefited from government concessions of 
land and installations, ostensibly demanding that they pay a 
higher tax rate, and accusing them of using government 
connections to get sweetheart deals. Among his targets have 
been major U.S. investors AES and MIT (ref A). 
 
-------------- 
Widely Popular 
-------------- 
 
¶3.  (C//NF)  Martinelli is still in his honeymoon period. 
Despite the concern expressed by some international 
investors, Martinelli's moves have been met with public 
support, currently at 72% (not as high as Martin Torrijos' 
80% approval rating at this point in his presidency, but 
still very high). The press has also served more as a 
cheerleader than as a watchdog. Fernando Berguido, Executive 
Director of the paper of record La Prensa, told the 
Ambassador August 25 that he thought Martinelli was finally 
standing up to the vested interests. Asked what steps the 
Embassy might take with new "democracy and governance" 
funding to strengthen the independence of the judiciary, 
Berguido, also head of Transparency International Panama, 
suggested only that the Ambassador appeal to Martinelli 
personally to keep honest justices and not appoint corrupt 
ones. Berguido also acknowledged that Martinelli had 
personally leaked documents to him that the paper had used to 
run an expose on corruption by Ernesto Perez Balladares, 
former president of Panama and currently campaigning to 
reclaim the leadership of the Revolutionary Democratic Party 
(PRD). 
 
------------------------------------- 
National Assembly - Don't Look at Us! 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C//NF)  During a series of lunches with National 
Assembly Deputies from Martinelli's Democratic Change Party 
(CD) and the allied Panamenista Party, several leading 
deputies expressed their support for Martinelli, but also 
highlighted the constitutional weakness of the Legislative 
Branch compared with the Executive. Panamenista Deputy and 
Party Vice President Alcibiades Vasquez told the DCM August 
27 that the National Assembly was not an independent 
institution, citing its lack of a stand alone budget, and the 
Executive's control over discretionary funding. Deputies need 
to carry out social programs in their districts. Several 
deputies expressed anger over the disrespectful way Minister 
of Government and Justice Jose Raul Mulino had behaved in 
presenting a bill to be rubber-stamped. Mulino berated a 
Panamenista Deputy and demanded that the Assembly pass the 
law immediately without debate.  Panamenista Deputy Jose 
Blandon told emboffs that members of the government did not 
know how the Assembly worked, and thus made unreasonable 
demands on the pro-government block. 
 
¶5.  (C//NF)  National Assembly President Jose Luis (Popi) 
Varela told the emboffs that Martinelli had ordered him to 
appoint Rafael Barcenas to the Panama Canal Administration 
Board, a designation that belonged to the National Assembly. 
Varela protested and argued that the President would have 
three seats to appoint in January. According to Varela, 
Martinelli said, "No, no, I have decided, and it has to be 
Barcenas. Maybe I will name your candidate with one of my 
nominations." Varela noted that after the Assembly voted as 
instructed, Barcenas publicly thanked the President, and not 
the Assembly or Varela, for appointing him. Deputies from 
every party have told us that actions such as this were a 
humiliation for the Assembly, and left it "naked" to public 
scorn. 
 
¶6.  (C//NF)  CD Whip, Jose Munoz told emboffs that Martinelli 
himself was incorruptible, but that it was possible his 
ministers could be corrupted. He expressed his belief that in 
such a case, Martinelli would immediately fire the official. 
Munoz and fellow CD deputies fully supported the government's 
agenda. They argued that the heavy pressure on the large 
corporations was an attempt to correct the entire culture of 
evasion in Panama, by convincing average Panamanians that 
they were not the only ones who would have to pay taxes or 
obey the rules. They all noted, however, that the Assembly is 
too weak to oppose Martinelli. Munoz indicated he did not 
like the names circulating for Supreme Court nominees, but 
noted there was nothing he could do to stop them. The 
deputies were very supportive of efforts to prosecute corrupt 
members of the former PRD government, but Munoz noted that it 
would be very dangerous to Panamanian democracy for 
Martinelli to find himself without a strong opposition. 
 
----------------------------- 
Comment: No Controls On Power 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (S//NF)  Panama clearly has a very Presidentialist 
government. The National Assembly has no independent budget, 
no power to initiate budget bills, and no ability to modify 
executive branch budget proposals. The Deputies are viewed as 
service providers by their constituents, and rely on the 
executive for funds. The Supreme Court and the A/G's office 
also depend on the Executive for their budgets, and pay a 
price for alienating a powerful president. Ultimately, the 
president names Supreme Court magistrates, giving him the 
ability to put his close allies into those jobs. But 
Martinelli's power at this time goes beyond even this wide 
constitutional mandate. Martinelli seems to be in permanent 
campaign mode, constantly opening new fronts of battle in a 
popular campaign against interests that are widely seen as 
having benefited from special treatment by the government for 
years.  Martinelli's strong personality, his lack of 
commitment to "rule of law," the hyper-powerful presidency, 
and the high approval ratings may well end up combining to 
erode Panama's democratic institutions. 
 
¶8.  (S//NF)  Given the strategic importance of the 
Panama-U.S. relationship, Post believes it is necessary to 
avoid an over-identification with Martinelli and make clear 
our support for Panama's democratic institutions as a whole. 
Without weakening our cooperation with the GOP on our common 
agenda, the Embassy is also making a point of meeting with 
opposition political figures, supporting calls for 
strengthening judicial independence, and highlighting our 
work with civil society groups. Our message to our local 
contacts will be that the USG supports the strengthening of 
Panama's democratic institutions, to ensure its ability to 
become a first world country, which is the consensus 
development goal for Panama. 
STEPHENSON