09STOCKHOLM237

Thu Apr 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Embassy Stockholm
O 091347Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4286
INFO USEU BRUSSELS IMMEDIATE
USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATES E C R E T STOCKHOLM 000237 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2029 

TAGS: KAWK PHUM MOPS PREL PTER PREF EU SW

REF: A. GENEVA 263 
¶B. 2008 STATE 106853 

Classified By: CDA Robert Silverman for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 

¶1. (S) Swedish Minister of Migration Tobias Billstrom asked CDA to come see him on short notice on April 8 to discuss Guantanamo detainees. Saying that Sweden strongly approved of the "general approach" the Administration has taken on detainees, Billstrom stated that if Sweden can assist, it would like to do so. The solution for Sweden boils down to two points: first, there must be a "quality branding" for individual asylum seekers "achieved by using UNHCR"; and second, Swedish administrative procedures must be followed precisely, meaning that there must be a strong case for protection for any individual who might be re-settled. Billstrom continued that the U.S. and Sweden have a "common interest in thinking about ways to achieve this." 

¶2. (S) Billstrom cautioned it would be important to craft an approach "using UNHCR in an instrumental way, which might just work." He added that the Swedish Government would need to hear directly from UNHCR. "If UNHCR is ready to go forward, then we are willing to consider the issue very carefully." Billstrom stressed that there was an important "political dimension to be considered," and that it would be "embarrassing" if an "approach" were made that did not include UNHCR, forcing Sweden to say no. 

¶3. (S) Billstrom noted that China is "probing" various EU Member States on the possibility that they would accept Uighur detainees. He stated that "for my part, this is solely a question of protection, and if we work with UNHCR in a proper way, it would help us to withstand the pressure from the Chinese." Billstrom stated that he was aware of communication between the Swedish security service (SAPO) and the USG on the security backgrounds of five Uighur detainees. (Note: SAPO has determined that five Uighurs and two non-Uighurs would pose no significant security threat if resettled in Sweden.) 

¶4. (S) Billstrom asked about USG requirements for security monitoring of detainees who might be re-settled in Sweden. Poloff replied that the USG usually requests humane treatment and security-related assurances when transferring detainees, but had flexibility in terms of the latter in some cases (Ref B). CDA offered that USG experts might be willing to meet with the Minister to answer his questions on thQ#Q1Qto Amb. Williamson during his March meetings in Geneva (Ref A). In any case, Billstrom remained focused on UNHCR and never once raised the need for an EU framework for handling the issue. 

¶5. (S) Action Request: Please advise whether senior USG officials responsible for Guantanamo issues might be available to visit Sweden in coming weeks, possibly with representatives from UNHCR. SILVERMAN