09AITTAIPEI727
Global Action on Food Security: Securing
Thu Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0727/01 1690345
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180345Z JUN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1776UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000727 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EEB/TPP/MTAA/ABT Janet Speck, Gary Clements and Don 
Morton 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/TC and EAP/EP Katherine Hadda 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W Ruzicka 
USDA/FAS for OCRA/Higgiston, Radler, Beillard, and Petlock; and 
OCBD/Groves 
 
Sensitive 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID ECON PREL APEC TW
SUBJECT: Global Action on Food Security: Securing 
Greater Support for Food Security at the L'Aquila 
Summit 
 
REF: SECSTATE 58996 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On June 15, AIT economic and agricultural officers 
shared reftel information with Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) 
Department of Economic and Trade Affairs Director General Weber Shih 
and Council of Agriculture (COA) International Affairs Department 
(IAD) Director General Susan Chang.  Both Shih and Chang expressed 
appreciation for the information about the U.S. initiative, and gave 
AIT officers information on Taiwan's food security and other aid 
initiatives.  COA's Chang requested a more detailed breakdown on 
U.S. food security spending.  End summary. 
 
MOFA: Food Security Key 
----------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On June 15, AIT Economics Chief shared the information in 
reftel with MOFA Department of Economic and Trade Affairs DG Weber 
Shih. Shih said the Taiwan authorities have just released a white 
paper on foreign aid policy, and noted food security plays a large 
part in Taiwan's development policy. Shih cited an ongoing 
grain-yield enhancement project Taiwan is conducting with diplomatic 
allies Gambia, Burkina Faso, Swaziland, Nicaragua, and Haiti. [Note: 
an English summary of the 7 May white paper on foreign aid policy, 
"Progressive Partnerships and Sustainable Development, is on the 
MOFA website at http://www.mofa.gov.tw. End note.] 
 
¶3. (SBU) Shih said Taiwan will increase coordination with donor 
countries as it develops and executes aid projects.  According to 
Shih, in addition to its membership in the Asian Development Bank 
(ABD), Taiwan is seeking ways to increase cooperation with regional 
institutions such as the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).  [Note: 
on May 15, the MOFA-sponsored Taiwan International Cooperation and 
Development Fund signed a memorandum of understanding with the EBRD 
to provide USD 10 million to co-finance EBRD projects. End note.] 
 
¶4. (SBU) Shih noted Taiwan would also like to work more with the 
African Development Bank (AfDB), but said the AfDB has not responded 
to Taiwan's offers. Shih also expressed hope Taiwan's overseas 
representative offices in countries such as Swaziland can directly 
cooperate on development issues with USAID offices in those 
countries. 
 
COA: Taiwan Proposes to Sponsor APEC Food Security Forum 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5. (SBU) On June 15, AGR Chief delivered the information in reftel 
to Taiwan Council of Agriculture (COA) International Affairs 
Department (IAD) Director-General Susan Chang. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Chang expressed appreciation for the information about the 
U.S. initiative, and noted Taiwan's abiding interest and concern 
about food security issues, particularly given the island's 
dependence on feedstuff imports for livestock production.  She noted 
that Taiwan was greatly hurt by higher feed and other input costs 
during the recent energy and food crisis. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Chang informed Agoff Taiwan plans to propose the APEC 
Agricultural Technical Cooperation Working Group (ATCWG) fund a 
project titled "APEC Food Security Forum: a regional dialogue with 
global significance."  If APEC accepts the proposal, Taiwan would 
host, in October 2010, a "Forum on Food Security" to be partially 
funded by APEC. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Major issues to be discussed at the Forum would include the 
causes and implications of the food crisis, and potential policy 
responses to issues such as increased demand for agricultural 
commodities, low grain stock levels, market access for small farmers 
and food availability, food security mechanisms, agricultural 
investment and capacity building, drought and water scarcity, 
climate change, and food security-related research and development 
in second generation biofuels and agri-biotechnologies. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Chang requested non-monetary U.S. co-sponsorship for the 
Taiwan proposal, and hopes to secure this at the upcoming ATCWG 
meeting in Suzhou, China that a number of COA staff will attend.  In 
response, AGR Chief agreed to relay the Taiwan proposal to USDA/FAS, 
while noting there may not be enough time to get a Washington 
response before the meeting. [Note:  AGR Chief subsequently emailed 
a copy of the Taiwan APEC/ATCWG proposal to APEC contact points in 
USDA/FAS, who have in turn distributed it to relevant Washington 
agencies, including staff who will be attending the ATCWG meeting. 
End Note.] 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Chang asked for a more detailed breakout on how the 
increased U.S. funding commitment will be spent.  She also requested 
a historical comparison to past spending, both for the U.S. 
commitment and the global USD 15-billion target.  While she did not 
present specific historical data nor speculate on future support, 
Chang indicated that Taiwan's spending on agricultural development 
overseas has held steady in recent years. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Chang drew specific attention to Taiwan's increased 
funding for the World Vegetable Center (AVRDC) located in Tainan, 
and pointed to the key role improved vegetable production and 
technology can play in generating income for small-hold farmers and 
women, particularly in developing countries. She added AVRDC is 
seeking to add a new Central and South American branch station in 
Honduras. 
 
YOUNG