09ANKARA847
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2030
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0847/01 1691014
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181014Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9912
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0107
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5887
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3930
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7369
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7255
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3834
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 17, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
AKP Files Judicial Complaint over Alleged Anti-Government Plot 
All papers and TV Channels:  Following his meeting with Chief of 
General Staff General Basbug, PM Erdogan addressed his party group 
in the parliament to call on military and civilian judicial 
authorities to investigate the alleged military plot to overthrow 
the civilian AKP government, which was brought to light by leftist 
Taraf last Friday.  Erdogan also said, "If the allegations are false 
and the aim of the allegations is to cause provocation and 
confrontation between state institutions, it would create a grave 
situation.  If the allegations are true, that would be even more 
serious."   Mainstream Sabah reports that the meeting between 
Erdogan and Basbug "helped defuse tensions" and Erdogan gave the 
message that "the state institutions trust each other."  Yesterday 
evening,  AKP deputy parliamentary group leader Bekir Bozdag and the 
party's general secretary Idris Naim Sahin submitted a petition to 
the Ankara Chief Prosecutor's Office,  requesting a probe into the 
allegations and legal action against anyone involved.  Mainstream 
Vatan reports that the names of the General Staff or the army were 
mentioned only in the excerpts from Taraf daily, otherwise these 
names were not mentioned in the petition.  Islamist-oriented and 
pro-AKP government Zaman says the AKP filed its complaint through 
the civilian judicial system because "past military investigations 
have not yielded satisfactory results." 
 
In a related story, mainstream pro-government Sabah reports that 
General Basbug left Ankara yesterday for Macedonia and Albania and 
he'll be away until Saturday.  Meanwhile, Deputy Chief of General 
Staff General Hasan Igsiz will conduct all administrative activities 
at the TGS Headquarters. 
 
Reaction From the Opposition to the Anti-Government Plot 
Sabah reports main opposition party CHP's leader Deniz Baykal told 
his party group meeting yesterday, "We all know that the Ergenekon 
case contains plenty of documents like the current one in question. 
This is a vital issue.  There are three theoretical possibilities - 
first, TGS ordered such a plan to be prepared, second, some officers 
in the TGS prepared the document on their own and without informing 
their commanders, or third, this is a fake document.  We want to 
know as soon as possible which theory out of these three is the 
truth."  Opposition party MHP leader Devlet Bahceli said "If this 
document is real, it is a major threat to politics.  If it is fake, 
it still creates serious problems.  The allegations puts TGS under 
serious blame.  It is necessary for the civilian judiciary to 
intervene to protect democracy and for the prestige of the Turkish 
Armed Forces." 
 
Editorial Commentaries on the Anti-Government Plot and Iran 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "For a country to become a 
power, it needs a political and economic stability, as well as a 
powerful military. If Turkey can't overcome the latest developments, 
it will face a bigger crisis. Hence, Turkey's aim to become 'a 
global power' and to protect its 'regional power' status will be in 
danger." 
 
Taha Akyol in mainstream Milliyet: "Democracy and law are becoming 
superior values in Turkey. And digesting democracy and law is very 
important for politicians, legal professionals, and the rest of us. 
What is also important is to reform the military's principals in 
line with the values of democracy and the rule of law." 
 
Mehmet Barlas in mainstream Sabah: "The right thing is to seek the 
truth, not to argue. Everybody must wait for the result of the 
investigation into the allegations." 
 
UK's The Times: Oil Exports from Northern Iraq Could End The 
Conflict between Turkey and the PKK 
Mainstreams Sabah and Milliyet, Islamist-oriented Zaman:  Media draw 
attention to an article in the UK daily The Times which claims that 
 
ANKARA 00000847  002 OF 003 
 
 
"talks are under way between Turkey and the PKK."  The paper says 
that companies including OMV and Sinopec are plotting billion-dollar 
takeovers of companies that claim titles to Kurdish oil and gas in 
northern Iraq. And yet these investments are being made despite 
continued warnings from Baghdad that the Kurdish regional government 
had no right to issue oil exploration licences without federal 
approval. The explanation may be that Turkey is offering reassurance 
that the Kurdish regional government is providing good title to oil 
from beneath Iraqi soil. Turkey showed its commercial hand last 
month when Genel Enerji agreed to a #1.5 billion takeover of 
Heritage Oil, reversing its interests into the London-quoted 
Heritage. It is unlikely that Turkey's biggest private enterprise 
would have done so without assurances from Ankara and from the 
Kurdish politicians in Erbil. Talks are under way between Turkey and 
the Kurdish separatist PKK, which has been waging an armed rebellion 
in the east of the country for a quarter of a century. If the talks 
are successful, it would be the first time in history that oil had 
ended a conflict. 
 
RTUK Chair Zahid Akman's Document is Fake 
Mainstream Hurriyet gives extensive front page coverage to reports 
from September 2008 indicating that the Radio and TV Supreme Council 
(RTUK) chairman Zahid Akman was banned from entering Germany because 
he was named in the Deniz Feneri charity corruption case.  In his 
own defense, Akman distributed a document to the press saying that 
such news was not real.  However, it was revealed yesterday that 
Akman's document denying his ban from traveling to Germany was fake. 
 A spokesperson for the Main Taunus district of Germany said that 
the "document distributed by Akman was not the original document 
prepared by German authorities."  As a result, the prosecutor's 
office in Frankfurt has launched an investigation into the issue. 
 
Election Aftermath in Iran 
Media feature the instability in Iran as a major front-page story. 
Coverage is largely focusing on the plight of the Musavi supporters, 
a government ban on foreign media, and the Guardian Council's 
refusal to redo the elections.  In "In The End, Blood Flowed," 
mainstream Hurriyet asks, "How could 39.2 million votes be counted 
so quickly?"  Far right Ortadogu carries the front-page headline, 
"Iran Turns Into A War Zone," and the paper notes, "Ahmadinejad 
supporters on motorcycles attacked Musavi supporters with clubs." 
Liberal Radikal notes, "The killings of eight Musavi supporters 
shocked the opposition, and (demonstrators) again filled the 
streets."  Meanwhile, Radikal says, "Khomeini, the 'mediator,' has 
called a meeting of the Guardian Council to discuss the recount of 
some of the votes."  The paper also points out, "It's a Riddle How 
40 Million Votes Were Counted By Hand in 12 Hours," and 
"Communications have been cut," and "foreign press was banned," so 
"they clung to Twitter" for information.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports, "women were among those who were protesting in the streets 
yesterday and throwing stones at the police."  Leftist Taraf 
headlines, "No New Election in Iran," and the paper reports, "The 
Guardian Council has said they will not redo the elections," and 
"the Cultural Ministry banned foreign press from watching the 
demonstrations." Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "Iran Closes Up," 
and notes, "The Tehran administration sent letters to foreign media 
telling them they are banned and have no permission to photograph or 
watch the demonstrations."  Columnist Sami Kohen of Milliyet writes 
in "Anything Is Possible in Iran," that "the public protests show 
that Iran is in need of reform.  The religious and civilian leaders 
shall not ignore this reality.  The decision to recount the votes is 
a positive step regarding this." 
 
Obama's Reactions to Demonstrations in Iran 
Media note Obama "cannot remain silent" regarding the violence in 
Iran, but some point out Obama's reactions are not received well by 
the Iranian parliamentary speaker.  Mainstream Hurriyet headlines, 
"Obama Is Not Comfortable," as he says "It would be a mistake to 
remain silent regarding the images of violence we've seen in Iran 
over the past few days," and the paper notes Obama "emphasized that 
 
ANKARA 00000847  003 OF 003 
 
 
an investigation is necessary so no more blood is shed."  In "A Call 
from Obama," far right Ortadogu reports, "Obama indicated that he 
and all of America are uncomfortable with the violence that has 
erupted after the elections in Iran and he said it's necessary to 
find ways to prevent further violence."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports, "Iran is angry at Obama's response to the elections," as 
"Iran's Parliamentary Speaker Ali Laricani said "It's not necessary 
for Americans to be concerned about the elections."  Leftist Taraf 
reports "Laricani didn't delay in answering Obama." 
 
Carter on Peace Mission in Gaza 
Media draw attention to former President Jimmy Carter's visit to 
Gaza, in particular the focus is on his tour of Gaza and his 
meetings with Hamas.  Liberal Radikal quotes former President Jimmy 
Carter in the headline, "The Palestinian Public Is Treated Like 
Animals," and the paper notes, "Carter toured Gaza during a peace 
mission to the region and he condemned the aftermath of the tragic 
(Israeli) operations and the embargo."  In "Carter Is Moved in 
Gaza," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet notes, "The former president 
said it was hard to hold back his tears," as he "toured the areas 
most affected" by Israel's military operations in December and 
January."  Mainstream Sabah quotes Hamas leader Ismael Haniye in the 
headline, "We Recognize The 1967 Borders," and the paper notes 
"Former President Carter went to Gaza for Mid East peace meetings," 
and Haniye and Carter "agreed to support a Palestinian state."  In 
"Former President Carter Met with Hamas," leftist Taraf reports, 
"Carter and Haniya held a joint press conference where Carter said 
"This is holy land for all of us.  We are all children of Abraham." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- President Gul signed the controversial mine-clearing bill, passed 
by parliament, into law. 
 
- Eight people were injured in clashes between municipality 
officials and bus drivers in Diyarbakir. 
 
- U.S. Ambassador to Turkey James Jeffrey visits officials in 
Diyarbakir. 
 
 
World 
 
-  A Russian news agency says a Turkish military delegation has come 
to Russia to discuss the possible acquisition of Mi-28 attack 
helicopters. 
 
- Due to a Russian veto, the Security Council fails to extend the 
presence of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia 
 
JEFFREY