09ANKARA776
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8337
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0776/01 1531237
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021237Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9795
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0073
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5813
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3890
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7339
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7221
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3801
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000776 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, JUNE 2, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
A New Oil Connection Between Northern Iraq and Turkey 
Sabah, Zaman, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Turkiye, Cumhuriyet and others: 
Today's papers reported that northern Iraq began pumping oil to 
Turkey through Kirkuk-Yumurtalik line yesterday.  Most papers 
feature large photos of Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and Kurdistan 
Regional President Massoud Barzani at the opening ceremonies of the 
pipeline. Mainstream Hurriyet reports that speaking at the ceremony 
yesterday, Iraqi President Talabani said the deal was "important in 
demonstrating the unity of Iraq."  KRG President Massoud Barzani, on 
his part, said "this was a historic step for the region and the 
world."  KRG Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani said at the ceremony 
marking the occasion in Erbil "Economic cooperation within Iraq and 
across its borders will lay the foundation for a brighter collective 
future."  Hurriyet notes that within a year the pipeline is planned 
to carry up to one hundred thousand barrels of northern Iraqi oil 
per day for an expected turnover of about two billion dollars per 
year. 
 
Editorial Commentary on northern Iraqi Oil to Turkey 
 
Fehmi Koru writes from Erbil in northern Iraq for Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak (6/2): "Until recently, Turkey's cooperation with the 
administration in northern Iraq seemed extremely difficult.  When 
the Kurds in northern Iraq shifted their view of the PKK and began 
underlining Turkey's rightfulness, Ankara, all of a sudden, found 
out that the segment it can best get along with in Iraq was the 
Kurds.  The KRG and Turkey are increasingly drawing closer to each 
other.  The Kurds are in an effort to establish closer ties with 
Turkey than they have with Baghdad.  Yesterday, the oil coming from 
the two oil zones in northern Iraq was flown to Yumurtalik port on 
Turkey's Mediterranean coast, and it was done at the cost of 
worrying Baghdad." 
 
Cengiz Candar writes in liberal Radikal (6/2): "The Iraqi Kurdish 
administration has enacted its own oil law in 2007, but the Iraqi 
Oil Law is yet to be passed -- a shortcoming which causes big 
problems.  Despite everything, for the first time the Iraqi oil 
began flowing to abroad, and through Turkey.  We must not be 
surprised if we soon see Turkey as an intermediator on energy 
between Erbil and Baghdad.  Turkey, Iraqi Kurdistan and the Iraqi 
central government have a common future shaped not only by common 
interests but also by a partnership of interests." 
 
At ATC, General Basbug Expresses Turkey's Determination to Eradicate 
the PKK 
Anatolian Agency and CNN Turk report that addressing a conference 
arranged by the American Turkish Council on Turkey-US relations, 
Chief of General Staff General Ilker Basbug said, "Northern Iraq is 
no more a nest for the terrorist organization PKK as of December 
¶2007.  It is not possible to eliminate the terrorist organization 
totally unless PKK presence in northern Iraq is rooted out from 
there.  The presence of the PKK in northern Iraq posed a threat not 
only for Turkey but also for Iraq and at the same time this presence 
has some negative impacts on Turkish-US relations."  General Basbug 
expressed pleasure and appreciation over cooperation and 
coordination with the US in dealing with the PKK and for the 
intelligence support. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Kurdish Question-the PKK 
 
Hasan Cemal writes in mainstream Milliyet (6/2): "If the PKK is 
honest in its decision to extend its ceasefire until July 15, it 
should withdraw to areas where it will not contract Turkish troops. 
If Ankara prefers a new process for a solution without weapons, it 
should show the necessary political will toward that end.  The 
expectations for a settlement regarding the Kurdish question are on 
the rise around the country; it would be a pity if this opportunity 
is missed." 
 
ANKARA 00000776  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Rusen Cakir writes in mainstream Vatan (6/2): "It'd be wrong to 
think that the PKK declarations of ceasefire actually indicate a 
weakness in the organization.  In spite of a considerable decrease 
in the support it receives from outside and the intense intelligence 
sharing between the US and Turkey, the PKK maintains its operational 
capabilities, as seen in the Daglica and Aktutun attacks.  On the 
Kurdish question, the AKP government acts hesitantly.  Opposition 
CHP leader Baykal, in an unexpected move, says amnesty could be 
possible if weapons are laid down.  Following the local elections, 
the DTP no has a larger room to maneuver, and its leader Ahmet Turk 
participates in open debates.  If President Gul can convince the 
government to take concrete forward steps, if the CHP does not step 
back from its current standpoint, and if the DTP can act a bit 
'autonomously,' we can see progress in the disarming of the PKK and 
make peace.  The PKK's recent extension of the ceasefire was good, 
now it's the President's and the PM's turn." 
 
The AKP Government to Announce Stimulus Package to Boost 
Investments 
Mainstream Vatan reports that PM Erdogan is expected to make public 
a stimulus package to boost investments to decrease unemployment and 
revive stumbling markets.  The package includes government aid for 
investors to start up new business with tax reductions and exemption 
from customs duties.  Cities in Turkey's eastern and southeastern 
regions will be high on the list to receive government support. 
 
The AKP is Determined to Pass Draft for De-Mining 
Mainstream Sabah and liberal-intellectual Radikal report that 
opposition parties voiced fierce reactions to a clause in AKP's 
draft which would allow the chosen mine clearing company to rent the 
territory to turn it into agricultural land for up to 44 years. 
However, the AKP government is determined to solve the problem by 
giving the General Staff a more active role in the mine clearing 
operations.  NATO's Maintenance and Supply Agency (NAMSA) might be 
considered as a primary choice in the new draft prepared by the 
AKP. 
 
"A Star Falls in the Atlantic." (Milliyet) The top front-page story 
today notes a Turkish passenger, Ceren Necipoglu, was also among the 
passengers on board the Air France plane that was lost over the 
Atlantic Ocean yesterday.  Mainstream Haberturk carries the banner 
headline, "The Only Turk on Board," and reports, "Ceren Necipoglu, 
an academic at Anadolu University and a musician, was on her way 
back home to Turkey after performing in two concerts in Rio." 
Mainstream Milliyet reports Anadolu University's Chairman of Art 
said, "It was so important for Necipoglu to attend that music 
festival."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet notes, "she had a ticket 
for a later flight but she took the early one in order to reach four 
of her students' final exams." 
 
An American Auto Giant Declares Bankruptcy.  Flashy headlines 
comment on GM's transformation from an American auto giant to a 
troubled company in need of bankruptcy protection and government 
intervention.  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "American Dreams End as 
GM Declares Bankruptcy and Chrysler Goes to Fiat."  Mainstream 
Milliyet headlines, "From Now On, GM Is The Property of the U.S. 
Treasury," as "A Hundred-Year-Old Industry Giant is Bankrupt." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "America's Giant, GM, 
Crumbles."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines on its front 
page, "General Decline," and reports, "GM, a symbol of the American 
automotive industry, raises the bankruptcy flag."  Mainstream 
Haberturk reports "The 101-Year-Old GM Becomes a State-Owned 
Economic Enterprise."  Liberal Radikal reports, "GM Applies for 
Bankruptcy Protection, Will Save Itself from Ruin by Down-Sizing." 
 
Health Minister on Swine Flu 
Mainstream Vatan reports that Health Minister Recep Akdag says that 
two of the four swine flu patients in Turkey went to the hospital in 
the US before travelling to Turkey and they were given "light flu 
 
ANKARA 00000776  003 OF 003 
 
 
drugs and been sent away."  Minister Akdag noted that "the medical 
officials in the US do not test every flu patient for H1N1. 
However, they can at least prevent these patients from leaving the 
country."  The Minister added that he would ask the World Health 
Organization to warn the US and other countries to tighten the 
measures to avoid the spread of the swine flu." 
 
Editorial Commentary on North Korea 
 
Sami Kohen observes in mainstream Milliyet (6/2): "The US and Japan 
are expected to ask the UN Security Council to apply heavy sanctions 
on North Korea.  One option that is under consideration is 
restarting the negotiations process which was cut after long talks 
in the wake of North Korea's first nuclear test in 2006.  North 
Korea, however, seems to continue to challenge the UN.  Turkey's 
stance in the North Korean crisis is important not only because 
Turkey holds the temporary presidency of the UN Security Council, 
but it will also determine Ankara's attitude toward Iran's nuclear 
program.  Turkey cannot afford any inconsistency in this matter." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
-  Five soldiers were injured in mine explosions in Hakkari and 
Sirnak. 
 
- The Turkish Air Force celebrates its 98th anniversary. 
 
- In May exports declined by 39.97 percent to $7.3 billion, while 
annual exports drop to $108 billion. 
 
 
 
World 
 
-  Eton College in Britain has confirmed 32 suspected cases of swine 
flu. 
 
- Sources in northern Iraq say Turkey is going to open a consulate 
in Erbil in October or November. 
 
- Armed Taliban militants have abducted at least 400 people from a 
school in Northwest Pakistan. 
 
- Azeri President Aliyev and his Armenian counterpart Sargsian are 
expected to meet in St. Petersburg on June 4. 
SILLIMAN