09ANKARA815
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jun 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5260
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0815/01 1611242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101242Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9860
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0092
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5851
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3914
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7356
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7238
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3819
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000815 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 10, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The EU Renews Calls for Turkey to Carry Out Reforms 
Zaman, Hurriyet, Radikal, Milliyet, Yeni Safak:  The European 
Commission's Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn spoke to a group of 
Turkish journalists in Brussels regarding the EU's expectations for 
Turkey in 2009.  Liberal-intellectual Radikal  reports that Olli 
Rehn said that Turkey "should not concentrate only on the Cyprus 
issue" and that "democratic reforms were an important part of the EU 
process."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Olli Rehn clearly 
stated that the EU "expects Ankara to carry out constitutional 
reforms concerning party closures by the end of 2009."  Zaman quotes 
Rehn as saying "We want some concrete steps to be taken in the field 
of fundamental freedoms.  We expect such steps to pave the way for 
the strengthening of the freedom of press, freedom of expression and 
freedom of religion.  The amendments on the Foundations Law are 
significant, but are not sufficient.  Having the Labor Law adopted 
by the Parliament at once has importance.  Additionally, 
constitutional reforms concerning political party closures, in line 
with the Venice Criteria should be carried out by the end of the 
year."  Ruling out assumptions that Turkey has had lost its 
reformist spirit, Rehn noted that 10 out of 35 chapters have been 
opened since 2005 and despite all the crises Turkey has experienced 
since 2005 and despite the tensions between Turkey and the EU, this 
is a good result. 
 
Editorial Commentary on EU-Turkey 
 
Mehmet Ali Birand wrote in tabloid Posta: "The European Union is 
urging Turkey to take tangible steps on the reform process.  The EU 
Commissioner Olli Rehn especially drew attention that nothing had 
changed from their point of view, no matter what France and Germany 
say, by stating, 'our target is to realize Turkey's full membership 
in the European Union.'  That means the idea of 'privileged 
partnership' as put forth by France and Germany has not yet reached 
the EU Commission. The Commission does not attach any importance to 
these calls. The only expectation is that Ankara will keep its 
promises by re-starting the reform process, accelerating steps 
toward a solution in Cyprus, finding a formula to reopen the Halki 
seminary, and overcoming limitations against the freedom of thought 
and the freedom of the press." 
 
Abdulhamit Bilici wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Even the 
pro-Turkey figures at European Parliament express disappointment 
about the slow down in the reform process.  Turkey's accession to 
the EU will certainly be not as easy as the process was for Croatia 
or Slovenia.  Turkey should be able to accept this as a fact and 
move forward on the reform process, which is important both 
domestically and internationally." 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "There is a clear and strong 
message from the EU that Turkey has to focus on reforms rather than 
harping on disappointment with the EP's more conservative 
composition.  The EU is still hopeful about good prospects 
regardless of these.  EU officials and Turkish officials in Brussels 
agree that tangible steps before the end of 2009, such as reopening 
the Halki Seminary, will be very helpful to ease potential problems 
such as permission to allow Greek Cypriot ships to use Turkish 
ports." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The best 
answer to the growing anti-Turkey platform in the newly composed 
European Parliament is for Turkey to accomplish tangible reforms. 
After all, these reforms are for the good of the Turkish people and 
for uplifting the standards of Turkish democracy." 
 
Karabakh Summit to be Held in Moscow Without Turkey 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak reports that members of Minsk Group are 
planning to hold a "mini summit" on the Karabakh issue in Moscow 
next month. 
 
ANKARA 00000815  002 OF 003 
 
 
President Obama will go to Moscow on July 6 and French President 
Sarkozy will also be in the region at that time so Obama, Sarkozy 
and Russian President Medvedev will hold talks with Armenian 
President Sargsian and Azerbaijani President Aliyev in Moscow.  The 
leaders are expected to focus on problems in Nagorno Karabakh, 
energy issues and developments in the Caucasus.  The paper notes 
that Turkey is not invited to the summit. Normally, says Yeni Safak, 
the members of the Minsk Group include the U.S., Russia, Turkey, 
France, Germany, Belarus, Italy, Portugal, Holland, Sweden, Finland, 
Armenia, and Azerbaijan. However, the paper says that this meeting 
will only include the U.S., France, Russia, Armenia, and 
Azerbaijan. 
 
Foreign Minister Davutoglu Urges The International Community to 
Boost Support for Pakistan 
Sabah, Radikal, Zaman:  Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu on Tuesday 
urged the international community to support troubled Pakistan. 
Davutoglu presented Pakistani Prime Minister Gilani with a $10 
million check for humanitarian aid.  Following his meeting with the 
Prime Minister, Davutoglu held contacts with the Land Forces 
Commander General Kayani and with the Parliament Speaker Fehmida 
Mirza.  Davutoglu noted that the Turkish Embassy in Islamabad would 
shortly become the NATO contact point in Pakistan, operating as a 
channel for disseminating information and facilitating NATO programs 
while stressing the importance of improving bilateral relations 
within the framework of an action plan. 
 
European Court Fines Turkey for Failing to Protect Woman from 
Domestic Violence 
All papers report that The European Court of Human Rights delivered 
a historic decision by fining Turkey 36,500 Euros for discriminatory 
judicial passivity in a domestic violence case, which the court 
ruled "created a climate in Turkey that was conducive to domestic 
violence."  Mainstream Hurriyet says this is the first time a state 
is convicted for failing to prevent domestic violence.  In 2002 
Nahide Opuz applied to the European Court to file a complaint 
against Turkish authorities who failed to protect her from her 
abusive husband.  This husband was released from prison even though 
he was serving a lifetime prison sentence for murdering Opuz's 
mother in 2002.  The ECHR ruled that the Turkish state had violated 
three articles prohibiting torture and discrimination, and ensuring 
the right to life of the victim. 
 
Guantanamo Prisoner Transferred to U.S. for Trial 
Media are united in their interpretation that the success of the 
prosecution of Ahmed Ghailani in a New York civil court is a key 
test for President Obama's plans to close Guantanamo. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "This transfer is an important test 
for Obama's plan to close Guantanamo and try some of the suspects in 
the U.S."  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "A Revolution in Gitmo: The 
First Civil Prosecution Proceeds," and the paper reports, "Geylani 
faces 238 separate charges related to the 1998 bombings of the U.S. 
embassies in Kenya and Tanzania," which "killed 12 Americans and 224 
Kenyans and Tanzanians," and Geylani has "remained in U.S. custody 
since he was apprehended in Pakistan in 2004."  Mainstream Haberturk 
reports "the first detainee (from Guantanamo) is brought to the 
U.S." which constitutes, "an important development in Obama's plan 
to close Guantanamo." 
 
George Mitchell Embarks on Tour for Mideast Peace 
Media highlight President Obama's phone conversation with Israeli PM 
Netanyahu ahead of George Mitchell's visit to the region and 
Netanyahu's expected speech next week.  Leftist Taraf headlines, 
"The U.S. is Determined on Middle East Peace," and the paper notes 
"prior to Israeli PM Netanyahu's speech on a new approach to peace 
and security in the region, Obama talked on the phone with him," and 
"in a separate development, Special Envoy George Mitchell is 
travelling to Israel to discuss Jewish settlements and peace talks 
with Palestinians," and the paper notes some predict, "The U.S. 
could solve the crisis within two years."  Liberal Radikal reports, 
 
ANKARA 00000815  003 OF 003 
 
 
"Special Envoy George Mitchell began a tour of the Middle East 
yesterday with a visit to Israel, where he will begin to present 
Obama's plan for peace between Israel and Palestine."  In "A 
Two-State Solution Plan from The U.S.," leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports "Mitchell has begun his tour of the Middle East 
in order to recharge peace talks between Israel and Palestine." 
Mainstream Sabah highlights that "despite the differing views 
between the U.S. and Israel regarding peace talks with Palestinians 
and settlements in the West Bank," Mitchell praised Israel as "Our 
close ally." 
 
Elections in Iran - "It's Not An Election, It's a Revolution." 
(Hurriyet) 
Media note the campaigns are heating up ahead of Friday's 
presidential elections in Iran.  In "A Human Chain in Tehran for 
Musavi," liberal Radikal reports, "The campaigns are getting fierce 
ahead of Friday's elections," as "a giant crowd of Ahmadinejad 
supporters gathered in a stadium for a campaign rally, so supporters 
of Musevi used Facebook and SMS to organize a long human chain along 
Baghdad street."  Mainstream HaberTurk reports in "Election Crowds 
in Tehran," that "Supporters of both Ahmadinejad and Musavi filled 
the streets of Tehran to the point that Ahmadinejad was unable to 
reach a rally with 50,000 participants."  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports, "The Differences in The Meetings Are Obvious," as "women at 
Ahmadinejad's meetings are covered from head to toe," and "Musavi's 
meetings take place in a party-like atmosphere, where youth dance 
and women are free to dress chicly." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
Diyarbakir Governor sets up a call center offering service in 
Kurdish and Zaza language. 
 
Bitlis Education Directorate initiates investigation against labor 
union activist Kemal Gultekin who referred to the "AK party" as 
"AKP." 
 
The Ankara prosecutor has asked the Justice Ministry to annul a 
ruling of Sincan criminal court giving the green light to the trial 
of President Gul in connection with missing funds of the now closed 
Welfare Party. 
 
Iraqi President Talabani invited CHP leader Deniz Baykal to 
Baghdad. 
 
RTUK Chairman Akman announced he would not resign over allegations 
of his connections to the German-based corruption scandal related to 
the Deniz Feneri organization.  Akman will complete his term as RTUK 
Chairman on July 14th. 
 
 
World 
 
Search crews have recovered 28 bodies of passengers on the Air 
France Flight that crashed in the Atlantic Ocean eight days ago 
 
An Indian military plane with 12 personnel on board is reported 
missing along India's borders with China. 
 
The FBI plans to continue using informants to monitor mosques in the 
U.S. 
 
The US Army says it holds around 11,000 prisoners in Iraq. 
 
JEFFREY