09ANKARA899
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Jun 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8777
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0899/01 1761245
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251245Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0024
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0127
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5919
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3951
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7385
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7274
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3854
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000899 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, JUNE 25, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
MFA Press Briefing Touches on Relations with Armenia, Iran, and 
Syria 
All media report Turkish Foreign Ministry Spokesman Burak Ozugergin 
told a press briefing Wednesday that Turkey and Armenia "were 
continuing their negotiations in various levels."  Ozugergin noted, 
"We are discussing all issues with Armenia, and what is important 
are the principles we set in place." Ozugergin said that there was 
also an ongoing process between Azerbaijan and Armenia, and both 
processes were affecting each other. The spokesperson referred to 
recent remarks of the presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia that they 
had reached a compromise that progress was necessary and that the 
shuttle democracy should be maintained. Ozugergin said that Turkey 
was supporting a solution to the Upper Karabakh dispute through 
peaceful means, and a positive course of the process would 
contribute to the peace and stability in the Caucasus. The spokesman 
also said that Turkey would support any positive development or step 
in the Minsk process. "The Settlement of Upper Karabakh problem will 
restore stability in the region, and make it sustainable," Ozugergin 
said. Also, Ozugergin said that Turkey's Foreign Minister Ahmet 
Davutoglu might meet foreign ministers of other countries, including 
his Armenian counterpart Eduard Nalbandian, in the Greek island of 
Corfu during an informal meeting of the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) this weekend. Ozugergin said that 
Davutoglu would meet his Greek counterpart on the sidelines of the 
meeting.  Regarding Iran, Ozugergin expressed Ankara's belief that 
Iran was capable of solving its problems. "Iran can keep the means 
to seek its rights, and is capable of solving its problems and 
discussions." Ozugergin underlined Iran's importance for the region, 
and said Turkey was closely monitoring developments in that country. 
"We hope this process will contribute to the improvement of 
democratic institutions and rules in Iran," Ozugergin said. 
Ozugergin said that Turkey believed Iran could satisfactorily end 
the political discussions within its territories. The spokesperson 
also said Turkey would respect any decision of Iran. 
 
Regarding the Israeli-Syria relations Ozugergin said the 
Israeli-Syrian negotiations under mediation could resume upon the 
common will of the two countries, "Turkey has conveyed to the two 
parties that it is ready (for talks)." Ozugergin also said that 
Turkey was in close cooperation with the U.S. administration, and 
had told the administration that it would go on mediating when 
necessary conditions occurred. 
 
FM Davutoglu: "We Will not Pursue Any Policies Without Azerbaijan's 
Participation" 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that Davutoglu for the first time as the 
Foreign Minister, attended the Parliament's Foreign Relations 
Committee meeting and said that "Turkey will never pursue policies 
without taking Azerbaijan into consideration."  Davutoglu added 
"Some circles show the closure of the Turkey-Armenia border as a 
problem, but the border gate was open until 1993.  Our active roles 
in the Caucasus, Middle East, North Africa, and Center Asia will 
continue." 
 
President Gul Travels to China Together With 90 Businessmen 
Mainstreams Hurriyet and Sabah report that in an interview prior to 
his visit to China, President Gul said "China is a natural partner 
and Turkey wants to increase business with China.  Turkey and China 
are in a good position to overcome new challenges and pursue greater 
prosperity through cooperation. The cooperation between Turkey and 
China is of importance not only to our two countries, but also to 
the international community."  Sabah notes that the businessmen 
travelling with President Gul will sign business deals and projects 
worth  $2.9 billion. 
 
In a related story, mainstream Vatan reports that while there are 
tensions between the PM and the DTP over scheduling an appointment 
for a meeting,  the Presidential Palace made a gesture to DTP and 
added a representative from the party to the President's visit to 
 
ANKARA 00000899  002 OF 003 
 
 
China.  The Deputy Chairman of DTP Selahattin Demirtas was on Gul's 
plane to represent the DTP during the presidential visit to China. 
 
Military Prosecutor's Office: "The Anti-Government Plan was not 
Prepared at the TGS Headquarters" 
All papers:  The Turkish military ruled out Wednesday the 
prosecution of a senior navy officer Albay Dursun Gigek suspected of 
allegedly drafting a plan to destroy the ruling AKP.  The Military 
Prosecutor's Office said it has confirmed that the alleged document 
was not prepared in the General Staff headquarters. The case file 
was sent to Istanbul Public Prosecutor's Office.  The Military 
Prosecutor also indicated that there was no need to investigate the 
navy colonel.  The office sent the file to Istanbul Chief 
Prosecutor's Office. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Military Court Decision 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The Military Prosecutor's 
decision invalidates claims of a coup plotting organization within 
the Turkish General Staff.  At this point, is seems likely that the 
document in question is a fake.  There will be a civilian judicial 
process as well, but at the same time, it is difficult not to 
believe this document was deliberately prepared in order to ruin the 
army's prestige." 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The military prosecutor 
did the right thing and reached its verdict based on evidence, 
instead of suspicion or speculation.  There was no concrete proof 
that warranted a military investigation, therefore the case was 
forwarded to the hands of the civilian judicial authority.  This is 
very normal." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The military 
court decision is an effort to close the case completely or at least 
put it on hold.  The investigation started and concluded within the 
military ranks.  Regardless of this decision, the political 
ramifications of this case will continue and will force the military 
to change." 
 
Obama Gets Tough Against Iran (Haberturk, Ortadogu, CNN Turk) 
Media draw attention to U.S. President Obama's toughened stance 
against Iran.  Far right Ortadogu, mainstream Haberturk, and 
mainstream CNN Turk all carry the same headline, "Obama Gets Tough 
Against Iran."  Leftist Taraf reports, "Following days of criticism 
from Republicans in the U.S.," Obama, "spoke out against the use of 
violence against protestors in Tehran."  Liberal Radikal notes, 
"Obama exploded at charges he was acting too softly toward Iran," as 
he emphasized, "What's important is whether the government is seen 
as legitimate in the eyes of the Iranian public, not in the eyes of 
the U.S."  Meanwhile, NTV reports in "Crisis in Iran," that 
Ahmadinejad has said, "U.S. President Obama, don't interfere in our 
internal affairs." 
 
"Another Blood Bath" in Iraq (Radikal, Yeni Safak) 
Media note the bomb attack in Baghdad yesterday came during the days 
prior to the beginning of the U.S. withdrawal from Iraq.  Haberturk 
headlines, "As U.S. Soldiers Withdraw, Baghdad Gets Rough." 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports "Baghdad Is Rocked By A Bomb," and the 
paper notes, "U.S. troops will begin their withdrawal from Iraq in a 
few days," and yet, "the bomb attacks are increasing."  Liberal 
Radikal and Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak call the attack "Another 
Iraqi Blood Bath."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet calls the attack, 
"One of the bloodiest attacks in the Shiite neighborhoods of 
Baghdad," and "the bomb set off fires throughout the marketplace." 
The paper also reports, "The government of Iraq has declared June 
30th a holiday," as "U.S. troops begin the process of their 
withdrawal on that day." 
 
Drone Attack on Taliban Funeral Kills 70 (CNN Turk) 
Most media report the U.S. drone attack targeted and killed 70 
Taliban in Pakistan, while the Islamist media either didn't report 
on the story or when they did, omitted the part about the dead being 
 
ANKARA 00000899  003 OF 003 
 
 
Taliban militants.  Far right Ortadogu reports "America Kills 70 
Taliban with A 'Heron.'"  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet calls the 
strike, "An Attack on The Heart of The Taliban."  Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak ignores reports Taliban were the target of the strike and 
headlines, "The U.S. Hits Another Funeral: 70 Dead," and the paper 
reports, "A U.S. spy plane attacked Pakistan's South Waziristan 
region and killed 70 people."  In addition, the paper points out, 
"Last year the U.S. has launched 43 air attacks in the region" and 
"killed 400 people."  Islamist-oriented Zaman did not report on the 
strike at all in its paper or on its website. 
 
U.S. Decides to Send Ambassador to Damascus 
Media are positive about the announcement the U.S. will appoint a 
new ambassador to Damascus.  Mainstream Haberturk reports in, "An 
Ambassador from the U.S. to Syria," that "after a four-year break, 
the U.S. will send an Ambassador to Syria," and "The U.S. withdrew 
its Ambassador in Damascus following the assassination of Lebanese 
PM Rafik Hariri."  Far right Ortadogu reports, "The appointment is 
part of Obama's goal of improving relations with the Middle East and 
a sign of Syria's growing role in the region."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports, "It's still not known who will be appointed as 
ambassador."  Liberal Radikal reports, "Turkey is pleased," about 
the appointment as MFA Spokesperson Burak Ozurgergin "welcomed the 
decision of the United States to appoint an ambassador to the Syrian 
capital of Damascus, and expressed pleasure with further improvement 
of relations between Syria and the United States." Mainstream Sabah 
comments, "Relations came to a halt after the U.S. said Syria of 
supported terror and played a role in (Lebanese PM) Hariri's 
assassination, relations are back on track with the appointment of a 
new ambassador." 
 
U.S. Armenian Diaspora Pleased with New Appointment of Israeli 
Ambassador to the U.S. 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports "The new Israeli Ambassador to the U.S., 
Michale B. Oren, refers to the events of 1915 as 'genocide,'" and 
the paper adds, "the Armenian Diaspora in the U.S. is pleased," with 
the appointment. 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
-  After waiting two months for a response to a request for a 
meeting with PM Erdogan, the largely pro-Kurdish opposition party 
DTP decided to withdraw its request. 
 
- Today PM Erdogan will travel to Albania and Brussels. 
 
- The Parliament approves a bill for the restructuring of credit 
card debts. 
 
 
World 
 
-  British Foreign Secretary Milliband cancels his trip to Cyprus as 
the Greek Cypriots voice objections to Milliband's plans to visit 
TRNC President Talat in his office. 
 
- While Iran continues to boil, President Abdullah Gul stresses that 
stability in Iran is very important for Turkey. 
 
- A bomb exploded in a market in Sadr city of Baghdad killing 72 
people injuring 150 others. 
 
SILLIMAN