09BEIJING1440
MEDIA REACTION: GEITHNER'S VISIT, NORTH KOREA
Mon Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7175
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1440/01 1520926
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010926Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4211
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001440 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: GEITHNER'S VISIT, NORTH KOREA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. GEITHNER'S VISIT 
 
"Complaint diplomacy should be discarded" 
 
The official Xinhua Daily Telegraph (Xinhua Meiri Dianxun) (06/01): 
"Before the visit began, Geithner informed the Chinese media that 
the first goal of the visit is to inform China about the measures 
the U.S. will take to deal with the crisis and to learn about the 
similar measures China will take.  The second goal of the visit is 
to plan the SNED; which will be held later this summer.  Geithner 
has also emphasized that he will not continue the so-called 
'complaint diplomacy' with China.  In the past, some U.S. officials 
became accustomed to using 'complaint diplomacy', when pressuring or 
accusing China on issues such as the RMB exchange rate or trade 
deficit. However, this type of diplomacy has had little effect and 
received lots of criticism.  This time, Geithner emphasized that the 
Obama administration is dedicated to promoting the bilateral 
relationship, in all aspects, through positive cooperation. 
Geithner's comments coincide with China's recently-established 
policy 'to jointly build up the U.S.-China relations, in all 
aspects, characterized by positive cooperation in the 21 century.' 
The common view that the U.S. and China have reached, which states 
that the two will increase their mutual trust and cooperation while 
respecting and caring for the core interests of each other, properly 
dealing with divergences and sensitive issues, is been the best 
point at which to give up 'complaint diplomacy.'" 
 
¶2. NORTH KOREA 
 
a. "DPRK's moves driven by inner urge to power" 
 
The official English-language newspaper China Daily (06/01): "There 
used to be a so-called card-playing theory about the Korean 
Peninsula nuclear issue. Advocates of such a theory believed the 
DPRK was not actually developing nuclear weapons. Instead, it was 
showing its nuclear prowess as a trump card to draw the attention of 
the U.S. and the international community and using it as a 
bargaining chip for negotiations. ... The "card-playing theory" is 
wrong: The DPRK was not simply bluffing; it has actually been 
developing nuclear weapons.  This has given rise to a new 
explanation by some Chinese academics: that the latest steps taken 
by the DPRK have something to do with its domestic political 
situation.  ... Some academics believe that the current leadership 
is determined to shoulder the heavy responsibility of accomplishing 
the major tasks facing the DPRK when becoming a "strong and 
prosperous nation" before handing over charge to the next 
generation. This is part of the current leadership's effort to 
fulfill its "historic mission".  Among the major tasks could be to: 
 
¶1. Turn the DPRK into a truly nuclear state. 
¶2. Equip the country with mature short-, medium- and long-range 
missile technologies. 
¶3. Re-demarcate the marine border - between the DPRK and ROK on 
waters off the west coast of the Peninsula - as was formed after the 
1953 Korean War truce was signed. 
¶4. Push forward the cause of national reunification. 
 
This could explain why the DPRK, with a sense of urgency, has 
resorted to a series of daring acts within such a short span of 
time. If the hypothesis holds, the development of the situation on 
the Korean Peninsula, and even in East Asia, is worrying and fraught 
with the risk of going out of control." 
 
b. "Japan debates taking a preemptive strike against North Korea" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(06/01): "North Korea responded to the 
Security Council by launching missiles. However, over the weekend 
the DPRK has quieted.  The U.S., Japan and South Korea have 
increased their nuclear deployment.  Japanese officials have called 
for a preemptive strike against North Korea's military facilities. 
However, the Japanese act cautiously.  Japan's Defense Minister has 
publically said that Japan will not take a preemptive strike against 
North Korea.  Chinese experts have said that some Japanese personnel 
are always looking for excuses to possess nuclear weapons and to 
take advantage of North Korea's nuclear issue.  China and the whole 
world should be vigilant concerning this move by Japan.  A Russian 
expert on the issue indicated that the stances of Russia and China 
are, first, insistent on the non-proliferation of nuclear programs; 
second, urging North Korea to return to the Six-Party Talks. And 
avoid cornering North Korea.  Chinese experts also suggest that the 
biggest concern is whether or not the U.S. will use the crisis to 
offset the damages done by the financial crisis.  Both North Korea 
and the U.S. still have room to maneuver, however, the U.S. has put 
China, its go-between and mediator, at the front of the North Korea 
 
BEIJING 00001440  002 OF 002 
 
 
crisis. In this way, the U.S. avoids the pressures that it should 
bear on its own shoulders as one of the major forces in the issue." 
 
c. "Is North Korea China's strategic burden?" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(06/01): "It seems that North Korea's nuclear 
test intended to create difficulties for the U.S., Japan, South 
Korea and others.  However, this move has also created an 
embarrassing situation for China.  China should not simply give up 
on the DPRK.  China cannot begin to view the DPRK as a burden 
because the DPRK is not only a political and economic problem, but 
also a strategic issue.  North Korea is still an important factor in 
China's geopolitical setup, in order to contain Japan and the U.S. 
Thus North Korea is not yet a strategic burden, but a strategic 
resource for China. The U.S. government, deeply trapped in the 
financial crisis, may intend to kick the ball, 'the North Korea 
issue', to China.  If North Korea continues its current policy, soon 
the country will experience a Cold War, or instantly disappear.  If, 
either of the above situations happens, China's international 
security environment will seriously deteriorate." 
 
PICCUTA