09BERLIN751
MEDIA REACTION: IRAN, FRANCE, SOMALIA, CLONE MEAT
Tue Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 231235Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4409
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000751 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM IR FR SO US
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAN, FRANCE, SOMALIA, CLONE MEAT 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   Aftermath of Iranian Elections 
¶3.   Western Reactions to Iran 
¶4.   French President Sarkozy's State of the Union 
¶5.   Somalia 
¶6.   Clone Meat 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Early evening newscasts by ZDF-TV's Heute and ARD-TV's Tagesschau 
opened with stories on ongoing protests in Iran.  Most newspapers 
led with stories on Iran.  Tagesspiegel and Frankfurter Rundschau 
opened with a story on the German hostages in Yemen.  Editorials 
focused on Iran, the German economy, and the CDU platform. 
 
¶2.   Aftermath of Iranian Elections 
 
All papers continue to give the events in Iran broad and extensive 
coverage.  Stories on the most recent developments in Iran still 
dominate the front pages in the majority of the German print media; 
some even carry front-page pictures depicting people carrying 
posters of Neda, the martyr -- describing her as the new face of the 
Iranian revolution.  The events in Iran were also the lead stories 
on ARD and ZDF TV's newscast.  Several papers, as well as broadcast 
media, carried commentaries and editorials on the events. 
 
ARD-TV's Tagesthemen commented: "The revolution 30 years ago was a 
great promise for freedom, but we in the West never understood this. 
 The many young people, who are now protesting in the streets, do 
not want anything else but freedom, independence and a true 
republic.  But at the latest since revolutionary leader Khamenei's 
tough Friday sermon, one thing is clear: This state has 
irretrievably lost and now finally reversed its noble principles. 
It is a political and moral pile of debris.  The efforts of 
Khamenei, his guardians, and experts are laying the way for their 
own end." 
 
Norddeutscher Rundfunk Info Radio of Hamburg aired the following 
commentary: "The powers-that-be in Tehran are now suffering from a 
great uncertainty....  In addition, the authority of the religious 
leader has now been considerably damaged because it was he who early 
praised the official results and thus confirmed them.  With the most 
recent statement of the Guardian Council, not only the official 
outcome of the election seems to become increasingly uncertain but 
also Khamenei's reputation.  The country is now changing hour by 
hour and the political structures are today totally different than 
they were before the elections." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung judged: "The religious state is now at a 
crossroads.  It is faced with either a dictatorship run by the 
hardliners or with its collapse.  In addition, the Islamic Republic 
is referring to old patterns.  It is accusing Americans, British, 
and Germans of stirring up the unrest and damaging Iran.  This, too, 
is a classic red herring once a government is about to come to its 
end.  Only future cooperation or hostilities will now decide the 
future of the country - and pure coincidence.  One single incident 
could be enough to push situation out of control.  But how can the 
international community effectively exert influence without 
supplying the regime with new arguments for old conspiracy theories? 
 How credible can U.S., British, and German solidarity be when all 
sides involved know that the demonstrators are alone when they look 
into the muzzles of the state's rifles?" 
 
Financial Times Deutschland argued; "If in a dictatorship the 
official media contradict themselves, then we can perfectly assume 
that a power struggle within the regime is going on.  That is why we 
can consider the most recent reports from Iran to be evidence that 
the alleged election falsifications and mass protests are dividing 
the state leadership.  In the meantime, the protest movement 
considers itself to be strong enough to accept election results only 
if they are the result of internationally monitored new elections. 
But this will not happen.  Khamenei has linked his fate so closely 
to Ahmadinejad that an ousting of the president could also be 
dangerous for him.  That is why we must take another report, spread 
by the state media, very seriously: that the revolutionary guards, 
who are subject to Khamenei's orders, will take tough actions 
against the opposition." 
 
Regional daily Rhein-Neckar Zeitung of Heidelberg opined: 
"Khomeini's revolution 30 years ago has consolidated into an 
inflexible dictatorship.  And the appearance of being a democratic 
country has now turned to a real threat for the regime.  The brutal 
moves against the protests can no longer be kept secret nor will it 
be possible to force the spirit of change back into the bottle.  Any 
kind of development, even the worst, is now possible.  But change in 
Iran has begun.  The West should support these changes without any 
pussyfooting on behalf of human rights, which are undeniable and 
indivisible." 
 
Regional daily Mannheimer Morgen held: "Of course, Moussavi as a 
former representative of the establishment does not want to turn the 
system upside down.  But can he control resistance?  The anger is 
growing, including the anger at Ayatollah Khamenei, because he has 
allied with President Ahmadinejad.   With this move, the religious 
leader has come under fire.  The unrestricted ruler over the people 
has now become vulnerable.  The crisis is now taking an incalculable 
course for the Iranian revolution.  At the end, even its legacy 
could be at stake." 
 
Suedkurier of Konstanz maintained: "Ayatollah Rafsanjani's daughter 
has been imprisoned, and this is clear evidence that the leadership 
is mutilating each other in this power struggle.  There is no doubt 
the ayatollahs are getting nervous.  In their distress, have even 
admitted to irregularities in the elections, but this is no longer 
the main issue."  In the view of regional daily Allgemeine Zeitung 
of Mainz "we are excited to see who of the inner-religious critics 
of Ayatollah Khamenei has the courage to take over control or 
whether they will leave it to ex-President Rafsanjani.   We know 
that he massively supported Mousavi.  Five family members of 
Rafsanjani have been arrested.  Khamenei clearly knows where the 
pressure that is now erupting in the streets is coming from." 
 
¶3.   Western Reactions to Iran 
 
Die Tageszeitung commented: "The time is ripe to hold universal 
rallies to support the Iranian opposition, which is so bravely 
risking its neck.  At least the West should share the desire that 
the Iranian opposition reaches its goals and that no more blood is 
shed on this path.  The expression of solidarity should come from 
the people, not from governments and least of all from the Israeli 
government.  Netanyahu's criticism of the Iranian regime for 
beating, arresting and torturing civilians, is accurate.  However, 
it can be doubted whether his call for free elections in Tehran will 
achieve anything.  President Obama is completely right to avoid 
taking sides.  Expressions of sympathy from the head of a 
government, who has previously called for preemptive strikes against 
Iran if nuclear research is not put on ice, can only be 
counterproductive." 
 
Regional daily Leipziger Volkszeitung wondered: "Why are the 
protests of western governments against electoral fraud and the 
bashing of demonstrators in Iran so restrained and as soft as wax? 
We could almost think that the leaders of the western countries feel 
embarrassed by breaking a lance for freedom and human rights.  The 
Obama administration is almost apologetic in creating the impression 
that it does not want to interfere in Iran's domestic affairs in 
order to avoid a pretext for an increasingly brutal suppression and 
to jeopardize talks on Iran's efforts to get nuclear weapons. You 
can lead a horse to water but you can't make it drink, and if the 
Untied States does not want to 'drink,' it will lose reputation. 
And again, the West looks divided in foreign policy and is now 
offering the Tehran regime, which is on the defensive, a chance for 
a counter attack." 
 
Regional daily Rheinische Post of D|sseldorf opined: "From Europe we 
are now witnessing strong protests, but now all eyes are on the 
United States.  But Obama is reacting with restraint.  As a duty, 
the United States is criticizing the restriction of freedom rights 
in Iran, complaining about state violence and its victims.  But U.S. 
foreign policy has been characterized by efforts to avoid the 
bullying tones of the Bush era towards the Islamic world.  This may 
look wise but is probably interpreted in Iran as a sign of weakness 
and as an indication that there is no closely coordinated western 
crisis strategy.  In his brief time in office, Obama has delivered 
important speeches; now it is time for a few great words." 
 
Regional daily Die Tagespost of Wuerzburg observed: "Film directors, 
photographers, the literary establishment, musicians, and other 
artists cannot be silenced -- even under the tough conditions of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran.  They do not need private lessons but 
solidarity.  We know-it-all westerners should not prescribe 
enlightenment to Persian culture." 
 
Straubinger Tagblatt/Landshuter Zeitung declared: "The accusation of 
the Iranian leaders of the West supporting 'anarchy and vandalism' 
is not true because it is unfounded.  But Europe and the United 
States have the duty to increase their engagement in Iran based on 
the universally valid UN charter and other international human and 
civil rights conventions.  A few clear warnings are not enough.  The 
oriental 'religious state' has again turned into a matter for the UN 
Security Council.  In view of the international legal situation, it 
is one of the noblest tasks of the civilized world in the 21st 
century to give their support to the suppressed and courageously 
revolting Iranians." 
 
¶4.   French President Sarkozy's State of the Union 
 
Sueddeutsche and FT Deutschland carried front-page photos showing 
French President Sarkozy marching by rows of colorful guards in a 
wing of the Versailles palace.  The caption of the Sueddeutsche 
said: "For the first time since 1873, a French president addressed 
both chambers of the parliament.  In his pompously staged speech, 
Sarkozy signaled support for the plan to ban burkas in France."  FT 
Deutschland's caption headlined "He is the State" remarked: "Only a 
change of the constitution made Sarkozy's speech in the stately 
palace of the Sun King Louis XIV possible.  The president defended 
the huge deficit spending and called for fighting the burkas.  The 
opposition spoke of a cold coup." 
 
In an editorial, Sueddeutsche commented: "Sarkozy did not need this 
forum.  To reach his voters, he can get on TV all the time.  His 
polls are improving and so are the chances that he will run again in 
three years and will be reelected.  However, the president wants 
more than his reelection.  He wants to leave a legacy behind and to 
change the republic according to his ideas.  With his presentation, 
he redefined and changed his role as president.  Like an American 
President, he delivered a State of the Union address, accounting for 
his policy to both parliamentarians and the people.  Sarkozy hopes 
to become one of the grand presidents." 
 
¶5.   Somalia 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine commented: "It sounds funny when President 
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, whose troops do not even have control of the 
capital, declares a state of emergency.  However, the situation is 
not funny.  Militant Islamists are increasingly brazen.  The African 
Union and the international community must therefore make a quick 
decision on whether they want to intervene militarily....  Declaring 
the state of emergency could be a step that leads to a mandate.  It 
is particularly important to Africa that Somalia does not turn into 
an operational basis for terrorists and al Qaida.  Terrorism would 
soon spread to neighboring countries.  The West should support those 
countries that are prepared to intervene." 
 
¶6.   Clone Meat 
 
Mass-circulation, right-of-center tabloid Bild-Zeitung of Hamburg 
penned the following editorial: "At issue is not the meat of a 
cloned fattened bull or the milk of a cloned super cow, but at issue 
is the meat and the milk of the descendant of these cloned animals. 
The consumer wants better quality and cheaper prices -- and this is 
what cloning technology makes possible. . Clone meat has been 
available in the U.S. since 2008, but the EU directive had to be 
adopted to lay down the rules for the import and sale of clone meat 
in Europe.  In the United States such meat does not need to be 
labeled!   And this is the decisive point: clone products need a 
clear label.  The consumer has a right to know where the steak on 
his plate comes from." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung argued: "Fortunately, cloning is expensive and 
inefficient.  If at all, only precious stock animals will be cloned. 
The meat of their descendants must in any case be labeled, allowing 
consumers to decide what will land on their plates." 
 
 
KOENIG