09BEIJING1663
JUNE 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, SUB COLLISION, GREEN DAM,
Thu Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2674
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1663/01 1692305
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 182305Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4630
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI 0800
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT 0065
RUEHAH/AMEMBASSY ASHGABAT 0747
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001663 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EINT CH CN KN KS TX UZ IR IN
 
SUBJECT: JUNE 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, SUB COLLISION, GREEN DAM, 
BUY CHINA 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 18 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- MFA Spokesman Qin Gang stated that China "respected the choice of 
the Iranian people" in recent elections. 
 
-- Despite controversy over the "Green Dam" internet filtering 
software China had a responsibility to protect Chinese youth from 
"bad and violent things." 
 
-- Asked why China omitted a question from the transcript of the 
June 16 press briefing about the June 11th collision between a 
Chinese submarine and a sonar array trailed by the destroyer USS 
John McCain, Qin asserted that the transcripts were "fully accurate 
and complete." 
 
 
-- Asked why China had included "Buy China," clauses in a recent 
stimulus package after China criticized a similar such clause in the 
U.S., Qin said that China "rejected all forms of trade and 
investment protection." 
 
-- China expressed its "strong disapproval" to the Asian Development 
Bank's approval of the India Country Strategy for 2009-2012 despite 
China's objection to the inclusion of some projects in Arunachal 
Pradeshand urged the ADB to "take measures to ameliorate the damage 
caused." 
 
Iran Elections 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  In response to a question on the Iranian elections at the June 
18 regularly scheduled press briefing, Foreign Ministry Spokesman 
Qin Gang said that China "respected the choice of the Iranian 
people." 
 
Submarine Collision 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked why the MFA omitted a question from the transcript of the 
June 16 press briefing about the June 11 collision between a Chinese 
submarine and a sonar array trailed by the destroyer USS John 
McCain, Qin asserted that the transcripts were "fully accurate and 
complete." 
 
Green Dam Software 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  "Green Dam" internet filtering software had generated 
significant discussion in China and abroad, said Qin.  Yet "no 
matter how many different opinions were expressed," China had a 
responsibility to protect Chinese youth from "bad and violent 
things." Qin urged reporters not to forget the government's 
responsibility to protect China's youth, and claimed that this was 
also international practice.  Qin referred questions on the 
"technicalities of the software," to the "competent authorities." 
 
 
Buy China Rules included in New Stimulus Package 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5.  China "rejected all forms of trade and investment protection," 
said the spokesperson when asked why China had included "Buy China," 
clauses in a recent stimulus package after previously criticizing 
similar U.S. practices.  The purpose of the new Chinese legislation 
was to maintain a fair market environment and was "in line with 
China's 2002 law on procurements." 
 
Asian Development Bank India Strategy 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  China expressed its "strong disapproval" that the Asian 
Development Bank's (ADB) approved its India Country Strategy for 
2009-2012 despite China's objection to the inclusion of projects in 
Arunachal Pradesh. The ADB operations would not change the ongoing 
territorial dispute between China and India. Qin said the ADB 
"should not interfere" in this matter, and urged the ADB to "take 
measures to ameliorate the damage caused."  Qin also noted that as 
an "important member" of the ADB, China was willing to promote 
regional development, but always believed that bilateral 
negotiations should be used to solve China's border dispute with 
India. 
 
2010 BRIC Summit 
---------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00001663  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7.  China had committed to attending the next BRIC summit in Brazil 
in 2010, said Qin.  Qin noted that at the BRIC summit June 16 in 
Yekaterinburg, Russia, the four countries exchanged views of global 
issues of concern, enhanced mutual trust and charted the future 
course of dialogue.  Qin expressed China's willingness to work with 
the BRIC to "promote dialogue and cooperation of the four countries 
at a steady pace." 
 
China-Russia Relations "Greatly Enhanced" 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  President Hu Jintao's June 18 state visit to Russia "greatly 
enhanced the bilateral strategic partnership," and deepened mutual 
trust and cooperation in trade and people to people exchanges, said 
the spokesperson. The visit "laid the foundation for future 
development of the two countries "strategic partnership."  Qin noted 
that China was prepared to deepen cooperation with Russia to solve 
international problems and work toward the stability of the world 
financial system.  Qin acknowledged that problems existed between 
the two countries, but said that the two countries had similar views 
on major international and regional issues, and that China was 
prepared to continue intensive discussion and cooperation to resolve 
existing differences. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  China had not changed its policy on the Six-Party Talks and 
would use "all peaceful means available" to solve the North Korean 
issue. China would "always promote that policy," said Qin. 
 
No New Visits Planned to North Korea 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  The spokesperson had "no information to provide," regarding a 
reported planned trip by State Councilor Dai Bingguo to North Korea 
and China was willing "as always" to support the denuclearization of 
the Korean peninsula.  Asked what "normal exchanges," China has had 
with North Korea since the second nuclear test, Qin said that China 
was willing to abide by good neighborly relations with North Korea 
and it was "in this spirit that China handled related issues." 
 
 
Activities of Kim Jong-il Sons in China 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Asked to confirm reports in Japanese media indicating that Kim 
Jong-il's son Kim Jong-un had recently visited Beijing and met with 
Hu Jintao and other leaders, and that Kim Jong-il's eldest son Kim 
Jong-nam had recently been in China, Qin responded, "the events 
reported in the relevant media did not take place." 
 
Visits 
------- 
 
¶12.  Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi will visit Canada from June 21-23. 
FM Yang will then travel to New York from June 24-26 to take part in 
UN meetings on the global economic crisis.  Thai Prime Minister 
Abhisit Vejjajiva will visit to China from June 24-27.  Vice Premier 
Li Keqiang will visit Turkmenistan, Finland and Uzbekistan June 
23-29. 
 
PICCUTA