09BERLIN665
MEDIA REACTION: POTUS VISITS, CAIRO SPEECH, GITMO,
Thu Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 041319Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4262
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000665 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM SA EG XF US CH XG UK
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: POTUS VISITS, CAIRO SPEECH, GITMO, 
TIANANMEN, EURO ELECTIONS, UK GOV CRISIS 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   POTUS in Riyadh 
¶3.   Presidential Speech in Cairo 
¶4.   POTUS Visit to Germany 
¶5.   Guantnamo Prisoners 
¶6.   Anniversary of Tiananmen Massacre 
¶7.   European Parliament Elections 
¶8.   UK Government Crisis 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused on the future of the Arcandor department store 
chain, the Tiananmen Square massacre 20 years ago, and a new health 
label for food.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast Heute opened with a 
report on the search for debris of Air France Flight 447, while 
ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened with a story on 
the memorial service for the victims of AF 447. 
 
¶2.   POTUS in Riyadh 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine editorialized: "The fact that the American 
President visits Saudi Arabia and Egypt makes clear that he is 
serious about his policy of reaching out to the Muslim world.  Under 
his predecessor, Washington's reputation in the region was damaged 
seriously.   Obama's meeting with Saudi King Abdullah, whose country 
is currently the lead nation of the Sunni Muslims, was important. 
However, a great deal more is expected in Arabia and elsewhere from 
his speech in Cairo.  Obama has already struck a more conciliatory 
tone towards the Muslim world, although he himself lowered 
expectations.  The conflicts in the region, which require U.S. 
engagement to be resolved, are so complex that quick solutions 
cannot be expected despite an improved sentiment.  Obama will not 
change the minds of fanatics, such as Bin Laden." 
 
Primetime ARD-TV's Tagesschau reported on the President's visit to 
Riyadh that "the Saudis are afraid of a stronger neighbor in Iran 
and that it might soon possess nuclear weapons.  Barack Obama wants 
to exploit the position of the Saudis to stop the flow of financial 
assistance to extremists in Afghanistan and Pakistan. King Abdullah 
wants to revive a promising 2002 peace plan.  On the margins of the 
talks, which were primarily of private nature, the American 
President emphasized the good strategic relations to Saudi Arabia." 
 
¶3.   Presidential Speech in Cairo 
 
ZDF-TV's Heute-Journal reported on the President's upcoming speech 
in Cairo that "its main goal is to overcome the mistrust that has 
been built up between the Muslim world and the West for so many 
years.  President Obama wants to open a door with his speech and 
offer a partnership.  He will emphasize that the West is not at war 
with Islam."  The report added that, although "one speech doesn't 
make a summer," there are "opportunities for improvements in the 
medium-term because many people in the region want this." 
 
Under the headline "Obama is reaching out," mass tabloid Bild 
editorialized: "It is supposed to be an historic speech, an act of 
reconciliation.  Obama will speak to the Muslim world in Cairo, to 
1.2 billion Muslims....  America has never fought a war against 
Islam.  Whenever Muslims suffered in recent decades, America came to 
help.  Thousands of Americans have died for the freedom of Muslims. 
The Muslim world should actually reach out to America to express 
gratitude - not the other way around." 
 
ZDF-TV's Washington correspondent Matthias Fornoff noted that he 
finds it "interesting" that "the speech will be immediately 
translated in 13 languages and be watchable over YouTube and 
Facebook in order to directly reach out to young Muslims in the 
world." 
 
Tagesspiegel judged under the headline "He has no 
Time,":"expectations are running high.  Many people in the Muslim 
world are expecting concrete statements in Cairo today.  Obama will 
certainly use his personal biography and his charisma to emphasize 
the planned partnership with the Islamic and Arab world is credible. 
 He will succeed.  Fewer and fewer people in the Arab world listen 
to Osama bin Laden.  Nevertheless, Obama could also disappoint if he 
does not present concrete proposals to resolve the Middle East 
conflict, and if he does not call for political liberalization in 
Egypt.  Obama wants to win the hearts of the people, win support of 
the Arab regimes and form sound alliances with a view to the Middle 
East and Iran.  This will be a difficult dichotomy and needs time. 
But Obama does not have this time.  Without any visible initiatives, 
the next outbreak of violence is pre-programmed." 
 
According to Handelsblatt, "we cannot take it amiss that Barack 
Obama thinks he knows how to cut the Gordian knot in the Middle 
East.  He is new in his job and little experienced in foreign 
policy.  That it why he has the right to pin his hopes on things 
common sense has demanded for a long time in this lasting conflict 
between Israel and the Palestinians: honesty.  With sincerity, 
honesty and without any tricks, all sides involved should try to 
disentangle the conflict.  But the Middle East would not have been 
this smoldering fire if things were really that simple.  For the 
first time on his trip, he will get a small insight on what a 
long-cultivated distrust has done to the people in the region, 
because there is no trust between Jerusalem, Damascus, Cairo and 
Riyadh." 
 
Regional daily Flensburger Tageblatt had this to say: "When 
President Obama delivers his address in Cairo today, he will be 
walking a tightrope act.  The feat for him must be to extend his 
hand to the 1.5 billion Muslims without slapping the Israeli ally in 
the face.  Obama will concentrate on the necessary precondition for 
the success of any new initiative which aims at finding an 
accommodation between Israelis and Palestinians.  The U.S. president 
will try to restore his country's position as an 'honest broker.'" 
 
Regional daily Der Neue Tag of Weiden opined: "The omens are good, 
expectations high: Obama's father was a Muslim, he himself lived as 
a boy in Indonesia, the most populous Islamic country in the world. 
Despite all anti-American resentment in Asia, the U.S. president is 
considered extraordinarily popular.  He could now strategically take 
advantage of this reputation in order to gain greater influence on 
the peace process in the Middle East.  Today, the Arab world will 
listen closely whether and to what extent he will disassociate 
himself from the Israeli settlement policy." 
 
Sueddeutsche's front-page report is headlined:"Obama Seeking 
Reconciliation with Muslims," and reported that "the highlight of 
his trip to the Middle East will be a speech in Cairo with which he 
wants to renew America's relationship with the Muslim world. 
However, the President will not visit Israel."  The paper added 
that, "following the eight-year presidency of George W. Bush and the 
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, anti-Americanism and radical Islam are 
stronger than ever in the Arab and Islamic world.  With a one-hour 
speech at Cairo University, Obama now wants to initiate change and 
seek reconciliation with the region." 
 
Handelsblatt reported under the headline: "Dual Tightrope Act on the 
Nile," that "As a matter of fact, President Obama will break the 
political legacy of his predecessor George W. Bush in the Middle 
East.  For instance, he avoided any contacts with Islamists who 
planned to implement a state based on Islamic principles.  But the 
U.S. Embassy in Cairo has now sent out invitations to politicians 
who have close links to Egypt's largest opposition movement, the 
Muslim Brotherhood.  That is why Obama's address is also a challenge 
for Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak, who considers the Muslim 
Brotherhood his most dangerous opponents and is using violence 
against them."  The paper cited the spokesman for the Muslim 
 
Brotherhood, Essam Erian, as having said that "the Islamists do not 
want to hear only nice words from Obama but also want to see deeds, 
because the trip would otherwise be useless...  The United States 
must completely withdraw from Iraq, stop the bombing in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, help the Palestinians get their rights, and give up 
their support for the dictatorship of the Egyptian president." 
 
¶4.   POTUS Visit to Germany 
 
Weekly Die Zeit argued in an editorial: "Barack Obama represents the 
new, the future: he incorporates the dream of shedding old skins, 
the dream of enlightenment and modern times.  But this politician of 
today and tomorrow has now imposed on himself a crash course in 
history during his visit to Europe on Friday and on Saturday. 
Nationalism and communism, tyranny and liberation, war and victory 
and peace and all this in two days--is that not a bit too much? 
Seen from a global policy point of view, Europe is for Obama only a 
'side theater."  His most important item on the agenda during his 
trip is his speech in Cairo.  It is almost unavoidable that Obama's 
policy of detente will create concerns and distrust in Israel.  The 
visit to the memorial site in Buchenwald, may demonstrate that the 
Untied States and its new president have not forgotten the Nazi 
crimes, and that they are aware of the history of the Holocaust and 
the precarious existence of the Israeli state.  Barack Obama does 
everything to disarm the conflicts of the present, and this is the 
important thing about his presidency:  the return to reason and 
normalcy." 
 
ZDF-TV's Heute-Journal showed German Government Spokesman Wilhelm 
saying that "the visit shows the interest in our country and the 
interest in close exchanges about important international topics." 
He added that Chancellor Merkel's relations with Obama are "good" 
and "cordial."  A think tank commentator noted that the focus of 
Obama's visits is on the Muslim world and that "Washington is aware 
of the fact that Germany will not be able to make major 
contributions prior to the upcoming national elections."  American 
Academy Director Gary Smith added that Obama wants to avoid the 
notion that he is interfering in the upcoming German elections. 
 
Berliner Zeitung editorialized: "German foreign policy is suffering 
from the election campaigns between Chancellor Merkel and Foreign 
Minister Steinmeier.  U.S. President Barack Obama's visit to Saxony 
and Thuringia is also an election campaign appointment for top 
German politicians.  The Chancellor will get the images at the side 
of Obama.  Her challenger prefers not to participate in the talks 
because he wants to avoid photos that show him, according to the 
rules of the protocol, as part of Merkel's entourage, not as an 
independent candidate for the highest German office." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine highlighted that "Obama's second visit to 
Germany as American President will again not take him to Berlin.... 
Some people believe this is a hidden political message by 
Washington." 
 
Berliner Zeitung carried a page on President Obama's visit to 
Germany under the headline "Obama meets Merkel and annoys 
Steinmeier," noting that Steinmeier decided not to go to Dresden 
because he would have seen Obama only with a group of people.  The 
U.S. delegation had rejected the idea of a one-to-one conversation 
due to the rules of protocol. 
 
¶5.   Guantnamo Prisoners 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung stated in an editorial:  "The latest 
improvement of conditions at the prison does not change the 
fundamental dilemma that prevails between barbed wire and the watch 
towers: for more than seven years, the majority of prisoners have 
been behind bars without any prospect for a prosecutor who will 
finally put them on trial and charge them with concrete crimes.  And 
there has been no hope for a judge who will acquit or sentence them. 
Prisoner number 78 was unable to tolerate this any longer and 
committed suicide.  Many men in Camp Delta have been waiting for a 
long time for their release, because their home regimes are 
suspected of torture and neither the U.S, nor its hypocritical 
allies in the far away Europe want to give them a chance for a new 
life.  But without a way out, even more prisoners will choose this 
way out." 
 
¶6.   Anniversary of Tiananmen Massacre 
 
L|becker Nachrichten concluded: "On the anniversary of the student 
protests, there is no glimmer of hope.  The events are a taboo. 
China's youth does not know anything about Tiananmen.  A new revolt 
cannot be expected.  It has turned out to be a great illusion that 
intensified trade with Beijing would initiate political change. 
Capitalist production and consumer fetishism primarily in the big 
cities were unable to shake the communist rule.  Even the Olympic 
Games last year, which western sports functionaries praised in an 
irresponsible way as a turn towards liberalization, did not move 
anything." 
 
In an editorial regional daily Rhein-Zeitung of Koblenz declared: 
"It is one of the most important questions in global history whether 
such a tough market economy that causes so many social distortions 
like the one in China can survive in the long run without democracy. 
 The soul of a westerner would say 'no,' while the bitter experience 
of the Chinese says 'yes.'  But if 1989 teaches us one thing, then 
it is that sometimes history takes a surprising course.  We should 
do everything possible that China witnesses such a change as it 
happened in the GDR in 1989." 
 
Regional daily Die Tagespost of W|rzburg noted: "Support for the 
oppressed church in China continues to be necessary.  But it should 
also be in the interest of the international community of nations to 
urge the Chinese government to reassess the protest movements of 
1989, release the student leaders who are still in prison and to 
call the responsible people for the massacre to account." 
 
¶7.   European Parliament Elections 
 
Weekly Die Zeit said in a front-page editorial: "Never before has 
another order created so much wealth and freedom for 500 million 
people, no other union of states has had such a great attractiveness 
that other countries at any cost want to join it.  But China and 
Russia put efficiency above democracy and have become important 
global players and compete with the EU because they are able to act 
faster and more recklessly.  A high voter turnout would give Europe 
the right thing at the right moment that others do not have: 
legitimacy." 
 
Regional Nordbayerischer Kurier of Bayreuth argued: "Hardly anyone 
knows the top candidates of the big parties.  Why is the political 
Europe so far away?  We do not want Brussels to tell us what we have 
to do, and, in this respect, the EU frequently lacks the necessary 
sensitivity.  Only a few people have any idea of how the complex 
structure of the EU with the Council of Europe, the European 
Commission and the European Parliament works.  On Sunday, when we go 
to the polls, we will find ballots with many strange names.  But 
Europe, the unknown country, needs well-known faces.  Then the 
people would turn to it." 
 
Tabloid Express of Cologne observed: "An opinion poll revealed that 
only a few Germans know the German candidates who will run in 
elections on Sunday.  Is this a boring election?  Unfortunately, the 
interest in the elections seems to be minor.  Almost 500 million 
people live in the euro zone, a vast union with a great 
attractiveness and by far more than a simple economic area.  The 
European Union stands for democracy and freedom.  Politicians, who 
laud Europe but continue to stick to national mindsets, are not the 
only ones who must be blamed for the fact that it has so little 
influence as a union of nations.  We, too, are called upon [to 
change this].  A high voter turnout would strengthen Europe more 
than all the nice soapbox speeches." 
 
Schwdbische Zeitung of Leutkirch pointed out: "It is up to the 
people to choose those who represent them [in the European 
parliament, EP].  And the higher the voter turnout, the greater will 
be the moral weight of the European Parliament.  If the Lisbon 
Treaty finally came into force, the EP would make a big step forward 
with respect to its influence.  That is why every citizen, who does 
not go to the polls forfeits a chance to decide about his personal 
circumstances surrounding his or her life." 
 
¶8.   UK Government Crisis 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine commented: "The opposition in the Lower House 
of Parliament is smelling blood and is calling for new elections. 
This is only logical given the Brown government's loss of authority 
and involvement of leading Labor politicians in the expense scandal. 
 Brown's resistance to call new elections is also logical because he 
and Labor are with their backs to the wall.  However, if the 
European and local elections turn out as the predictions say, if 
they are a disaster, then a reshuffle of the cabinet will not 
suffice to rescue Brown.  The days of the Prime Minister, who is 
turning ever more into a tragic figure of British politics, might 
indeed be numbered...  In the current crisis, Britain needs a 
government that can lead and does not languish." 
 
Die Welt noted that "Gordon Brown is experiences a serious crisis" 
and "Britain is seeing one of the most precarious phases in its 
history."  The editorial added: "The island is suffering from the 
weakest governments in a long time, and it will be taught a proper 
lesson in today's European and local elections....  Early elections 
might be the only way out [of the crisis.]  Soon, the Prime Minister 
will not be able to avoid them." 
 
A Frankfurter Rundschau editorial headlined "Facing the Collapse" 
remarked:  "These are dramatic days in London.  The government of 
the Labor Prime Minister is beginning to collapse.   Two top 
ministers have resigned within two days....  The embarrassing 
reports on self-enrichment of British parliamentarians have caused a 
giant quake that made the foundation of the government unstable." 
 
 
Regional daily Braunschweiger Zeitung noted: "Members of all parties 
in the House of Commons have enriched themselves at the expense of 
the taxpayer.  But now the time has come to settle political 
accounts. And the worst thing for Prime Minister Gordon Brown is 
that the British are called upon this Wednesday to vote for their 
representatives for the European Parliament.  This could become a 
black day for Labor.  It seems that the banking crisis and the 
shameless behavior of some managers have a political parallel in 
England.  It does not matter that the sums involved are very small. 
The moral depravity and the brazen unscrupulousness are the things 
that are so disgusting." 
 
 
KOENIG