09GUATEMALA538
ROGUE ELEMENTS OF GUATEMALAN MILITARY SELLING
Mon Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Embassy Guatemala
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGT #0538/01 1592235
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 082235Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7597
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCS E C R E T GUATEMALA 000538 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/07/2019 
TAGS: MARR PGOV PTER MCAP PREL PINR MOPS GT
SUBJECT: ROGUE ELEMENTS OF GUATEMALAN MILITARY SELLING 
WEAPONS TO NARCOS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 407 
 
Classified By: Political Officer George Mathews for reasons 1.4 (b.d) 
 
¶1. (S) SUMMARY.  In the wake of a recent deadly shoot-out 
between GOG anti-drug agents and Zetas, the embassy has 
received new information indicating rogue elements within the 
Guatemalan army are selling military-grade weapons and 
munitions to narcotraffickers.  The Embassy DAO has learned 
that 12 junior officers were recently relieved by their 
commanders for suspicion of selling armaments under their 
control to drug organizations.  The 12 officers have not been 
arrested, but were instead "sent home," while Guatemalan 
military intelligence (D2) continues its investigation.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) On April 24 agents from SAIA (Counternarcotics 
Analysis and Information Service) conducted a raid on a 
warehouse located 30 kilometers south of Guatemala City. The 
agents encountered a number of heavily-armed Zetas, the 
military arm of the Gulf Cartel, and the ensuing firefight 
left 5 SAIA agents dead.  Following the raid, GOG authorities 
confiscated  a large quantity of weapons, including: 11 light 
machine guns, a Light Anti-tank Weapon (LAW), 563 
rocket-propelled grenades, 32 hand grenades, 8 Claymore 
anti-personnel mines, almost 8,000 rounds of small arms 
ammunition, and 3 fully armored Suburbans. 
 
¶3. (S) NAS reports that senior officials in the Attorney 
General's office (MP) were receptive to allowing DAO and ATF 
personnel access to the weapons cache.  As a result of this 
access, DIA analysts were able to determine with a high 
degree of confidence that many of these weapons and munitions 
came from Guatemalan military stocks. For example, the 3,812 
rounds of 5.56mm ammunition, used by M-16s and other 
military-style assault weapons, were found sealed in 
packaging bearing the stamp of the Guatemalan military 
industrial facility (IMG.) 
 
¶4. (S) Senior Guatemalan military leaders ordered D2 to 
initiate an investigation into the sources of the Zetas' 
weapons and munitions.  In the course of their investigation, 
D2 determined that 12 junior military officers were likely 
involved in selling armaments to narcotraffickers. A number 
of the rocket-propelled grenades recovered following the 
April 24 shoot-out can be tied directly to weapons storage 
facilities under the control of these officers.  However, 
none of the 12 officers have, at this point, been arrested 
for their involvement in these activities.  (NOTE: As is 
standard practice in the Guatemalan military, these officers 
have not been prosecuted.  Rather they have been relieved of 
their positions and sent home.  In similar cases in the past, 
officers have not faced courts martial and were either 
allowed to retire or were quietly shifted to other 
assignments. Furthermore,  there is a high level of distrust 
between D2 and civilian law enforcement agencies, which makes 
any prosecution in the civilian legal system unlikely. END 
NOTE) 
 
¶5. (S) DAO reports that the senior leadership of the 
Guatemalan military has been fully supportive of efforts to 
determine if narcotraffickers are receiving weapons from 
Guatemalan military stocks. However, D2 has been much less 
supportive, claiming they are still investigating the matter. 
 They also have been hesitant to reveal significant details, 
such as the names of the 12 officers, what units they are 
assigned to, or where they are stationed. 
 
¶6. (S) On May 12, DAO spoke with Major General Abraham 
Valenzuela, the Guatemalan Minister of Defense, about the 
QValenzuela, the Guatemalan Minister of Defense, about the 
investigation. Valenzuela said he is very concerned about the 
matter and will ask President Colom to request that an 
outside agency, possibly the International Commission against 
Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG) investigate.  Valenzuela 
believes a small ring inside the Guatemala military is 
involved in the sale of arms to narcotraffickers.  However, 
Valenzuela did not comment on the number of officers 
involved.  He did say that he will do everything possible to 
see that the 12 officers implicated in the D2 investigtion 
are prosecuted.  He also offered to providethe names of the 
12 officers to the embassy so they can be prohibited from 
being issued visas to the United States. 
 
¶7. (S) COMMENT: The involvement of Guatemalan military 
officers in the sale of weapons to narcotraffickers raises 
serious concerns about the Guatemalan military's ability to 
secure its arms and ammunition.  The National Police (PNC) 
are already outgunned by the narcotraffickers, and now have 
to go up against weapons from Guatemala's own military 
 
stockpile.  While we are currently only aware of this 
isolated case, we will press Ministry of Defense officials to 
review its procedures for securing weapons and ensure the 
problem is not widespread.  The increased willingness of the 
Guatemalan military to punish corruption with vigorous 
prosecution would also send a strong message and preserve 
institutional integrity.  To further this goal, the embassy 
will press the GOG to refer this case to CICIG, with the 
expectation that high-profile prosecutions could deter others 
in the Guatemalan military from cooperating with 
narcotraffickers. 
Lindwall