09ISLAMABAD1425
PROPOSAL FOR THE FY 2009 JULIA TAFT FUND
Mon Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Islamabad
VZCZCXRO1222
PP RUEHLH RUEHPW
DE RUEHIL #1425/01 1801239
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291239Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3478
INFO RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0573
RUEHKP/AMCONSUL KARACHI 1920
RUEHLH/AMCONSUL LAHORE 7522
RUEHPW/AMCONSUL PESHAWAR 6470UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISLAMABAD 001425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PGOV AF PK
SUBJECT: PROPOSAL FOR THE FY 2009 JULIA TAFT FUND 
 
1.(U)  Embassy Islamabad proposes to use 2009 Taft Fund resources to 
support installation of water hand pumps in Barakai refugee camps in 
Swabi District in Pakistan's Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP). 
This is a one-time project proposal from the International Medical 
Corps (IMC) to increase the supply of clean water to Afghan refugees 
in the Barakai camps. IMC has been providing primary health care 
through Basic Health Units in both camps since 2003 with support 
from PRM.  Gaps in water provision in the Barakai camps were 
observed during a monitoring and evaluation visit by Embassy's 
Refugee Affairs Specialist, and community leaders highlighted the 
need for increased provision of clean water. IMC has been 
recommended for continuation of its health project in Barakai 
through a separate funding mechanism by PRM.  The proposed Taft Fund 
project will meet an identified gap not covered in that proposal. 
IMC works closely with the refugee community and, through Barakai 
camp committees, can promote sustainability of the project. 
 
Project Description 
------------------- 
 
2.(U)  IMC proposes to install 14 water hand pumps in pre-identified 
selected locations in the two Barakai camps.  Installation of hand 
pumps provides an indigenous low cost technology with no recurrent 
electricity expenses or other related maintenance and operations 
costs.  Once properly installed, the hand pumps can easily be 
operated and repaired by the local community without any external 
support. In addition, an IMC Community Mobilizer selected from the 
community will revive and activate the water user committees already 
established in the camps and, through these committees, will involve 
the beneficiaries in site identification, planning, monitoring, and 
proper maintenance of the hand pumps. The community will thus play a 
central role in the implementation of the project and ensuring its 
sustainability. 
 
3.(U)  IMC will train the water user committees in use and proper 
maintenance of the hand pumps.  According to IMC, the community has 
also indicated that it is ready to contribute in cash up to ten 
percent of the cost of installation of the hand pumps.  This 
contribution, which will be made by the households which will 
directly benefit from the pumps, will instill in the community 
members a sense of ownership and an increased interest in 
maintaining the hand pumps after the installation.  It will thus 
further ensure the sustainability of the initiative. 
 
4.(U)  IMC assures us that its engineers have checked with the 
Tehsil Municipal Administration (TMA) and irrigation department to 
ensure that pumps will have no significant effect on the water 
table.  They indicate that Swabi is among NWFP districts where water 
is in abundance.  Due to the presence of Tarbela Dam and extensive 
irrigation in the area, the water table in Swabi has been rising 
over the years.  The Barakai camps and surrounding areas also have 
significant numbers of trees and plants which also help in water 
retention. 
 
Justification 
------------- 
5.(U)  These hand pumps will benefit approximately 2,100 individuals 
and fill a gap in clean water provision caused by the steady 
increase in the Afghan refugee population in the camps and a 
resulting decrease in water pressure within the water supply 
systems. (The current population growth rate for Afghans in Pakistan 
is 3 percent/year.) 
6.(U)  The available water supply schemes do not adequately fulfill 
the needs of the over 50,000 people living in the two refugee camps. 
There are several sources of water at the camps. The main source is 
a piped water supply system with community water points, which are 
managed by the water user committees.  With an increase in camp 
populations over time, unauthorized connections to the pipes have 
decreased water flow and pressure such that people farthest away 
from the water source are barely able to get any water from this 
system. Some hand pumps and dug wells are in use in the camps to 
supplement the water supply system, but there are still parts of the 
camps where water availability is an issue. Refugees from these 
areas have to travel quite a distance to get water. 
7.(U)  With the decreased access to water supply, even if it is safe 
for drinking, residents conserve available water for drinking 
purposes only and therefore decrease water use for health and 
hygiene purposes, such as washing hands, clothes and dishes. 
Decreased access to water thus risks poor hygiene and sanitation 
practices potentially leading to diseases like diarrhea, scabies, 
tuberculosis and hepatitis A.  This project will help reduce the 
chance of disease.  The IMC strategy of encouraging community 
participation, requiring a cash contribution by refugees, and 
activating and building the capacity of the existing water user 
committees will help ensure that trained committees are responsible 
for taking care of the water pumps in the future and that the pumps 
are thus sustainable well beyond the project life.  Upon 
repatriation, the trained individuals can take with them the 
technology, knowledge and skills acquired in this project for use in 
Afghanistan. 
 
ISLAMABAD 00001425  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Budget 
------ 
 
8.(U)  IMC requests USD 19,945 to be spent as follows.  An expanded 
version of the budget is available. 
 
Budget Breakdown    Amount in USD 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Personnel cost      2,940 
Staff benefits        147 
Travel and per diem       300 
Supply and material costs  11,800 
Other direct cost       963 
                                  -------- 
Total Direct Costs    16,150 
Indirect costs      3,795 
          -------- 
Total Project Costs    19,945 
 
Implementing Organization 
------------------------- 
 
9.(U)  IMC, headquartered at 1919 Santa Monica Boulevard, Suite 400 
in Santa Monica, California, is a long-time implementing partner of 
PRM in Pakistan and other countries and coordinates its Pakistan 
country activities with UNHCR, government offices, and other NGOs. 
It is in compliance with PRM policy on, and has provided a signed 
copy of, the code of conduct of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee 
(IASC) on protection from sexual exploitation and abuse.  PRM 
currently funds two IMC projects (primary health care and 
gender-based violence awareness/protection) in Pakistan. 
 
Certification 
------------- 
 
10.(U)  If PRM approves this proposal and provides post with an 
allotment notice advising that funds are available for obligation, 
post certifies that it has the authority and capacity to award the 
grant to the intended recipient agency prior to the end of the 
current fiscal year. 
 
PATTERSON