09KABUL1547
IN DIRE NEED: A LOOK INSIDE THE MINISTRY OF
Tue Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO0483
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #1547/01 1671522
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161522Z JUN 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9488
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES PRIORITY 0110UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 001547 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL AF PHUM
SUBJECT: IN DIRE NEED: A LOOK INSIDE THE MINISTRY OF 
MARTYRS AND DISABLED 
 
¶1. On June 14 Deputy Minister for Martyrs and Disabled Suraya 
Paikan told polcouns her Ministry lacks resources to 
adequately serve Afghanistan's approximately 800,000 disabled 
people.  Priorities for the Ministry include conducting a 
survey of disabled Afghans, staffing and equipping the four 
existing disabled persons resource centers, establishing new 
resource centers, and harnessing the political power of 
disabled Afghans to support the government rather than become 
prey for insurgent recruiters.  Paikan said that neither the 
rest of the Afghan government nor the international community 
pays enough attention to her constituents and urged our 
financial and political assistance.  She also drafted a 
letter to Secretary Clinton further outlining her concerns 
(follows). 
 
The Disabled Community: Struggling to Survive 
---------- 
 
¶2. Paikan estimated there were 800 thousand disabled Afghans, 
many of whom were injured during the country's 30 years of 
war.  Many are homeless and most are desperately poor. As 
many employers will not consider hiring disabled people, many 
send their children to sell small items or beg in the street. 
 The government pays registered disabled people roughly 
twelve dollars a month.  It is an embarrassment, Paikan said, 
that our government dispenses this low a sum to people who 
were injured fighting for their country. 
 
¶3. Many of the disabled belong to one of 30 unions headed by 
former warlords and commanders.  Paikan said when she started 
working with the community approximately 11 months ago, the 
majority were anti-government and easy targets for insurgent 
recruiters, who were known to use disabled people to carry 
out suicide missions.  Paikan has gained people's trust by 
not ever making promises, because she knows she cannot 
deliver, and by speaking up to support rights for the 
disabled.  She emphasized that even the slightest government 
support could make a huge difference in where these 
economically poor but potentially politically powerful people 
place their support. 
 
¶4. Polcouns asked Paikan about the June 13 protest of a group 
of disabled people in Kabul near the Embassy.  Paikan said 
the leader of one of the 30 unions had informed her of the 
group's plans to speak out against the many barriers and 
blockades in the city. The union members told Paikan they 
were angry the barriers lessened their already decreased 
mobility. 
 
Priorities: Connecting Disabled People with Employers; 
Staffing and Equipping Resource Centers 
---------- 
 
¶5. Paikan identified her priorities as follows: first she 
would like to undertake a survey of the disabled community 
and enter basic demographic information, work history, and 
vocational capacity into a database.  This database would be 
used to connect employers with disabled job-seeking Afghans 
and as a resource for government planning and international 
donors.  Second she asked for financial assistance to staff 
and equip the four existing resource centers for disabled 
people.  The centers are currently just empty buildings. She 
is seeking resources to populate the centers with 
occupational therapists, vocational counselors, and 
rehabilitative equipment.  Paikan also requested funds for 
building, staffing, and equipping new resource centers. 
 
Comment 
--------- 
 
¶6. Embassy's political-military section transmitted to 
Washington a funding proposal "Strategic Support of 
Disabilities Sector to Reduce Recruitment of Disabled to 
Suicide Bombing Missions," requesting funding for the 
Ministry of Martyrs and Disabled.  The request would fund a 
handicapped accessible office, a small shelter, a resource 
center, and a microfinance support center.  We would like to 
re-voice our support for that proposal. The Ministry of 
Martyrs and Disabled is in a dismal state of repair.  Many 
disabled people that come to see Deputy Minister Paikan to 
inquire about services must navigate three staircases on 
crutches or be carried by relatives.  We will also continue 
to coordinate assistance efforts with other partners such as 
the International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC), which 
both care for and employ disabled Afghans. 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
Her Excellency Mrs. Hillary Clinton, Secretary of State of 
the United States of America: 
 
First of all I would like to congratulate you and President 
 
KABUL 00001547  002 OF 002 
 
 
Barack Obama on the spirit of democracy that permeated the 
elections in the United States of America.  It was inspiring 
to people all over the world. 
 
We are writing this letter on behalf of the people who have 
devoted themselves to providing us with independence and 
humanitarian freedom as we work to establish a democracy with 
a strong civil society component and growth opportunities. 
 
Why did we choose to write to you? First you are a woman, 
second you are a mother, and third you are a clever, patient, 
and sensitive politician.  In your trip to Afghanistan you 
gave a kind speech that inspired us to want to tell you our 
problems directly. 
 
In the first stage of U.S. involvement in Afghanistan, your 
government gave hope to Afghans with disabilities by 
highlighting the rights of Americans with disabilities.  We 
are disappointed, however, that we have not gotten as far as 
we would like due to a lack of facilities and assets to 
support Afghans with disabilities the way they deserve to be 
supported after so many years of war. 
 
We continue to lack rehabilitation centers and shelters for 
the homeless disabled.  A lack of inclusive education and 
social support has resulted in some disabled people having to 
beg for money, while others have been driven to narcotics 
addiction. 
 
We would like for you to push the U.S. to pay more attention 
to persons with disabilities and the families of martyrs in 
Afghanistan.  Your support will strengthen the programs in 
Afghanistan, which could follow the American lead and become 
an example of strong advocacy programs and a defender of the 
rights of disabled people in the region.  We would also like 
you to encourage other countries to support the most 
vulnerable groups in Afghanistan. 
 
We hope that one day, we will no longer have to witness the 
trials of the disabled to overcome the challenges of society 
long after they have overcome their own handicaps. 
 
Sincerely Yours, 
On behalf of Afghans with disabilities, 
 
Suraya Paikan 
Deputy Minister for Martyrs and Disabled Affairs of the 
Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled 
END TEXT 
 
 
 
EIKENBERRY