09MANAGUA603
NICARAGUAN GOVERNMENT RENEWS LEGAL ACTION AGAINST OPPOSITION
Wed Jun 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
R 172318Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4259
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
NSC WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000603 
 
 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC//WH/MSIEGELMAN 
TREASURY FOR SARA SENICH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2029 
TAGS: PGOV EFIN ECON NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN GOVERNMENT RENEWS LEGAL ACTION AGAINST OPPOSITION
 
REF: A. A. 08 MANAGUA 880 
     ¶B. B. 08 MANAGUA 450 
     ¶C. C. 07 MANAGUA 2446 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan for reasons 1.4 b & d. 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: A Managua judge announced on June 11 that he 
would hold hearings June 22-26 regarding accusations that 39 
people committed "crimes against the economy of the country, 
fraud, and influence peddling" in connection with the 2001 
government bailout of four Nicaraguan banks.  The list of 
those accused includes opposition leader Eduardo Montealegre 
and La Prensa President Jaime Chamorro.  Montealegre believes 
the government's case is intended to pressure him and his 
deputies in the National Assembly to support Ortega's top 
legislative priority, constitutional reform to perpetuate 
FSLN rule.  There also exists the possibility that 
Montealegre, if he is stripped of immunity and convicted, 
will have to chose between spending time in jail or fleeing 
the country.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Judge Julio Cesar Arias of the Fifth District Criminal 
Court of Managua announced on June 11, 2009, that he would 
hold hearings June 22-26, 2009, regarding accusations that 39 
people committed "crimes against the economy of the country, 
fraud, and influence peddling" in connection with the 2001 
government bailout of four Nicaraguan banks.  The list of 
those accused includes Eduardo Montealegre, prominent 
opposition leader and former Finance Minister, and Jaime 
Chamorro, President of the Board of Directors of "La Prensa" 
(center-right daily).  Also accused are former Finance 
Minister Esteban Duque Estrada, former Central Bank 
Presidents Noel Ramirez and Mario Alonzo, and many other 
current and former Central Bank and Finance Ministry 
employees. 
 
¶3. (U) Public Ministry Special Prosecutor Armando Juarez 
filed the case on July 7, 2008, on behalf of the government. 
The Ortega administration claims that during the Bolanos 
administration, when these bank bailouts were orchestrated, 
government officials conspired with employees of BanPro, 
BanCentro, and Banco de Finanzas (BDF) -- the banks that took 
on the failed banks' nonperforming assets -- to intentionally 
undervalue those assets.  As a result, Special Prosecutor 
Juarez claims that the Central Bank overcompensated these 
banks, with bonds known as CENIs (now called "bonos 
bancarios"), for these nonperforming assets.  Curiously, 
Ramiro Ortiz Sr., President of BanPro; Roberto Zamora, 
President of BanCentro; and Juan Sacasa, President of BDF, do 
not appear on the list of those accused. 
 
¶4. (C) Montealegre believes the government's case is intended 
to pressure him and his deputies in the National Assembly to 
support Ortega's top legislative priority, constitutional 
reform that would permit presidential re-election and create 
a semi-parliamentary system.  Montealegre told the Ambassador 
on June 15 that under no circumstances would he be bullied 
into supporting Ortega's ploy to perpetuate FSLN rule, which 
requires a super-majority of 56 votes (Ref C). 
Alternatively, Montealegre posited that the FSLN may be 
hoping he will flee the country to avoid arrest.  As a member 
of the National Assembly, Montealegre is immune from 
prosecution.  Should his immunity be lifted, he told the 
Ambassador he would not participate in the hearings and would 
challenge the government to compel his participation. 
 
¶5. (C) A simple majority of 47 votes is needed to strip a 
legislator's immunity.  Currently, the FSLN has 38 votes. 
However, two smaller groups, the Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance 
(ALN) -- Montealegre's former party, now led by his nemesis 
Eliseo Nunez -- and the Bancada for Unity (BUN) -- an FSLN 
front group comprised of ex-FSLN, ex-ALN and ex-PLC deputies 
-- have five and eight votes, respectively.  Both groups tend 
to vote with the FSLN, though sources claim the FSLN has to 
pay for each vote.  Combined, they have 50 votes, enough to 
strip immunity.  The Fifth District Court has already 
submitted a request to the National Assembly's Executive 
Committee to strip Montealegre's immunity.  Sources suggest 
that the committee, dominated by the FSLN and its allies, is 
prepared to take action on the request before recess begins 
on July 7, 2008. 
 
¶6. (C) Some local media have reported that ex-President 
Arnoldo Aleman's Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC) would 
vote with the FSLN to strip immunity, hoping to rid the PLC 
of their primary rival.  On June 12, PLC Deputy and Justice 
Committee Chair Jose Pallais told Poloff that he did not 
believe the FSLN would come up with the votes, because 
stripping immunity would threaten too many others. 
Currently, there are pending requests to strip two ALN and 
two PLC deputies of their immunity, for unrelated issues.  No 
one, he said, wants to shoot first, because there will be no 
stopping once it starts. 
 
¶7. (U) Meanwhile, bank officials confirm that the Central 
Bank continues to make payments on the CENIs, according to 
the terms that the Central Bank negotiated with BanPro, 
BanCentro, and BDF in June and July 2008 (Ref A).  The Ortega 
administration has ended calls for a repudiation of the debt 
associated with the bailout, which totaled $332 million when 
issued but has since been renegotiated several times (Ref B). 
 
¶8. (C) Comment: Ortega must be tempted by this opportunity to 
rid himself of his most credible political opponent. 
However, FSLN and allied legislators may not in the end vote 
to strip Montealegre of his immunity.  Instead, the 
accusations of wrongdoing have public relations value and may 
damage Montealegre's standing; he currently ranks at the top 
of all political polls.  In addition, the threat of 
prosecution remains valuable to Ortega in his efforts to keep 
pressure on all legislators as he seek to come up with six 
more votes for constitutional reform.  End comment. 
 
CALLAHAN