07AITTAIPEI164
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S ANTI-SATELLITE MISSILE TEST
Tue Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0016
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0164 0230711
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230711Z JAN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3821
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6256
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7485UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S ANTI-SATELLITE MISSILE TEST 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage January 23 on the dispute between the Presidential Office 
and the Taipei District Court over the "state secrets files" in the 
Presidential Office Allowance for State Affairs case, and on the 
debt-ridden Rebar Asia Pacific Group.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an op-ed piece in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
commented on China's recent anti-satellite missile test.  The 
article said China's move was aimed at expressing its displeasure 
with the United States' monopolization of space weapons development 
and to intensify its deterrence against U.S. and Japanese military 
intervention in cross-Strait conflicts.  End summary. 
 
"What Is the Satellite Killer for?" 
 
Professor Philip Yang of National Taiwan University's Department of 
Political Science opined in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 400,000] (1/23): 
 
"... China's move to launch an anti-satellite missile was 
significant in two major strategic aspects:  First, it was aimed at 
express [China's] displeasure with and its competitive attitude 
toward the United States' monopolization of the development of space 
weapons; second, it was meant to intensify its deterrence against 
U.S. and Japanese military interference in the conflict across the 
Taiwan Strait. ... Theoretically, U.S. spy satellites and the 
weather satellite that China has destroyed are of almost the same 
altitude, so there should be no difficulty for China to aim at U.S. 
spy and communication satellites.  Besides, the move to shoot down a 
satellite can also produce an impact on the anti-missile defense 
system developed by the United States and Japan.  In fact, there is 
no need for China to develop any large-scale space weapons; as long 
as it demonstrates that it has the ability and willingness to 
destroy satellites effectively, the United States will surely have 
scruples about China's attitude and actions. 
 
"When it comes to deterring U.S. and Japanese intervention in 
cross-Strait conflicts, China is clearly aware that future 
U.S.-China military conflicts will most likely be set off by 
cross-Strait issues. ... In the event of possible military 
intervention by the United States and Japan in conflicts across the 
Taiwan Strait, the Beijing authorities have long since started to 
demonstrate their military deterrence capability and status, 
including the deployment of mid-range missiles to deter U.S. carrier 
battle groups from coming to Taiwan's aid.  China's recent move to 
launch an anti-satellite missile was, in military terms, a way of 
so-called 'channel blocking' - namely, an attempt to daunt U.S. 
military assistance [to Taiwan]. ... 
 
"But the move to destroy a satellite with a missile will clearly 
produce a negative impact.  China will surely have to pay the 
serious political consequences.  First, the  image of peaceful 
development that China has endeavored to create over the past few 
years will be severely challenged, and the theory of the 'China 
threat' will prevail again, mainly because China's reluctance to 
make its military development 'transparent' has made  people 
suspicious of its motives.  Second, the United States will speed up 
[developing] anti-satellite killer facilities, which will likely 
result in a space weapons race among big countries, and the arms 
race in East Asia may well become the center of U.S. and Japanese 
military strategies.  Conservatives in the United States and Japan, 
on the other hand, were greatly encouraged [by such a development], 
which will create a new paradise for international arms and 
industrial manufacturers.  But it is unable to create a haven for 
security across the Taiwan Strait and peace in East Asia." 
 
YOUNG