07AITTAIPEI71
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S TRIP TO
Wed Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0071 0100851
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100851Z JAN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3675
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6177
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7409UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN'S TRIP TO 
NICARAGUA 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to focus 
their coverage January 10 on the insolvency crisis involving The 
Chinese Bank; on President Chen Shui-bian's transit of San 
Francisco; and on the personnel reshuffle currently going on in the 
KMT.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" ran a banner headline 
on page four that read "Bian Transiting San Francisco; No U.S. 
Official Greets Him at the Airport; Bian's [Activities] Are Limited 
in the Hotel."  In terms of editorials and commentaries, a news 
analysis in the pro-unification "Liberty Times," Taiwan's 
largest-circulation daily, commented on President Chen's transit of 
the United States.  The article said Washington's making things 
easier for Chen during his U.S. transit en route to Nicaragua sent 
out a clear political signal.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" also said "Chen's willingness to take the flight to an 
uncertain ally and fly the flag, so to speak, is the sign of a 
president who might just be beginning to fight back."  End summary. 
 
A) "Art of Transiting" 
 
Journalist Tsou Jiing-wen noted in an analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] (1/10): 
 
"President Chen Shui-bian has again set foot on the continental 
United States since more than a year ago and stayed overnight in San 
Francisco.  Prior to his departure, some complication took place 
during the negotiation process between Taiwan and the United States. 
 Given China's strategy to target and monitor [Secretary of State 
Condoleezza] Rice closely and [Washington's doubts] about whether or 
not Chen still retains his leadership, the chances were originally 
slim for Chen to stay overnight in the United States.  But the Blue 
camp's tardy response to the special arms procurement budget, which 
the United States cares about most, has more or less created some 
subtle chemical reactions to Washington's consideration of a 
balanced policy. 
 
"Chen, who has just passed the test of the Taipei and Kaohsiung 
mayoral elections at the end of 2006 but has yet to break free from 
the entanglements of the Presidential Office Allowance for State 
Affairs case, hopes to regain the high ground of a state leader that 
he previously enjoyed by using this diplomatic journey.  This is a 
political practice both Taiwan and Washington are well aware of. 
Prior to Chen's departure, the United States had watched closely 
whether his New Year Day's speech would 'go too far.'  It had also 
tried to figure out whether A-Bian, who is labeled as 'corrupt,' 
still remains in charge.  One can clearly see the United States' 
prudence [on this matter] under its strategic need to stabilize its 
relations with China. ... 
 
"Given AIT's smooth transmission of information, the distance 
between Washington and Taipei is actually just a few feet away.  Why 
was Ma Ying-jeou hijacked by James Soong?  Why is it the People's 
First Party that has been dominating the KMT's policies? 
Washington's patience [with the Blue camp] has long exceeded its 
limit.  Now that the Legislative Yuan's session is about to 
conclude, Washington is watching closely the KMT's next step!  At 
this moment, [Washington's move to] make things easier for A-Bian 
sends out a clear political signal.  Besides, A-Bian is traveling to 
Nicaragua, where a left-wing president has been elected; Bian's trip 
can also help stabilize the United States' backyard, so why not do 
him a favor at little cost to itself?" 
 
B) "Better to Stand up Than Await Death" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (1/10): 
 
"President Chen Shui-bian's trip to Nicaragua is not significant for 
which and how many stops in the US that Washington will allow this 
time, but rather as a reminder of Taiwan's bizarre diplomatic milieu 
and that Chen still has the energy to juggle being a stifled, lame 
duck president at home and a quixotic statesman abroad. ...  The 
risk for Chen is that he could look utterly inept if Nicaragua were 
to swap allegiance soon after the inauguration.  Given his 
difficulties at home, however, Chen could hardly be intimidated by 
such minor corrosion of his image.  If anything, Chen's willingness 
to take the flight to an uncertain ally and fly the flag, so to 
speak, is the sign of a president who might just be beginning to 
fight back." 
 
YOUNG