07AITTAIPEI98
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT BUSH'S IRAQ SECURITY PLAN
Mon Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0098 0152240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 152240Z JAN 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3727
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6206
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7438UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000098 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT BUSH'S IRAQ SECURITY PLAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
give extensive reporting and editorial coverage January 12 to the 
alleged violation of securities transaction regulations of the Rebar 
Asia Pacific Group.  News coverage also focused on President Chen 
Shui-bian's trip to Nicaragua and the trial operations of Taiwan's 
high-speed railway system.  The Chinese-language papers only gave 
limited coverage to President George W. Bush's Iraq security plan. 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's largest-circulation 
daily, ran a banner headline on page five that said "Bian Enjoys 
High Visibility and Has an In-depth Talk with U.S. Envoy at the 
Inauguration Ceremony of Nicaraguan President." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" called President Bush's Iraq policy a 
wild gamble, saying "he is using the United States' future as his 
stake."  A column in the pro-status quo "China Times" said there is 
nothing new in President Bush's new strategy on Iraq and that "(t)he 
Iraq issue can no longer be solved by using stopgap measures or 
applying palliative remedies."  End summary. 
 
A) "Bush's Wild Gambling" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang noted in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 500,000] (1/12): 
 
"... Bush's idea of sending 20,000 more U.S. troops to Iraq will 
definitely draw severe criticism.  But the consequences will be very 
serious if [the United States] withdraws its troops before it even 
seeks to stabilize the situation [in Iraq].  Bush actually has his 
reasons for sending in more troops before withdrawing them.  If 
[Washington] withdraws its troops now, not only will Iraq be 
devastated by a civil war, creating more pain and suffering, but 
Iran will also surely emerge big and strong; he Israel-Palestine 
crisis might get out of control; and Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia 
would be caught in a panic.  [Should this happen], the United States 
will lose its prestige, and its international status will nose-dive 
as well. 
 
"The Democratic Party condemned [Bush's] Iraq policy as worthless, 
but it also failed to come up with a viable alternative.  Former 
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is [now] viewed as the prime 
 
SIPDIS 
culprit responsible [for the worsening situation in Iraq].  But 
Rumsfeld's military strategy used to be very successful.  The 
question lies in the fact that the United States only knows how to 
win a war, but it has no idea how to occupy a country, let alone 
build democracy in other countries. ...  In the days when France was 
scrambling for spheres of influence in the Middle East, the 
Americans' sole interest in the region was oil.  Now Europe is 
concerned about nothing but oil, and the Americans want to take the 
Middle East into its sphere of influence.  Now is already too late 
[for Washington] to have regrets.  The Iraq issue is the key 
indicator of the United States' decline from prosperity.  Bush is 
engaged in unrestrained gambling with high stakes, and he is using 
the United States' future as his stake." 
 
B) "Such a New Strategy on Iraq" 
 
The "International Outlook" column in the pro-status quo "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] commented (1/12): 
 
"There is actually nothing new in President Bush's new strategy on 
Iraq.  If he pursues his policy, he will face a bigger failure.  The 
Iraq issue can no longer be solved by using stopgap measures or 
applying palliative remedies. ...  The Iraq issue is no longer a 
military issue now.  The war in Iraq has destroyed the country's 
social structure and economic development, and its originally barely 
satisfactory society is now full of hatred and confrontation. 
Iraq's economy, which used to be abundant in resources, was hit by 
the decline of its oil industry and unexpected interference of 
foreign forces, whereas its neighboring countries each harbor 
sinister schemes.  When Iraq is suffering from severe tribal 
conflicts, unemployment, and nationwide hunger, will the addition 
21,500 U.S. soldiers and USD1.2 billion worth of economic aid be 
able to solve its problems? ..." 
 
YOUNG