07BEIJING258
JANUARY 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING
Thu Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5483
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0258/01 0111218
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111218Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3715
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000258 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER IS CA SU CH
SUBJECT: JANUARY 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING 
 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the January 11 MFA press 
conference: 
 
-- The United States and China exchanged positions 
during the ongoing Natsios talks regarding Sudan. 
 
-- China has no position on the planned troop increase 
in Iraq. 
 
-- PM Wen met with Israeli PM Olmert and called for 
resuming dialogue between Israel and Lebanon, Syria 
and Palestine. 
 
-- China's firm counterterrorism actions protect both 
China and the world. 
 
-- MFA said a yet-be-released Human Rights Watch 
report criticizing China was prejudiced and 
politically motivated.  The Chinese government is 
working to realize a stable and developed society. 
 
-- China firmly opposes UNSC interference in Myanmar. 
 
-- China calls for the lifting of the EU arms sales 
ban and says PM Abe's comments to PM Blair that China 
is a threat are groundless. 
 
Natsios Meetings on Sudan 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  MFA Spokesman Liu Jianchao said in the regular 
January 11 press briefing that Special Presidential 
Envoy Natsios exchanged ideas with Chinese officials 
January 11 on the issue of Sudan, but avoiding 
answering a question as to whether or not China would 
put more pressure on Sudan.  Liu said the United 
States voiced its concerns and China elaborated its 
position during the talks, which are ongoing. 
 
No Position on Planned Troop Increase 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Liu was twice asked to clarify China's position on 
President Bush's planned troop increase in Iraq, but 
said only that China hopes for peace and stability, 
Iraqi self rule and the realization of human rights, 
democracy and economic development for the country. 
 
PM Wen Meets with Israeli PM Olmert 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  In responding to questions regarding Israeli PM 
Olmert's visit to Beijing and the PM's comment that he 
was pleasantly surprised with China's attitude toward 
Iran, Liu said that PM Olmert met with PM Wen Jiabao 
who called for Israel to resume dialogue with Syria, 
Lebanon and Palestine.  PM Olmert confirmed Israel's 
willingness to resume talks and consult with China on 
regional issues.  Liu said that China's position on 
Iran is clear.  UNSC Resolution 1737 reflects the 
international community's concern with Iran.  China 
opposes nuclear proliferation and hopes to resume 
talks to peacefully solve this issue.  Liu confirmed 
that the two leaders did not discuss Israeli arms 
sales to China. 
 
Overseas Uighurs and UN Inspectors in Western China 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5.  Asked for the MFA's comment on calls from overseas 
Uighur organizations to allow UN inspectors into China 
to confirm details of last week's raid of a suspected 
terrorist training camp near China's western border, 
Liu responded only that China's firm counterterrorism 
actions are in the interest of China and the world. 
He added that in this respect there can be no double 
standards as no country wants to see a "second Al- 
Qaeda" in China. 
 
Critical Human Rights Watch Report 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Liu said that the "so-called 'Human Rights Watch'" 
reports serve political ends and take a prejudiced 
attitude toward China, in response to a reporter's 
question about a HRW report, said to be coming out 
January 11, which claims China's human rights 
situation deteriorated in 2006.  Liu maintained that 
the Chinese government is trying to promote both 
social stability and a developed society.  China is 
willing to discuss human rights on the basis of 
equality and mutual respect, said Liu. 
 
 
BEIJING 00000258  002 OF 002 
 
 
China Firmly Opposed to UNSC "Interference" in Myanmar 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
¶7.  China firmly opposes interference by the UN 
Security Council in Myanmar, but endorses the 
international community's providing constructive 
support such as mediation efforts led by ASEAN and the 
special envoy of the UN Secretary-General, said Liu. 
He added that Myanmar's neighboring countries, ASEAN 
and the Non-Aligned Movement share an identical view. 
Liu stated that issues there are to be treated as 
"internal affairs" of Myanmar and that relevant 
parties should take cautious and responsible attitudes 
and avoid further complicating the situation in 
Myanmar. 
 
Comments on British-Japanese Summit 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  When asked to comment on reports from British PM 
Blair's meeting with Japanese PM Abe, Liu restated 
China's position that the European Union should lift 
its ban on arms sales to China and eliminate the 
political prejudice on which the ban is based.  He 
called groundless Abe's defense of the ban because of 
the threat posed by China and hoped that Japan would 
join with China to improve bilateral relations. 
 
Zeng Qinghong Presidential Rumors 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  When asked to comment on recent reports that Zeng 
Qinghong might be made the next president of China, 
Liu said that this is not within the purview of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to comment on.  He added, 
however, that the democratic system in China continues 
to improve. 
SEDNEY