07BEIJING86
JANUARY 4 MFA BRIEFING: IRANIAN ENVOY TO BEIJING,
Thu Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8794
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0086/01 0041207
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041207Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3508
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH
SUBJECT: JANUARY 4 MFA BRIEFING: IRANIAN ENVOY TO BEIJING, 
SIX-PARTY TALKS, TAIWAN, CHEN SHUI-BIAN VISIT, ISLAND 
DISPUTE, DEATH OF DPRK DIPLOMAT, DARFUR, PHILIPPINES 
SUMMITS, VISITS OF OLMERT, THAKSIN, FRANCE'S ROYAL 
 
¶1. Key Points at the January 4 MFA Press Conference were: 
 
-- Ali Larijani, special envoy to Iran President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad, will visit China January 4-5 to discuss the 
Iranian nuclear issue, bilateral relations and other issues 
of common interest. 
 
-- Although the MFA denies that the recent phase of Six-Party 
Talks was a failure, the spokesman said that the principle 
parties of the Talks must take more flexible and practical 
attitudes. 
 
-- China is gravely concerned about Japan-United States 
security discussions regarding the Taiwan Straits and firmly 
opposes any official exchange between the United States and 
Taiwan authorities. 
 
-- China holds that the erecting of territorial markers on 
the Paracel and Spratly Islands is completely within China's 
sovereignty. 
 
-- FM Li Zhaoxing's successful visit to multiple African 
nations this week is part of China's implementation of the 
8-Point Proposal agreed on at the Forum for China-Africa 
Cooperation held in Beijing in November. 
 
-- Former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin is rumored to be 
visiting China, Segolene Royal of France and Prime Minister 
Olmert of Israel plan to visit China and both Premier Wen and 
Foreign Minister Li will attend summit meetings in the 
Philippines later this month. 
 
Iran Envoy Carries Message to China 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. MFA Spokesman Liu Jianchao announced in the regular 
January 4 press briefing that Ali Larijani, special envoy to 
Iran President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, will visit China January 
4-5.  The two sides will discuss the Iranian nuclear issue, 
the bilateral relationship and other issues of common 
interest, Liu said.  Liu declined to give specifics regarding 
with whom Larijani would meet, saying only that the MFA will 
provide the media with up to date information during the 
visit. 
 
China Denies Failure of Six-Party Talks 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. In response to a reporter's question on Japanese Foreign 
Minister Taro Aso's comments that China failed to deliver 
success in the second phase of the Fifth Round of the 
Six-Party Talks as China previously promised, Liu said that 
the principle parties must take more flexible and practical 
attitudes.  Liu said that China made assiduous efforts 
recognized by the parties involved as well as the 
international community as a whole and will continue to play 
an active role.  It is clear to all that the Talks were not a 
failure and that important consensus was reached during the 
talks. 
 
Grave Concern over US-Japan Security Discussions, Chen 
Shui-bian's Travel to US 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶4. China has taken note of reports that Japan and the United 
States will discuss formulating a joint plan to deal with a 
possible crisis in the Taiwan Straits, Liu said, and regards 
the matter with grave concern.  Liu reiterated that Taiwan is 
an inseparable part of Chinese territory and that 
arrangements, discussions or consideration by Japan and the 
United States regarding Taiwan should respect, adhere to and 
honor the "one China principle."  China's relations with both 
the United States and Japan are currently improving so China 
hopes that both countries will do more in respect to this 
issue, said Liu. 
 
¶5. Asked for comment on reports that Chen Shui-bian would 
visit Nicaragua via the United States, Liu stated that China 
firmly opposes any official exchange between Taiwan 
authorities and the United States and that the relevant 
parties are quite clear on China's consistent position.  The 
United States should have a clear understanding of the nature 
of independence forces in Taiwan and honor its commitments to 
the one China principle and the joint communiques in word and 
in deed, Liu said.  He added that the United States should 
not send encouraging signals, should not provide a venue for 
Chen Shui-bian in the United States and should firmly and 
clearly oppose and confront Taiwan independence in the 
interests of the peace and stability of Taiwan and the 
overall state of China-United States relations. 
 
BEIJING 00000086  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
China Hopes Correct Measures Will Be Taken in Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6. On the issues of an expected address by Bush on possible 
troop increases in Iraq, Liu said that China hopes the 
parties concerned will take the correct measures to restore 
stability in Iraq and to give the Iraqi people a happy and 
stable life. 
 
Markers on Paracel and Spratly Islands 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. The Paracel and Spratly Islands and the adjacent waters 
are within the indisputable sovereign territory of China, 
said Liu when asked to comment on Vietnam's statement that 
China's erecting of territorial markers on the islands 
violates Vietnam's national sovereignty.  Liu noted that 
there is both historical and legal basis for China's claim, 
namely the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Seas, China's 
1992 Ordinance on Territorial Sea and Contiguous Areas and 
China's 1996 Declaration on the Baselines of Territorial Sea. 
 
China Sends Condolences to the DPRK 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked for China's reaction to and details of the death of 
DPRK diplomat Paek Nam-sun and what effect the event could 
have on the Six-Party Talks, Liu said the DPRK has released 
relevant information to the international media and that both 
State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan and Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing 
have respectively sent their condolences.  Liu stated that 
China appreciates Paek's joint efforts to increase friendship 
and cooperation between the two countries and that China is 
still willing to work with others in the Six-Party Talks and 
push forward with negotiations. 
 
Darfur Peace-Keeping Forces 
--------------------------- 
 
¶9. Asked about China's role and view toward its participation 
in peace-keeping forces to be deployed in Darfur, Liu said 
that China is happy to see the positive developments in the 
Darfur issue over recent months and will continue to play a 
constructive and positive role in working with the parties 
concerned. 
 
Hong Kong Journalist Reportedly Sent to Labor Camp 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶10. Asked for comment on reports that Hong Kong Journalist 
Ching Cheong has been sent to an education-through-labor camp 
after being tried on changes of espionage, Liu said that the 
competent authorities have already released information 
regarding this issue, which is not within the MFA's 
jurisdiction.  Liu added that Ching's sentence would be 
handled in accordance with the law. 
 
Debt Relief, FM Li's Visit to Equatorial Guinea 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶11. Liu declined to give specifics when responding to a 
reporter's question on China's cancellation of Equatorial 
Guinea's debt ahead of Foreign Minister Li's recent visit to 
the African nation.  China is currently implementing the 
8-Point Proposal agreed on in the Forum for China-Africa 
Cooperation held in Beijing in November, said Liu, adding 
that FM Li's successful visit to Africa has resulted in 
multiple agreements and specific projects.  Liu did not have 
details regarding debt relief. 
 
Israel PM to Visit 
------------------ 
 
¶12. Prime Minister Ehud Olmert of Israel will make an 
official visit to China January 9-11 at the invitation of 
Premier Wen Jiabao.  As a major principle party to the Middle 
East situation and a permanent member of the UN Security 
Council, China's exchange of views with Israel will promote 
and help the Middle East peace process.  The 15th anniversary 
of official state-to-state relations will also be celebrated 
at a concert which PM Olmert and State Councilor Chen Zhili 
will attend.  Asked if China would invite the Prime Minister 
of Palestine to visit China to promote the peace process, Liu 
said such a visit could be arranged when the two sides deem 
it necessary.  In response to a reporter's suggestion that 
China has ignored the Palestinian government in visits to the 
Middle East, Liu said that China has supported the just cause 
of the Palestinian people and has played a constructive role 
in the Middle East peace process. 
 
BEIJING 00000086  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Premier Wen and FM Li to Attend Philippines Summits 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶13. Liu announced that Premier Wen will travel to the 
Philippines January 13-16 to attend the Second East Asia 
Summit, Tenth China-ASEAN meeting, Tenth ASEAN-plus-Three 
meeting and will chair the Seventh Northeast Asian Leaders 
Trilateral Meeting, followed by an official state visit at 
the invitation of President Arroyo.  Foreign Minister Li will 
attend the China-ASEAN Foreign Ministers Meeting, the 
ASEAN-plus-Three Foreign Ministers Working Luncheon and the 
East Asian Foreign Ministers Working Luncheon in the 
Philippines.  FM Li will also chair the full session of the 
Northeast Asian Foreign Ministers Trilateral Meeting. 
 
Segolene Royal of France to Visit China, Thaksin Visit Rumored 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶14. French Presidential Candidate Segolene Royal of the 
Socialist Party will visit China January 6-9 with a 15-member 
delegation to discuss bilateral relations and other issues of 
mutual interest.  China hopes to further deepen relations 
between France and all parties of France, including the 
Socialist Party, and to push forward the development of 
strategic relations between the two countries, Liu said. 
Asked if former Prime Minister of Thailand Thaksin Shinawatra 
was currently visiting China, Liu said that he did not know 
any details of Thaksin's travel nor if he was in China, 
although Liu did confirm that Thaksin has a valid visa. 
SEDNEY