07CASABLANCA10
WOMEN'S NGO SAYS LAW CHANGED, NOT PRACTICE
Wed Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0010/01 0101423
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 101423Z JAN 07
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7560
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2848
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0727
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0234
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3682
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2211
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 7821
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 1971
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0508UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000010 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958 
TAGS: ECON PHUM PGOV PREL MO
SUBJECT: WOMEN'S NGO SAYS LAW CHANGED, NOT PRACTICE 
 
REF: 06 RABAT 02189 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Volunteers and staff members of the NGO Union for 
Women's Action say that while Morocco's new Family Code has brought 
some change, its laws are not followed consistently in practice. 
Reasons cited include the inclination of some judges to ignore new 
statutes, the unwillingness of certain elements of society to accept 
change, and the lack of a sufficient awareness campaign.   The 
organization believes these issues can and should be addressed, but 
lacks the resources to pursue its initiatives.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
UNION FOR WOMEN'S ACTION 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) On December 14, 2006, CG and econoff met with Casablanca 
representatives of the Union for Women's Action (l'Union de l'Action 
Feminine or UAF), an NGO that promotes women's rights, and provides 
counseling and training to battered women.  Started in 1983 as the 
March 8 Movement, after the date of International Women's Day, the 
organization became official in 1987.  It now has thirty-two branches 
in Morocco, and is headquartered in Rabat. 
 
¶3. (U) About nine women joined the meeting at UAF's SOS Annajda 
Center, a counseling facility in Casablanca.  The group included 
several staff members, as well as several doctors and lawyers who 
volunteer their time and services to help the center's clients.  The 
women counsel victims of violence, and the lawyers among them follow 
court cases and arrange mediation sessions for couples who cannot 
afford to bring their cases to court. 
 
¶4.  (U) UAF also offers literacy and professional training for women. 
 According to one staff member, the center began to notice in 2004 
that most victims of violence did not have money to support 
themselves and their children.  This realization led to the creation 
of a center to train women in computer skills, embroidery, hair 
dressing and other skills that would enable them to become 
self-sufficient.  The center estimates that it assisted about 400 
women in 2004 and 2005, and about 150 in 2006, and demand remains 
strong. 
 
---------------------------------- 
SLOW IMPLEMENTATION OF FAMILY CODE 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) While the women agreed that recent changes to the Moudawana, 
or Family Code, have had an impact, they were quick to detail 
implementation shortcomings.  To begin, they described the problem of 
judges who ignore the new code and continue to authorize polygamy or 
marriage for young girls.  They emphasized that judges have 
significant power to do as they please, and some flout new 
provisions, such as divorce, that the Moudawana supports.  Citing 
another example, the women explained that although the new Moudawana 
allows judges to issue restraining orders against abusive spouses, 
they frequently do not do so when the need arises.  As one woman 
aptly put it, the text is there, but enforcement is not. 
 
¶6. (U) Annajda Center volunteers and staff acknowledged that segments 
of Moroccan society do not accept the Moudawana's changes.  They 
attribute this in part to Morocco's high illiteracy rate, which 
approaches seventy-four percent in some areas.  They also feel that 
the state did not put enough effort into publicizing and explaining 
changes in the law.  They struggle to combat the perception that the 
new code is a law against men, rather than a law for the family. 
 
--------------------------- 
SUGGESTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) UAF representatives had several suggestions for how to put 
changes to the Moudawana into practice.  They advocate not only 
training judges, but also a far-reaching awareness campaign to inform 
Moroccans of what the changes actually mean.  They would also like to 
see demonstrations against ideas that undercut the Moudawana.  The 
movement to revise the Family Code met with opposition from the time 
it was initiated in 1992, and still faces resistance from Islamists 
and conservative elements of society. 
 
¶8. (U) While the women believe changes to the Moudawana are 
comprehensive, they see room for improvement. As the law currently 
stands, a mother is not always considered the guardian of her 
children in case of divorce.  This often complicates legal matters, 
for example when a father's signature may be required.  In addition, 
a mother cannot pass her nationality on to her children if she 
marries a foreigner.  Issues of inheritance also need to be 
addressed.  Perhaps the biggest change the women desire is more money 
and better infrastructure to implement the Family Code's new 
provisions. In a city of four million people, Casablanca does not 
have the financial or human resources to meet families' demands for 
social services. 
 
¶9. (U) When asked what they considered priorities for UAF's 
Casablanca branch, the women at the Annajda Center put full-time 
staff at the top of their list.  They currently rely heavily on 
volunteers, and would like to have their own staff lawyers and social 
workers.  They would also like to open a shelter for abused women. 
The Annajda Center in Rabat has a shelter that can accommodate up to 
forty people, but UAF runs no such facility in the larger city of 
Casablanca. 
 
¶10. (SBU) COMMENT: The women who work at UAF's Annajda Center in 
Casablanca, whether as staff members or volunteers, are impressive 
for both their professional qualifications and their dedication to 
UAF.  Their ideas about how to help women in Morocco are based on 
first-hand experience, and are well-conceived.   For example, they 
view training for judges as vital to putting the family code into 
practice, and would like to open a shelter for battered women in 
Casablanca, where such facilities are lacking.  UAF's support for 
women's rights and the new Family Code dovetails with recent Mission 
reform efforts in these areas, and their on-the-ground perspective 
underscores the importance of continuing to provide such 
organizations with resources to pursue their initiatives.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
GREENE