07DAMASCUS50
Syria/Iraq, Syria/Australia, Syria/US, Syria/UN, Bush's
Tue Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0050/01 0160823
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 160823Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2795
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6504
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4284
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2891
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7459
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1507
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4849
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1067
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7191UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000050 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Iraq, Syria/Australia, Syria/US, Syria/UN, Bush's 
Iraq Strategy, Al-Hariri Investigation (1/12-15) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers over the weekend reported the visit to 
Damascus by Iraqi President Jalal Talabani, beginning on Jan. 14, 
the first such visit in three decades.  President Talabni received a 
warm welcome in Syria. He was received by and met with President 
Asad.  Talks during the meeting dealt with bilateral relations 
between the two countries on all levels.  Both leaders stressed 
their keenness to improve joint relations in all domains.  President 
Asad expressed Syria's readiness to help Iraqis achieve national 
reconciliation and establish their country's unity, safety and 
stability, stressing Syria's full support for the ongoing political 
process in Iraq.  For his part, Iraqi President Talabani hailed 
Syria's stances towards Iraq, noting that "Syria has never withheld 
any help for Iraq." 
 
Papers on Jan. 15 reported that Former US President Jimmy Carter 
called upon the US administration to commence a dialogue with Syria 
and Iran on Iraq and other issues in the region, underlining that 
such a dialogue may enable all sides to understand one another 
better and lead them to a joint vision.  In a special interview 
broadcast on Jan. 14 by al-Jazeera television, Carter said he hoped 
that an international conference on Iraq would be held soon with the 
participation of all its neighbors, in addition to several 
international decision-making capitals and international 
organizations.  He underscored the necessity of preserving Iraq's 
unity and said he considers the recommendations of the 
Baker-Hamilton commission a good background for reaching a solution 
in Iraq. 
 
Papers on Jan. 14 reported that United Nations SecGen Ban Ki-moon 
stressed that the UN was fully committed to a peaceful, 
comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict on all tracks, 
on the basis of UN resolutions 242 and 338.  Ki-moon's remarks came 
during a meeting with Syria's Permanent Envoy to the United Nations, 
Dr. Bashar al-Ga'afari, who extended to him President Asad's 
congratulations and best wishes on assuming his new post as UN 
chief.  During the meeting, Mr. Ga'afari confirmed UN responsibility 
for the Arab-Israeli conflict, calling for a comprehensive 
settlement on the basis of the Madrid terms of reference, the 
land-for-peace principle and relevant UN resolutions. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad and Iraqi President Talabani reiterate the 
importance of consolidating Syrian-Iraqi ties and relations between 
the brotherly people of the two countries.  President Asad:  We 
support the political process in Iraq.  President Talabnai:  We owe 
Syria a lot and we will not forget its favors" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 1/15) 
 
"Vice President Shara to Dr. Meredith Burgmann, Chairman of the New 
South Wales Senate:  Foreign interventions are behind tension in the 
region. Burgmann discusses with Shara reopening an Australian 
Embassy in Damascus" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/12) 
 
"Former US President Jimmy Carter calls for opening dialogue with 
Syria and Iran" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/15) 
 
"United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon supports a 
comprehensive solution for the conflict in the Middle East" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/14) 
 
"Contrary to US policy, European political moves demand furthering 
the peace process in the region" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/14) 
 
"Spain suggests that Arab countries join the Quartet. Rice supports 
moderate Arab countries.  Hanieh:  Rice's visit to foil Palestinian 
legitimacy" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/13) 
 
"Russia and Iran call for reviving the peace process:  The 
Netherlands:  No peace in the region without Syria" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/13) 
 
"The Al-Sader movement rejects Bush's new strategy in Iraq. 
Restrictions regarding US targeting of religious figures is removed" 
 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/13) 
 
"Democrats describe the new US strategy in Iraq as not representing 
the will of voters.  A Republican Senator:  The new US strategy in 
Iraq is the biggest mistake since the Vietnam War.  Member of the 
Baker Commission depicts the new US strategy in Iraq as very 
dangerous.  US Senator Reed:  A decision might be passed opposing 
the plan.  Observers:  the new US strategy is a coup d'etat against 
the Baker-Hamilton report.  Russia:  A device to be used in internal 
political competition in the US.  French daily 'Le Monde':  The US 
strategy in Iraq is doomed to failure.  British daily 'the 
Guardian':  The US strategy is a wrong adventure" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/12) 
 
"Former officer at the US National Security Agency:  The Israeli 
Mossad assassinated Lebanese PM al-Hariri" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 1/14) 
 
"Hasan Nasrallah, SecGen of Hizbollah, wonders:  What is the secret 
behind US love for the al-Seniora government?  Nasrallah:  The 
International Tribunal is to settle accounts and not to unveil 
killers" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/15) 
 
"A draft letter at UN Security Council demanding that Serge 
Brammertz, new chief of UN Investigating Commission, unveil names of 
countries that failed to cooperate with his committee" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/14) 
 
"Observers:  Russia's demand to unveil countries that failed to 
cooperate with the international investigation into the killing of 
al-Hariri has embarrassed America and France.  The unconstitutional 
government persists in its violations" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
1/12) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------------- 
 
"A Caricature Scenario of a Flaring Crisis" 
 
---------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(1/13):  "It is as though the destiny of nations were a commercial 
deal!  This, simply, is how the US Administration, which is 
rebelling against international law and all other laws and norms, is 
dealing with the countries and nations of the world. 
 
"In the House of Representatives yesterday, and just before honoring 
the region with her visit, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice 
appeared before the world to defend the new war strategy that 
President George Bush laid out.  She repeatedly used the word 
'bargain', as if we were in a cheap 'bazaar' or auction.... 
 
"With an envious ability, Rice installed herself -- and this is her 
job -- as an advocate of the devil and a stanch defender of the 
heavy stick and the language of steel, fire, and aggression, not 
only in Iraq -- where the administration of the Zionized 
neoconservatives wants to send over 20,000 additional troops -- but 
also in the entire world, especially the Middle East.... 
 
"Syria is lucky this time:  Rice drew our attention to the fact that 
President Bush needs the approval of Congress if he decides to 
invade Syria!  Let us leave her with her illusions and wild 
imagination, on which she heavily relied in giving her answers.... 
 
"It is ludicrous that Bush laid out a caricature scenario in case 
the United States eases its pressure on Iraq:  The extremists will 
control oil sources. Iran will manage to possess weapons of mass 
destruction.  And American national security will face unlimited 
threats, and every American citizen will be endangered!  What is 
this rare intelligence and strategic farsightedness, that is based 
on illusions, probabilities, and fortunetelling...? 
 
"We no longer pin any hope on a late American awakening or on a 
change in the conduct of the Bush administration.  This 
 
administration is a totally hopeless case...." 
 
----------------- 
 
"Bush... Whereto" 
 
----------------- 
Hanan Hamad, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(1/13):  "Bush's new strategy for Iraq shows that he is going ahead 
with the invasion plan, injecting new blood into its veins, even if 
the whole world, including the United States, opposes him.  Indeed, 
the strategy is inclined to expand this invasion. 
 
"What is now happening in Somalia, and the warnings to Syria and 
Iran, constitute an important indication.... In addition to the 
intention to blame Iraqis later for the possible failure of the 
strategy, Bush's plan was accompanied by a new wave of deception for 
the American people themselves, who taught their president an 
unforgettable lesson in the recent election.  He said that the 
American forces are engaged in a battle that will determine the 
course of the global war on terror and the future of American 
national security.  In this, he repeats the same tune that seeks to 
frighten Americans and offers an unsuccessful justification for his 
rejection of the Baker-Hamilton recommendations and his failure to 
heed the clear message that the Americans sent him through the 
Congressional elections...." 
 
------------------------ 
 
"In the Wrong Direction" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Muhammad Khayr al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (1/12):  "President Bush's new strategy for Iraq is 
doomed to failure because it will produce nothing other than more 
mistakes and disastrous results.... 
 
"Bush's new strategy has nothing new except its characterization as 
new.  With its endeavor for an open stay in Iraq over an unspecified 
period and for the continuation of the war and the sacrifices, as 
Bush said in his explanation, and with its declared threats to Syria 
and Iran, the strategy is an extension of the previous Bush 
strategies with which he began the war on Iraq, strategies that 
resulted in major mistakes that the US president could not but 
concede and take responsibility for.  This means that he continues 
to move in the wrong direction without considering the grave 
consequences of this approach for the future of American interests 
and the reputation of his policy, which has hit rock bottom, and 
without paying attention to the victims of this approach among the 
American and Iraqi peoples." 
 
-------------------- 
 
"The Will of Iraqis" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Samir al-Shibani, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(1/13):  "President Bush failed to offer a reasonable formula to 
break free from the Iraqi quagmire.... On the contrary, the US 
President went too far with the language of force and weapons, a 
language that has proved impotent over the past four years.... 
 
"Iraqis alone, through their national unity and understanding of 
true collective participation in the management of a united Iraq and 
their categorical rejection of the occupation, can steer their ship 
toward the shores of safety.  Neither Bush's new strategy nor his 
unveiled democracy can challenge the will of the Iraqis, which has 
proved throughout history its ability to defeat the old and new 
Hulagu." 
---------------------- 
"Where Is the Secret?" 
----------------------- 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
 
(1/14):  "Syria has always cooperated with the investigation 
commission into the assassination of former Lebanese PM Rafiq 
al-Hariri but rejected attempts to politicize the investigations.... 
 
"Serge Brammertz, Chief of the Investigation Commission, confirmed 
Syria's cooperation with the commission and at the same time 
complained that 10 countries refuse to cooperate with him and 
respond to his requests.  What was the result?  Have the 14 February 
forces, the [Sa'd al-Hariri-led] Future Current, Washington, and 
Paris demanded that these 10 countries cooperate with Brammertz?  On 
the contrary:  The 14 February forces are silent.  And not only did 
Washington and Paris remain silent on the failure of these countries 
to cooperate, they also rejected the call to name these countries. 
This proves that there is a secret they want to keep, a truth they 
do not want to appear, an involvement by governments and 
intelligence services they do not want exposed, and political 
targeting and a certain course they do not want changed...." 
Corbin