07DAMASCUS58
Syria/Iraq, Syria/Israel, Syria/Ecuador, Rice Visit, Iraq,
Wed Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0058/01 0171241
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171241Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2806
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6511
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4291
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2898
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7466
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1514
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4856
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1074
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7198UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Syria/Iraq, Syria/Israel, Syria/Ecuador, Rice Visit, Iraq, 
Lebanon, Somalia (1/17) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  For a third consecutive day the Syrian press continued 
to report extensively on Iraqi President Talabani's visit to Syria. 
Headlines reported that President Asad and Talabani held a closed 
meeting on Jan. 16, during which they reviewed ways to develop 
relations between the two countries in all fields.  They also 
reviewed the results of meetings between Syrian and Iraqi officials 
to develop bilateral relations.  Talks focused on the best means to 
achieve Iraqi national rec 
onciliation, based on the unity of Iraq -- 
land and people -- and its independence and territorial integrity. 
President Talabani also met on Jan. 16 with VP Shara;  Assistant VP 
Mohammed Nassif and Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Faisal Miqdad also 
attended. 
 
Papers also featured an official statement by the Syrian Foreign 
Ministry denying a report published by Israeli newspaper Haaretz on 
Tuesday Jan. 16 about secret contacts between Syria and Israel.  The 
source, answering a question by the Syrian Arab News Agency (SANA), 
stressed that such information is "categorically unfounded and 
baseless." 
 
On Syrian-Ecuadorian relations, papers reported that newly 
inaugurated President Rafael Vicente Correa Delgado received 
Information Minister Mohsen Bilal on Jan. 16.  President Delgado 
hailed Syria's stances and important role in the Middle East, 
pointing to the joint goals and interests connecting the Arab and 
South American nations. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad and Iraqi President Talabani review development of 
bilateral relations and achievement of Iraqi national 
reconciliation.  The two Presidents stress the importance of Iraq's 
national unity and sovereignty" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/17) 
 
"Syrian Foreign Ministry:  News reports on contacts with Israel are 
categorically unfounded and baseless" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
1/17) 
 
"Ecuador's President Correa Delgado receives Information Minister 
Bilal:  Syria's role in the Middle East is very important.  Bilal: 
The meeting was very warm" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/17) 
 
"Sudanese envoy heads to Beirut soon.  Lebanese workers stage a 
sit-in in front of the Ministry of Commerce.  Popular rejection of 
the reform paper" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/17) 
 
"Israeli Chief of Staff Dan Halutz resigns as a result of Israel's 
defeat in Lebanon" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/17) 
 
"Four US soldiers killed in Mosel.  More than 200 Iraqis killed and 
injured in explosions at al-Mustansrieh University" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/17) 
 
"A second US aircraft carrier heads to the Gulf.  Russian defensive 
missiles to Iran.  Ivanov:  No sanctions against Tehran" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/17) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------- 
 
"From Heart to Heart" 
 
--------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (1/17)  "Perhaps what we heard from Jalal Talabani 
yesterday is the best proof that Syria's position was, and still is, 
appreciated by the Iraqi brothers.  Although he passionately 
expressed his love for Syria and said he is heavily indebted to it, 
Talabani undoubtedly reflected satisfaction with Syrian policy and 
eagerness to  build once again the best reciprocal relations to 
serve the two countries and fraternal peoples.... 
 
"Syria has all along been saying that it wants everything good for 
Iraq and stressing the need for a timetable for the withdrawal of 
the foreign forces from Iraq, as this would bring stability to the 
country.  Syria is pained by the shedding of every drop of Iraqi 
blood.  It is very concerned with this fraternal people and 
interested in Iraq's unity and stability and the success of the 
political process and national reconciliation in the country. 
"On this fraternal and pan-Arab basis, Syria believes that the 
solution to the problem in Iraq must be political and come from 
within Iraq.  Syria is ready to help the Iraqis achieve national 
reconciliation, as Walid al-Mu'allim said yesterday.  This is the 
only debt that the Iraqis owe Syria and the constant Syrian demand 
from the Iraqi brothers.  Nothing would delight Syrians more than 
seeing the crisis of Iraq resolved and a new page in Iraq's history 
turned within the process of Iraq's return to the Arab fold." 
 
--------------------- 
 
"A Hotbed of Tension" 
 
--------------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, said (1/17): 
 "US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's visits to the region have 
become a source of real concern, as she devotes her efforts to 
activating hotbeds of tension in the region rather than advancing 
the peace process.... 
 
"Whenever Palestinians come close to agreement on a national unity 
government, Rice comes to bring the situation back to point zero, or 
even below point zero.... 
 
"Rice comes also to incite countries of the region one against the 
other and divide them into moderates and extremists.  This keeps the 
region in a state of tension...." 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Only for Listening" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Ghazi al-Dada, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(1/17):  "Condoleezza Rice, who came to the region with an empty 
diplomatic bag and only to listen to the parties, as she said, made 
it clear that the United States will continue to isolate HAMAS and 
the Palestinian government even though she knows very well that this 
means isolating and punishing the entire Palestinian people, the 
majority of whom elected HAMAS to the government democratically.... 
 
"Rice did not hide the fact that her country is supporting one 
Palestinian team against another to stoke strife among the 
Palestinians.... 
 
"Perhaps the only, or at least the most important, objective behind 
Rice's visit, is to muster support for Bush's new strategy in Iraq, 
although this objective was wrapped by the phrase 'I came only to 
listen.'  The US Administration does only the things that serve its 
interests and the interests of Israel and their common plans in the 
region.  Any thing else is not worth thinking about...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
"Washington Has to Bear Consequences of its Acts" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Hamed Abu-Sa'id, a columnist in government-owned Tishrin, wrote 
(1/17):  "The joy of Washington and Addis Ababa after their joint 
and swift military victory over the Islamic Courts forces in Somalia 
has not been completed....[O1] 
 
"The reported attacks suggest that the Somali national resistance 
has begun its field action against the Ethiopian-American presence, 
while the Islamic Courts are reorganizing themselves to liberate 
 
their country, supported by all those who oppose the American 
presence.... 
 
"The war might extend to neighboring countries.... 
On the pretext of fighting terrorism, the United States ignited the 
conflict in the Horn of Africa to change the balances of power there 
and control oil sources and roads in the Arabian Peninsula, the Gulf 
countries, and Africa.  It, therefore, has to bear the consequences 
of this mad escalation.  The next days might hold many surprises for 
Americans and Ethiopians." 
 
Corbin 
 
 
[O1]This says that the joy is not completed.  Don't you mean that 
the victory hasn't been completed?