07DAMASCUS38
Syria/Spain, Syria/Indonesia, German Aid to Iraqi
Thu Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0022
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0038/01 0111100
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111100Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2777
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6497
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4278
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2884
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7453
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1501
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4842
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1061
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7185UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000038 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Spain, Syria/Indonesia, German Aid to Iraqi 
Refugees, Somalia, Bush's Iraq Strategy, Lebanon (1/10) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Jan. 10 reported Vice President 
Farouq al-Shara's meeting with Mr. Miguel Lawrance, First Assistant 
Secretary of the Spanish Socialist Party of Catalonia, who 
 
SIPDIS 
emphasized Syria's right to restoration of the Golan and condemned 
the current policies based on siege, isolation and non-dialogue, 
which cannot lead to any solutions for problems of the region.  Mr. 
Shara emphasized Syria's commitment to return of the occupied Golan 
in accordance with international resolutions.  He hailed the role 
played by Spain to push the peace process forward in the region. 
Both sides discussed the faltering peace process and the importance 
of activating efforts to revive it.  In a statement to SANA, the 
Spanish official said "We denounced any attempt to isolate Syria, 
because her role is active and basic to realization of a just and 
comprehensive peace, and we clarified the mistake committed by the 
US in occupying Iraq." 
 
Papers reported that Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono 
received a letter from Syrian president Asad on the situation in the 
Middle East and the latest developments in Palestine, Lebanon and 
Iraq, as well as the growing relations between the two countries and 
the importance of enhancing them.  The letter was handed to 
President Yudhoyono by Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Faisal 
al-Miqdad in a meeting in Jakarta on Jan. 9.  President Yudhoyono 
stressed his country's support of Syria's legitimate demand for 
restoration of the occupied Golan.  He also emphasized the 
importance of Syria's pivotal role in the region under the 
leadership of President Asad. 
 
Papers also reported that the German Government donated 500,000 
Euros to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) to 
support aid programs for Iraqis living in Syria and Jordan.  A 
statement issued by UNHCR said that the aid will be spent on Iraqis 
who departed their country since the war on Iraq in 2003 and live in 
Syria and Jordan. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Vice-President Shara, Foreign Minister Mouallem and Speaker of the 
People's Assembly Al-Abarash discuss the Middle East peace process 
and bilateral relations with the Spanish Socialist Party delegation" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 1/10) 
 
"President Asad sends a letter to Indonesian President Yudhoyono on 
latest regional developments.  Indonesian President underlines his 
country's support of Syria's positions and its right to restoration 
of the occupied Syrian Golan" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/10) 
 
"German aid to Iraqi refugees in Syria and Jordan" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 1/10) 
 
"President Bush announces today the dispatch of additional troops to 
Iraq" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 1/10) 
 
"Washington slides again into the Somali quagmire. Bloody US 
assaults against northern Somalia.  US [aircraft carrier] Eisenhower 
ready for military intervention" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/10) 
 
 
"Lebanese reject the Paris 3 conference.  Workers' General Union's 
strike enhances the popular sit-in" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
1/10) 
 
"Malaysia rejects US sanctions on one of its companies after 
allegations that it sold weapons" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/10) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------- 
 
"The Fireball" 
 
-------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
 
(1/10):  "The instigative and rigid voices in the Palestinian arena 
went too far in their reactions and threats.... Many people were 
shocked when they heard these instigators making threats, and they 
hoped the threats were made against the Israeli occupation, not 
against this Palestinian party or that, because the problem was and 
will always remain the occupation, which is engaged in a daily 
aggression against the Palestinian people.... 
"Intra-Palestinian differences allowed Israel to continue its 
aggression and evade all its obligations.  Attention has shifted 
from the Israeli occupation and its hostile practices to the 
Palestinian differences and their dimensions and possibilities, as 
if the victory of this Palestinian party or that would solve the 
problem.... 
 
"Israel is playing the role of direct and indirect inciter and 
detonator through a series of positions, practices, and hints.  When 
its incitements fail, or its political options go bankrupt, it turns 
to aggression.  When the aggression fails, it applies pressure 
through the positions of some international parties.  It throws the 
fireball in all directions because every loss on the Palestinian 
side, by any party, is a gain for it...." 
 
-------------- 
 
"The Red Line" 
 
-------------- 
 
Ghazi al-Dada, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(1/10):  "Israel is the only winner from a Palestinian civil war.... 
Palestinian infighting results from foreign causes, not from 
political differences among Palestinian factions.... 
 
"The current Palestinian crisis, which is still swinging between 
signs of breakthrough and signs of escalation, is a result of purely 
Israeli and American causes, essentially the unjust siege that has 
been imposed on the Palestinian people since HAMAS's victory in the 
legislative elections.... 
 
"Israel, in cooperation with the American partner, is up to its ears 
in the intra-Palestinian dispute.... Ending the occupation must be 
the main concern for every Palestinian.... Palestinians' main battle 
is against Israel.... Their battle is not against each other, no 
matter what the reasons for their differences.  We therefore hope 
that Palestinians will overcome their current crisis without losses, 
as they have overcome previous crises, so that they will not render 
free services to Israel -- something they definitely do not want to 
do...." 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"Change in Course, or Method?" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
Umar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (1/10):  "We do not expect President Bush's new strategy 
to solve the problems that his administration has created in the 
region.... Indications are that President Bush will not adopt the 
Baker-Hamilton Committee recommendations to address the various 
issues of the region, such as Middle East peace, withdrawal from 
Iraq, and the end of the occupation.  Rather, he plans to send more 
troops to Iraq.  As for the other issues of the region, President 
Bush's strategy is not likely to change the policy of interference 
in Lebanon and support for Israel's terrorism.... 
 
"The problem is that the Bush administration does not want to listen 
to others or heed the advice of Americans who have visited the 
region and seen its problems firsthand or the American citizens who 
have became tired of Bush's repeated promises of victory.... 
 
"After a policy that was full of mistakes and that proved useless on 
all levels, President Bush's new strategy is supposed to be one of 
reconciliation with the world, particularly the Middle East, but 
this does not appear to be the case...." 
 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Catastrophic Clues" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Sa'id Musallam, a political analyst in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
said (1/10):  "Most analyses note the serious dimensions of the new 
appointments in American political and military posts, especially as 
related to Iraq.... 
 
"We do not know what other changes and strategies the US 
Administrating has in store.  The talk about sending 30,000 more 
troops to Iraq is now very common. The policy of recklessness 
continues.  The team of hawks is not turning any attention to the 
proposals and recommendations that called for pursuing a policy of 
correction and dialogue.  The best optimists expect major follies, 
bringing disasters and tragedies upon many parts of the world, 
especially our region...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
"Liberating Iraq Depends on Iraqi People's Unity" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
Ibrahim Zu'ayr, a political analyst in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (1/10):  "The United States executed Saddam Hussein to deepen 
the sectarian sedition and escalate the internecine fighting between 
the Shiite and Sunni brothers.... 
 
"Every nationalist in Iraq must fight for the independence of Iraq 
and for expelling US invaders from their country.  This requires 
national unity and awareness that colonialists always work to ignite 
civil wars, as this serves their interests and enables them to 
rule.... 
 
"To save Iraq, the Iraqi people must be united and all guns must be 
directed toward their American enemies and their supporters.  The 
future and destiny of the Iraqi people are linked to the achievement 
of this great objective because it is the only thing that guarantees 
Iraq's freedom and independence." 
 
Corbin