07KHARTOUM144
AEC Plenary Minutes - Jan. 15, 2007 Meeting
Wed Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3171
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0144/01 0310415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310415Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5946
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID PREL SOCI SU
SUBJECT:  AEC Plenary Minutes - Jan. 15, 2007 Meeting 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The Assessment and Evaluation Commission (AEC) held 
its 16th plenary session in Khartoum on January 15.  AEC Chair 
Vraalsen sounded a pessimistic note regarding the slow pace of 
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), noting 
that implementation lagged far behind prescribed timetables.  The 
National Congress Party (NCP) representative renewed a complaint 
against the Chairman for not clarifying that his remarks at a 
December 10 press conference were personal, and did not reflect the 
views of the AEC.  Vraalsen stated that he had met with the Chairman 
of the Southern Sudan Commission for Census, Statistics, and 
Evaluation, and understood that the pilot census had been delayed as 
funds had not yet been transferred to it by the Ministry of Finance. 
 Vraalsen offered to clarify the nature of his remarks in exchange 
for a promise by the NCP representative to raise the census funding 
transfer with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
¶2.  The Power Sharing Working Group reported that a January 15 
meeting held to discuss the electoral process gained the 
participation of several small political parties, but that the NCP 
had elected not to participate.  The NCP representative argued that 
inviting guests had not been agreed to and that the issue was 
premature as it was still subject to emerging laws.  With respect to 
the Working Group on Security Arrangements, the spokesman asked that 
a plenary session be held with the Joint Defense Board, and 
suggested the AEC be briefed on the status of redeployment of Sudan 
Armed Forces, common military doctrine, Joint Integrated Units, and 
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration.  Regarding the Three 
Areas Working Group, the SPLM representative remarked that the focus 
had so far been on Abyei, rather than also on Southern Kordofan and 
Blue Nile States.  On wealth sharing, a meeting will be held in the 
near future to address the status of the Land Commission, the 
National Petroleum Commission, the Fiscal and Financial Allocating 
and Monitoring Commission, the status of transfers to the states, 
the currency conversion, and oil companies.  Regarding the currency 
conversion, which commenced on January 9, (update septel), a 
Norwegian technical expert noted that only 10 percent of the 
banknotes had so far been printed, and that donor contributions were 
below expectations.  An SPLM representative, Minister for 
Humanitarian Affairs Kosti Manibe, noted that the denominations so 
far released were too high in value to encompass many of the 
business transactions made in the South.  Finally, Vraalsen 
circulated a draft document listing the various CPA commissions, 
committees, councils, and other governmental institutions at the 
national level, indicating their mandates, intended dates of 
establishment, actual dates of commencement, and meetings held.  End 
summary. 
 
¶3.  The draft minutes from the January 15 AEC plenary meeting are as 
follows: 
 
(Begin text) 
 
Draft minutes from 16th AEC Plenary Meeting held on January 16th, 
2007: 
 
The meeting was attended by representatives from Italy, Ethiopia, 
Kenya, NCP, the Netherlands, Norway, SPLM, U.K., U.S., and observers 
from EU - Germany, A.U., L.O.A.S., and the U.N. 
 
The Chairman wished everyone a Happy New Year and hoped that 2007 
would be better for the AEC and the CPA. 
 
He introduced the Ethiopian Government's Special Envoy to the AEC, 
Dr. Kinfe Abraham. 
 
NCP requested amendments to the draft minutes of the 15th AEC 
Plenary Meeting held on December 12th, 2006. They would be submitted 
in writing to the Secretariat. The EU representative asked for 
clarification regarding the National Land Commission. 
 
The Chairman presented his report for the period December 12th, 2006 
to January 16th, 2007.  He emphasized the lack of progress in the 
implementation of the CPA. "CPA implementation was not moving 
anywhere near the timetables agreed upon." 
 
Additionally, he reported on a meeting with the Minister of 
Presidential Affairs, who had conveyed the deep displeasure of the 
Presidency regarding the Chairman's statement on security and oil in 
his Press Conference held on December 10th, 2006. 
 
The Chairman reported on his meeting with H.E. the President of GOSS 
in Juba.  The importance of holding an IGAD Summit regarding the 
implementation of the CPA was discussed, as was the appointment of 
an envoy from Kenya to the AEC. 
 
He also reported on his meeting with the Chairman of Southern Sudan 
Commission for Census, Statistics and Evaluation (SSCCSE) who had 
stated that the pilot project for the census had been postponed for 
the second time.  This was due to delays in the disbursement of 
funds by the Central Ministry of Finance. 
 
In this connection the Chairman suggested the following: He would 
issue a statement to the national media.  He would repeat that 
 
KHARTOUM 00000144  002 OF 002 
 
 
statements made during his Press Conference held on December 10th 
2006 were "his personal view" and not that of the Commission 
collectively.  In return, the NCP representative would contact the 
Ministry of Finance regarding the U.S. $1 million which is holding 
back the launch of the Pilot Census. 
 
Reports from working groups were presented. 
 
The Coordinator for the Power Sharing Working Group presented his 
report.  He explained that the meeting held to discuss the 
"Electoral Process" on January 15th, 2007, was attended by 
representatives of political parties in the NCRC.  NCP had chosen 
not to attend.  The NCP responded by explaining that:  1) although 
holding a meeting on the "Electoral Process" had been discussed in 
the Working Group earlier, the issue of inviting guests was not; and 
2) the wisdom of such a meeting at this juncture was questionable, 
since laws are still being shaped.  Voicing opinions by the parties 
was not of significant value for the Commission in "assessing and 
evaluating."  New information would not emerge from such a general 
debate. 
 
Several Commission members differed explaining that listening to the 
different voices was informative and useful in a transparent and 
inclusive "democratization process."  The Coordinator of the Working 
Group plans to call another meeting on the Electoral Process.  U.K. 
expressed a wish to invite political parties outside NCRC. 
 
The Coordinator for the Security Arrangement Working Group reported 
that OAGCC had not yet met.  The Chairman requested the Coordinator 
to schedule a Plenary with the JDB.  The Commission should be 
briefed on the redeployment of SAF forces, the status of the common 
military doctrine, the situation for the JIUs, as well as 
developments in DDR.  NCP stated that the joint JIU training program 
was approved for 2007. 
 
The Coordinator for the Working Group on the Three Areas reported 
that the draft minutes for the meeting held in December 2006 awaited 
finalization with the NCP.  The Coordinator hoped to meet NCP within 
a few days.  SPLM drew attention to the fact that much time was 
spent on Abyei, ignoring the other two areas.  He proposed that the 
Working Group visits the two states or alternatively invite the 
respective "governors" to brief the Commission on developments in 
their state.  The Chairman supported this proposal. 
 
The Coordinator for the Wealth Sharing Working Group informed that a 
meeting would be held soon to update on the status of the Land 
Commission, the National Petroleum Commission (NPC), the Financial 
Allocations Commission (FFAMC), transfers to the states from GONU, 
the currency and oil companies engaged in production areas. 
 
Norway commented in connection with the currency issue that:  The 
new currency was launched officially on the 2nd anniversary of the 
CPA in Juba.  However, printing was not implemented to the extent 
that IMF deemed necessary prior to a launch.  Only 10% was in place 
out of the stipulated 50%. Norway planned to call a meeting to gauge 
the amount which donors were willing to contribute to the printing 
of the new currency. 
 
SPLM commented on the denominations which were coming into 
circulation.  Coins had to be produced very urgently and not allow 
the new "single pound" to operate as the lowest denomination in the 
market.  Otherwise inflation would result.  Additionally, clear and 
easily digestible information on the new currency was necessary. 
 
NCP praised the Governor of the Central Bank and his deputy for 
launching the "new currency" on schedule. However, donors had not 
fulfilled commitments and the GONU became obliged to provide funding 
from its stabilization fund.  Norway commented that donors and the 
IMF had commended the Central Bank.  Donors were waiting for the 
necessary endorsement from IMF to release funds. 
 
In closing the Chairman reminded the members that they had been 
requested to send in comments by January 10th on "Preliminary Draft 
on CPA Commissions, Committees..." which was circulated last 
December.  NCP suggested that this would be done in the relevant 
Working Groups. 
 
The 17th Plenary Meeting was scheduled for February 15th, 2007.  A 
reminder will be sent out. 
 
(End text) 
 
¶4.  Note:  On January 18, the local press, including English 
language, government-affiliated Sudan Vision carried a brief 
statement from Vraalsen stating that he wished to repeat that his 
statement made during the December 10 press conference was his 
personal view and did not represent the views of the AEC.  End 
note. 
 
POWERS