07TUNIS17
TUNISIAN REACTION TO SADDAM EXECUTION
Wed Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXRO8254
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHTU #0017 0031857
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031857Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2416
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS TUNIS 000017 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/FO - GRAY, NEA/MAG, NEA/I 
NSC FOR ABRAMS AND O'SULLIVAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IR TS
SUBJECT: TUNISIAN REACTION TO SADDAM EXECUTION 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The GOT Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued 
an official statement on December 30 expressing its "deep 
regret" that Saddam Hussein was executed on the first day of 
Eid al-Idha.  This sentiment was echoed in private 
conversations; Tunisian contacts who passed the Eid holiday 
watching al-Jazeera coverage of the execution described 
feelings of anger, frustration, and humiliation, both with 
the judgment and its timing.  Meanwhile, Tunisia's main labor 
union held a demonstration in downtown Tunis, with protesters 
glorifying Saddam as a "martyr" and denouncing US 
"murderers."  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On December 30, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
released an official statement through the Tunisia-Africa 
Press Agency (TAP, www.tap.info.tn).  The statement, like 
most issued by the GOT, reflected Tunisia's traditional 
moderate position on pan-Arab issues, and called for 
stability and non-violence in Iraq.  It also expressed deep 
regret for Saddam's execution on the Eid al-Idha. 
 
Begin Text of MFA Statement (TAP translation): 
 
After the execution of former Iraqi president Saddam Hussein, 
Tunisia voices deep regret that this execution took place on 
the day of Eid el-Idha.  Tunisia considers the implementation 
of this sentence of this day is a serious blow to the 
feelings of the Muslim people, at a time when they celebrate 
a sacred religious feast. 
 
While reiterating the need to preserve the unity, integrity 
and stability of Iraq, Tunisia expresses hope that this 
execution will not result in an escalation of tension and 
violence and that the brotherly Iraqi people will achieve 
national conciliation, as part of understanding and concord. 
 
End Text. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Many private Tunisians expressed their surprise on 
the morning of December 30, when they learned of Saddam's 
execution in the early hours of the first day of Eid.  News 
coverage of the execution began as Tunisians proceeded to 
morning prayer, setting a muted tone to Eid celebrations that 
continued through the January 1st New Year's holiday.  As one 
woman summarized, the execution "spoiled the whole holiday." 
Given Tunisia's largely secular and pan-Arab nature, most 
Tunisians denounce the US "occupation" of Iraq and voice 
quiet support for Saddam and the Iraqi resistance.  These 
feelings were fueled by the timing of the execution, which 
was viewed as a joint US-Shia effort to humiliate Sunni Arabs. 
 
¶4. (U) Tunisian media reaction to the Saddam execution 
reflected ire over the holy day timing and sectarian tones of 
the execution, doubts about the present and future of the 
Iraqi state and frustration at the perceived American hand in 
the mess.  Some writers, however, expressed little regret at 
the dictator,s passing.  The following selections from 
Tunisian newspapers in recent days reflect the range of views: 
 
-- "No one in the world should doubt that Saddam,s 
execution, as well as his trial, were completely American 
decisions even if implemented by Iraqis.  It is true that 
Americans and their allies killed Saddam as a body but they 
built him up as a symbol and a martyr...which will push the 
resistance movement forward." 
 
-- "The real defeat is not of Saddam, who finally only got 
what he deserved, nor of his...Western accomplices, who 
hypocritically congratulate themselves on his execution...it 
is rather of the Iraqis who have paid for (Saddam,s) 
crimes...and who continue to pay under his former 
accomplices, who have today become his  honorable, 
executioners." 
 
-- "Saddam,s execution on the Eid holiday is considered a 
disgrace to all human values in the world...an insult by Bush 
to all Muslims..." 
 
¶5. (U) According to press reports, the Tunisian General Labor 
Union (UGTT), which is known to include Bathist sympathizers 
and pan-Arabists, held a demonstration in downtown Tunis 
January 2, with "hundreds" protesting Saddam's hanging. 
Among those said to be present was Ahmed Seddiq, a Tunisian 
lawyer who was on Saddam's defense team.  The demonstrators, 
who assembled outside the labor union's headquarters, 
reportedly carried portraits of Saddam and chanted "Martyr!" 
interspersed with denunciations of US "murderers." 
GODEC