09ANKARA957
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6696
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0957/01 1871304
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061304Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0114
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0146
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5951
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3970
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7402
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7290
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3870
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000957 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, JULY 6, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
President Gul Holds Phone Conversation With U.S. President Obama 
AA, Sabah, Milliyet ,Hurriyet,  CNN Turk, and others:  President Gul 
held a phone conversation with President Obama on Sunday. 
Mainstream Hurriyet says that the phone conversation was held on the 
eve of Obama's trip to Moscow.  According to the White House, the 
two leaders focused on bilateral and regional issues, including U.S. 
relations with Muslim societies in the world, the situation in the 
Caucasus, Turkish-Armenian relations, and the Upper Karabakh issue. 
Mainstream Sabah reports the phone conversation took place "hours 
before Obama's visit to Moscow." Mainstream Milliyet writes, "Before 
(Obama) Hit The Road, He Spoke with Gul," to discuss "relations 
between Turkey and Armenia," and also Gul took the opportunity "to 
thank Obama for his Cairo speech to the Muslim world." Mainstream 
Haberturk notes, "Before Obama departed, he spoke to Gul." 
 
Sabah Reports on A New Plan to Eliminate The PKK 
Saturday's mainstream Sabah reveals a plan by the U.S., Iraq  and 
Turkey for the liquidation of PKK.  Rights and Freedoms Party 
(Hak-Par) leader Bayram Bozyel talked to Sabah on the issue 
following his contacts in the region.  According to Bozyel, the 
U.S., Turkey and Iraq have agreed on a four-step plan.  The first 
step in the plan is the evacuation of refugees living in Mahmour 
camp in northern Iraq.  10,000 refugees in the camp will be brought 
to Turkey.  After the evacuation, PKK members from the Quandil 
mountain will settle in the Mahmur camp and will be disarmed there. 
The PKK leaders will be given Iraqi passports and will be sent to 
European Countries, mainly to Norway.  Parallel to this process, 
Turkey will prepare a new solution package which will contain 
amnesty for some PKK members as well.  Bozyel said the meetings 
between Turkey, the U.S. and Iraq continues and passports for the 
leaders are being prepared.  Stressing the importance of the roles 
of Barzani and Talabani at this process, Bozyel said "There are 
ongoing meetings with the PKK in different levels which the state 
keeps secret.  The process of issuing passports and transferring the 
PKK leaders to Europe is easy.  But, Turkey should announce the 
package soon.  The PKK leaders also support this plan." 
 
Three Alternatives for President Gul 
Mainstreams Aksam and Sabah report that all eyes are turned to 
President Gul for the approval of a bill allowing civilian courts to 
try military personnel.  Aksam highlights President Gul's options - 
he could approve the law but at the same time urge the government to 
make arrangements for the trial of top military officials; he might 
veto some of the provisions in the draft to demand arrangements 
giving immunity to the Chief of the General Staff and high-ranked 
military commanders; or Gul might approve the bill and state that 
the bill is in harmony with the constitution. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Controversial Bill 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal Radikal: "TGS has submitted to 
President Gul its objections to the bill for the trial of army 
officials by civilian courts. According to the military, the law 
contradicts the constitution. Second, the military believes that 
passage of the law will lead to clashes between the military and the 
civilian judiciary. In addition, the military believes its 
intelligence activities will become vulnerable to investigations 
launched by civilian prosecutors in connection with ungrounded 
complaints.  This in turn might pave the way for the politicization 
of the army. The military is concerned that army officials might 
become target of ungrounded complaints similar to the complaint that 
led to the arrest of Col. Cicek." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "According to the army 
sources the plan for fighting fundamentalism was not drafted in the 
General Staff by military officials. They say that the plan was 
drafted by civilians. This is why they need the cooperation with the 
civilian judiciary to find out the truth about the plan. The arrest 
and release of Col. Cicek is related to a complaint letter written 
to the Istanbul prosecutor. Because of this letter, he was summoned 
 
ANKARA 00000957  002 OF 003 
 
 
as a suspect linked to the Ergenekon network." 
 
Armenian FM Nalbandyan Comments on the Border Opening 
ANKA News Agency:  Armenian Foreign Minister Nalbandyan said over 
the weekend, "Borders with Turkey can open once an unconditional 
agreement is reached in the direction."  Nalbandyan also noted, "We 
expect Turkey to take the practical steps" but noted Turkey "has 
not" taken such steps. 
 
Chief Negotiator on Turkey's EU Membership 
AA: In response to Greek FM Bakoyannis' remarks to the Greek press 
that, "Greece has supported Turkey's EU membership from the outset 
but Greece's thesis is clear.  Besides those eight chapters there 
are other issues on the table and Turkey should fulfill its 
obligations," Turkey's Chief EU negotiator Egemen Bagis said "Turkey 
is aware of its responsibilities on the road to the Union.  Also 
Turkey has the right to expect its interlocutors to fulfill their 
responsibilities and liabilities."  In addition, Bagis noted "In 
contrast to our Greek friends, Cyprus is not the only item on our 
agenda." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-US and Turkey- Iran Ties 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "While Turkey is dealing 
with critical discussions regarding military-civilian issues, 
Washington has two different opinions on Turkey. One side dislikes 
the AKP and sees a significant danger that Turkey is headed toward a 
more and more Islamist state. The second group is slightly more 
positive and they believe they need to win Turkey back after it was 
lost during the Bush administration. This group works closely with 
Obama and Clinton. This camp is primarily concerned with Turkey's EU 
bid and democratic reforms, not Islam. They think the only way 
forward for Turkey is the EU harmonization process and Turkey should 
not waste time. Turkey should follow the EU reform path." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "As international interest 
grows regarding the situation in Iran, there is active disinterest 
towards Iran by Turkey. It seems that Turkey will follow a low 
profile policy towards Iran in order to prevent any political 
tension. Following President Gul's visit to Tehran, Ahmedinejad's 
commented, "Tehran doesn't want Turkey to mediate between the U.S. 
and Iran," and the Iranian leader noted, "The only choice for Turkey 
is to sit quietly and hope that developments in Iran won't affect 
Turkey negatively." 
 
An Historic Summit in Moscow Launches A New Beginning for 
U.S.-Russia Relations 
Media feature U.S. President Barack Obama's visit to Moscow as the 
lead international story, and particular emphasis is placed on the 
hope that the summit will improve relations between the U.S. and 
Russia.  Islamist-oriented Zaman writes, "Obama's long-awaited visit 
to Moscow begins today." Mainstream Milliyet headlines, "This Is The 
Time For Mutual Understanding," and the paper notes, "Obama's visit 
to Moscow will begin a new period for relations between the U.S. and 
Russia."  Mainstream Haberturk headlines, "The Summit To End 
Bush-ism and Putin-ism," as the summit marks, "A new era in 
relations between Russia and the U.S." Mainstream Sabah reports in 
"A New Start With An Historic Summit," that ,"Obama wants to bring a 
new beginning to U.S. relations with Russia," as "the two countries 
will discuss a number of issues in what is seen as 'an historical 
opportunity.'"  Meanwhile, leftist Taraf comments in "A Nuclear 
Agreement Is Still Not Ready," that, "the two countries are still 
working to reach an agreement that will decrease their nuclear 
armament suspicions."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak also has a 
different take on the issue in "Obama Shows His Official 'Target,'" 
during his Moscow visit, which the paper comments is Iran. 
 
The U.S. Won't Stand in Israel's Way 
Media draw attention to U.S. Vice President Joe Biden's comments in 
Iraq regarding the U.S. stance on a possible Israeli military strike 
against Iran.  Mainstream Vatan interprets Vice President Biden's 
 
ANKARA 00000957  003 OF 003 
 
 
remarks as, "a green light" to Israel under the headline, "If Israel 
Wants To Strike Iran, (The U.S.) Will Not Oppose It." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines, "A Green Light from Biden To 
Israel for An Iran Operation."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet calls 
Biden's remarks, "Promises from VP Biden that are creating 
anxieties."  Mainstream Haberturk headlines, "The U.S. Won't Say 
Anything to Israel If They Strike Iran."  Mainstream Sabah notes, 
"The U.S. Won't Stand in Israel's Way."  Liberal Radikal points out 
that Biden's comments were followed by Saudi Arabia's announcement 
that "Riyadh gave a guarantee to Israel to use Saudi airspace in an 
attack against Iran."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak calls Biden's 
comments, "Approval from The U.S. to Israel," for an Israeli attack 
against Iran. 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- 
-  The Turkish Board of Statistics (TUIK) conducted a survey on 6465 
people and showed that 51.9 percent of Turkish people would vote for 
EU membership if a referendum was held.  Only 29.5 percent would 
vote against EU membership. 
 
- Turkey will start warning smokers both in written and visual on 
packages as of 2010. 
 
- Three village guards were injured in a mine blast in Sirnak. 
 
World 
 
-  Independence Day celebrations in New York begin with the Statue 
of Liberty's crown opening to the public for the first time since 
September 11. 
 
- The Organization of American States agrees to suspend Honduras 
over the coup. 
 
- Two NATO Service members were killed in a bombing in southern 
Afghanistan.JEFFREY