09ANKARA1096
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0165
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1096/01 2111218
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301218Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0364
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0213
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6079
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4042
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7457
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7343
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3928
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001096 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, JULY 30, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The Government's 'Kurdish Initiative' - Still a work in progress 
Media outlets report Interior Minister Besir Atalay held a press 
conference to announce the government's "democratic moves" regarding 
Turkey's Kurdish issue.  Atalay said his government would "call on 
all political parties, civic organizations, intellectuals, the media 
and labor unions to be a part of the process."  Atalay stressed that 
the experiences of many other countries were also examined with an 
aim to find a solution to the Kurdish problem, but added that Turkey 
would implement its own model.  Atalay said his government would 
continue to take "determined, ambitious, patient and brave steps." 
"We believe the Kurdish Issue can be resolved by enhancing the 
democratic rights of our people," he emphasized.  Atalay noted he 
examined the experiences of several other countries, and that he had 
met the interior ministers of Sweden and Spain to exchange opinions 
on such matters.  "We are trying to set up our own model," concluded 
Atalay. 
 
Papers largely applaud the announcement.  Mainstream Haberturk 
headlines, "Ankara Adopts Historic Decision."  Mainstream Vatan 
headlines, "The AKP Undertakes A Brave Step."  Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak headlines, "The Solution Is More Democracy."  Leftist 
Taraf says, "The Turkish Formula Will Become A Model for The World." 
 Meanwhile, leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet is more skeptical, 
"The government has announced a new initiative - the Interior 
Minister Atalay says the government is still working on steps for 
solving the Kurdish issue." 
 
Meanwhile, mainstream Milliyet reports from Brussels that EU says 
every step taken toward a resolution of the problem will be a 
"positive mark" for Turkey's side.  In the latest Partnership 
Document, the EU expects Turkey to "display a comprehensive approach 
to eliminate the inequalities between the regions; to improve 
economic, social and cultural opportunities for all Turkish 
citizens, including the Kurds; and to end the village guards system 
in southeastern Turkey." 
 
Editorials on Turkish Government's Kurdish Initiative 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Atalay's 
announcement was disappointing for some who expected him to outline 
a clear-cut Kurdish solution package.  However, this is a long term 
process and patience is required; it's like being a guest at a 
dinner party and having to eat the host's casserole, made of unknown 
ingredients, in a dimly lit dining room.  In this process, the 
broader participation of opposition, including the DTP, will make it 
more successful." 
 
Mumtazer Turkone wrote in Islamist Zaman: "Some may say Interior 
Minister Atalay did not give much substance regarding the 
government's Kurdish initiative during his press conference 
yesterday, but in fact he said a lot.  The rhetoric he used and the 
approach he pursued meant a lot, which indicates that the state is 
headed in the right direction toward solving the problem." 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The Interior 
Minister's announcement shows the government continues to lack the 
determination and political will to bear the risks involved in 
initiating a process to solve the problem.  Atalay failed to 
communicate any substance or concrete plan, and he was evasive 
regarding the DTP's role in the process.  All of these are main 
reasons not to be hopeful about the future of this initiative." 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "If all sides are fully heard 
and if all participate in the solution process, Turkey can solve the 
problem by creating its own model to address the issue.  In order to 
achieve that goal, a special parliamentary commission with all 
parties' representation is a must." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist Yeni Safak: "Minister Atalay's 
 
ANKARA 00001096  002 OF 003 
 
 
announcement was clearly an indication of determination within the 
state to resolve the Kurdish problem.  A state strategy is underway, 
and we can simply call it a freedom project for Turkey." 
 
Justice Ministry: The HSYK Alone Cannot Change Prosecutors 
Papers report the Justice Ministry reacted harshly to a statement 
signed by nine members of the Supreme Board of Judges and 
Prosecutors (HSYK).  The ministry said in a statement, "HSYK is an 
administrative board, and cannot make judiciary inspections. Under 
the law, only the Justice Ministry grants permission for 
investigations into prosecutors, and the ministry has the authority 
to ask courts to reverse rulings."  The statement noted that some of 
the board members wanted to change the chief public prosecutor, 
deputy chief public prosecutor, prosecutors and three judges in the 
controversial 'Ergenekon' case, report papers. 
 
Fear of Civil War in Iraq (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet and Sabah as well as leftist Cumhuriyet and 
Islamist Zaman highlight the meeting between U.S. Defense Secretary 
Gates and Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government President Massoud 
Barzani.  Milliyet says, "American officials are very worried about 
the possibility that ethnic clashes, like the previous ones between 
Iraqi Sunnis and Shiites, could break out between the Kurds and 
Arabs after the U.S. withdrawal."  Secretary Gates reportedly asked 
Barzani to resolve disputes between the Baghdad central government 
and KRG, including territorial issues as well the sharing of oil 
resources and division of authority.  Gates asked them to ease 
Kurdish-Arab tension "before American forces pull out."  Sabah also 
added the withdrawal of U.S. troops might be accelerated, even 
though Secretary Gates did not offer any specific timetable for 
withdrawal. 
 
The U.S. Says Russia Could Join NATO 
Mainstream Sabah and mainstream Star report that the U.S. has 
"opened NATO's door to Russia."  During his testimony at the U.S. 
Congress, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs 
Philip Gordon said "NATO's doors should be open to democracies in 
Europe.  If Russia meets the criteria and can contribute to common 
security, and if there is consensus in the alliance, it shouldn't be 
excluded." 
 
Turkey Reaffirms Determination to Normalize Relations With Armenia 
 
Mainstream Sabah reports that at a joint press conference in Ankara 
with the Bosnian Foreign Minister on Wednesday, Foreign Minister 
Ahmet Davutoglu said that Turkish government is "still determined to 
normalize relations with neighboring Armenia."  However, Davutoglu 
noted, "at the same time, it is important for us to see the same 
determination from the international community and especially from 
Armenia on the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan."  Finally, 
Davutoglu responded to Armenian President Sargsyan's comments 
earlier this week that he would not come to Turkey for "football 
diplomacy" unless Turkey re-opened the border, describing this as 
"not very thoughtful." 
 
Iraqi Security Forces Raid Iran's People's Mujahedeen's Camp Near 
Baghdad 
Media outlets report that Iraqi security forces raided Esref Camp 
which shelters members of the Iranian opposition group People's 
Mujahedeen near Baghdad.  The Iraqi police said 300 camp dwellers 
and more than 100 security members were wounded during clashes 
between police and the Iranians.  The People's Mujahedeen claimed 
seven of their members were killed and 385 wounded.  People's 
Mujahedeen members were disarmed following the U.S. invasion in 
2003, says liberal Radikal. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- DTP leader Ahmet Turk said the government should allow the PKK's 
 
ANKARA 00001096  003 OF 003 
 
 
leader Abdullah Ocalan to be an "interlocutor" while working on the 
Kurdish issue. 
 
- Cyprus Turkish Airlines and its British tour operator CTA Holidays 
Limited have lost a legal bid to overturn a 35-year-old ban on 
flights from Britain to Turkish Cyprus, British media reported 
Wednesday. 
 
- Turkey's Central Bank Governor Durmus Yilmaz says year-end 
inflation was expected to stand at 5.9 percent. 
 
- The "3-G Technology" was officially introduced in Turkey.  3-G 
will allow subscribers to watch TV with their cellphones or enjoy 
super-fast internet connections. 
 
World 
 
-Rabiya Kadir, Uighur activist in exile, says "Nearly 10,000 Uighurs 
involved in deadly riots in China's northwestern Xinjiang region 
went missing in one night." 
 
- Jordan has set up a special tribunal for "honor crimes" in an 
effort to speed up trials in the cases. 
 
- Pope Benedict 16 attacks Glasgow Art Gallery's invitation to 
scrawl comments on the Bible, saying "'It is disgusting and 
offensive; they would not think of doing it to the Koran." 
 
- Ireland will take in two detainees from the U.S. detention camp at 
Guantanamo Bay in Cuba within the next couple of months, a senior 
government official said. 
 
JEFFREY