09ANKARA1087
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9151
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1087/01 2101147
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291147Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0354
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0209
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6073
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4038
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7453
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7339
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3924
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 29, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
 
The Turkey-U.S.-Iraq Summit (Cumhuriyet) 
Media outlets report the third ministerial meeting of the tripartite 
mechanism formed by Turkey, Iraq and the United States to develop 
their cooperation in the fight against the PKK terrorist 
organization was held in Ankara yesterday. The Turkish delegation 
was headed by Interior Minister Besir Atalay, the Iraqi delegation 
by Iraq's National Security Minister Sharwan al-Wa'ili, and the U.S. 
delegation by U.S. Brigadier General Steven Hummer, the Deputy Chief 
of Staff for Operations in Iraq's Multinational Force(MNF-I). 
Newspapers cover the meetings very positively and hail the meeting 
as "a summit" between Turkey, the U.S. and Iraq that will "liquidate 
the PKK."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye headlines, "Turkey, Iraq 
And The U.S. Will Liquidate the PKK," and the paper reports, "The 
Wipe-Out (of the PKK) Has Begun."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
notes, "The three-party meeting held in Ankara targeted ways to 
destroy PKK leadership in Kandil and Makhmur." 
 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports Turkey asked for enhanced 
security measures around the PKK camps in Kandil, and that the work 
on Makhmur Camp was "detailed and updated." Mainstream Hurriyet 
notes, "The most important decision reached yesterday related to 
Makhmur refugee camp," as "Intelligence gathered in Makhmur will be 
submitted to Turkey."  Mainstream Sabah notes it was decided that 
"logistical support for PKK members in Makhmur camp should be cut, 
and camp members linked to the PKK terror organization should be 
given no freedom of movement."  Sabah also says Turkey agreed at the 
talks to give intelligence training to Iraqi officials, thus making 
Iraq a part of the intelligence sharing mechanism between the U.S. 
and Turkey.  Cumhuriyet reports, "Baghdad expressed concern over 
claims the U.S. and Turkey met in Istanbul with Iraqi groups who are 
considered terrorists by the Baghdad administration."  However, 
Sabah says that the issue was not discussed during the meeting and 
instead the Iraqi minister conveyed his anxiety to Turkish Interior 
Minister Atalay in a separate meeting. 
 
Interior Minister Atalay told a press conference following the 
meetings that the parties "agreed to advance anti-terror 
cooperation" in order to end PKK presence in Iraq.  "We discussed 
the fate of PKK camps in northern Iraq and we want to see concrete 
results in the fight against the PKK," said Atalay.  Atalay said 
that the three-party subcommittee would continue holding weekly 
meetings in Baghdad, and added the sharing of intelligence via the 
Turkish office in Erbil continued.  The Iraqi Interior Minister 
al-Waili said they were working on the list of the PKK leaders 
Turkey wants to be extradited.  Waili noted the meetings in Ankara 
were "successful and positive," report papers 
 
Turkish Government to Announce its 'Kurdish Initiative' Wednesday 
Vatan reports "The government will initiate a plan, which is 
publicly called "The Kurdish Initiative," today. All media report 
Interior Minister Besir Atalay will hold a press conference at 12:30 
p.m. at the ministry and make important statements about the plan. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports the government intends to 
resettle PKK militants settled in Makhmur Camp in northern Iraq if 
the organization agrees to lay down its arms.  Papers expect the 
"steps to be taken" to include the closing of the Makhmur Camp, the 
return of the PKK militants to their homes, the sending of the PKK 
leaders to third countries, social policies targeting southeast 
Turkey, and legal arrangements for children convicted of throwing 
stones at the police.  Liberal Radikal headlines, "Initiative 
Excitement," as "NGOs are excited at the prospect of increasing 
democratic standards." 
Editorials on Turkey's Kurdish Question 
 
Bejan Matur wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "There is an obvious 
change in rhetoric coming from both the state and from Kurdish 
groups.  Once the state indicated it would change its position and 
pursue a new approach on Kurdish issue, the Kurdish political actors 
 
ANKARA 00001087  002 OF 004 
 
 
also changed accordingly." 
 
Rusen Cakir wrote in mainstream Vatan: "The Kurdish initiative 
affects both regional and international spheres, by the nature of 
problem.  However, it does not necessarily mean foreign pressure was 
exerted upon Turkey in order to reach a solution, as some conspiracy 
theorists tend to believe.  On the contrary, this is our matter and 
we must resolve this issue ourselves.  As president Gul suggested, 
the best way to address the problem is to raise Turkey's democratic 
standards." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Had Turkey been 
able to resolve its Kurdish problem long ago, today's Turkey would 
be closer to achieving its goal of a becoming a democratic and 
secular state based on the rule of law.  Turkey would be much more 
advanced regarding human rights and economic welfare as well.  At 
this stage, there is still a significant window of opportunity in 
which to solve the problem.  This chance must be supported by 
everyone." 
 
Tufan Turenc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "It is possible to 
resolve the Kurdish issue because the Turks and Kurds of this 
country have not produced any animosity after 25 years of violence. 
The solution finding process is something upon which everyone 
agrees.  In order to initiate concrete results, terror must come to 
a clear end.  The rest will be easy." 
 
Sargsyan: "I will not come to Turkey for the football match if the 
border remains closed." 
All media outlets report Armenian President Sargsyan told a press 
conference in Yerevan Tuesday that he will not attend the "Football 
Diplomacy" match between Turkey and Armenia in Istanbul in October 
if the border between Turkey and Armenia remains closed at that 
time.  The Armenian president emphasized during a joint press 
conference with Serbian President Tadic, "I will only accept the 
invitation if the agreements are observed and visible steps are 
taken, that is, I will go to Turkey if the border is open or if we 
are on the threshold of Armenia's de-blockading."  In addition, he 
noted, "Little time is left until the return match of the national 
football teams of Armenia and Turkey, which I have been invited to 
attend by the President of Turkey Abdullah Gul. In the existing 
circumstances we, certainly, anticipate to witness in the nearest 
future some constructive steps, through which our partners will try 
to create a corresponding environment for the reciprocal visit of 
the President of Armenia." 
 
Zana Convicted to 15 Months for Making 'Terror Propaganda' 
Papers and television channels report the internationally renowned 
Kurdish politician and activist Leyla Zana has been sentenced to 15 
months in prison for delivering a speech in London last year, in 
which she allegedly made "terror propaganda."  The judges sentenced 
Zana to 16 months of imprisonment according to Article 7/2 of the 
Counter Terror Law for making propaganda of a terrorist organization 
but lowered the sentence to 15 months due to good conduct at court. 
In May 2008, Zana addressed the SOAS University in London, saying, 
"The PKK and Abdullah Ocalan are the hearts and minds of the Kurdish 
people."  Zana's lawyers told the court Zana's conviction would not 
help the efforts to find a solution to Turkey's Kurdish question, 
reports leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet. 
Hizb-ut Tahrir Planned to Attack The Virgin Mary's House in Turkey 
(Vatan) 
Mainstream Vatan reports the fundamentalist terror organization 
Hizb-ut Tahrir was allegedly planning to stage attacks on the house 
of Virgin Mary in Ephesus near the city of Izmir in western Turkey. 
Last week, police apprehended 165 members of the terrorist 
organization in operations in 23 provinces around Turkey.  Eight 
suspects were detained in the eastern province of Van, and police 
found plans of the house of the Virgin Mary in the suspects' "cell 
house."  Police have also seized documents proving links between 
Hizb-ut Tahrir and the shadowy 'Ergenekon' organization, says Vatan. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001087  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
DTP's Tugluk Makes Self-Criticism re Kurdish Question 
Papers report that Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP's Aysel Tugluk, 
Diyarbakir lawmaker from the party's 'moderate wing,' said that 
"messages coming from the top of the state" were the "last 
opportunity" for finding a solution to the Kurdish problem.  "We 
should have stood against the killing of soldiers as well; we have 
not been able to establish empathy," said Tugluk, stressing the DTP, 
too, did not take "enough responsibility" in the efforts to find a 
solution.  Tugluk added that politicians should "apologize" for 
being unable to stop the deaths, report papers. 
 
Turkey to Open Embassies in 26 African Countries (Zaman) 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that within the framework of 
outreach to Africa, Turkey will open embassies in 26 African 
countries.  In the first stage, eight embassies will be built in the 
continent, which will also coordinate the aid sent to African 
countries by Turkish state agencies such as the Turkish Cooperation 
and Development Agency (TIKA) and the Turkish Red Crescent (Kizilay) 
as well some Turkish NGOs, reports Zaman. 
 
U.S. Softens Sanctions Against Syria (Milliyet) 
Media are quite positive regarding the U.S. decision to relax 
sanctions against Syria, with some noting the step as Obama's 
reversal of the Bush-era sanctions, some hailing the gesture as a 
way to improve relations with the Middle East, and others noting the 
Obama administration is stepping up efforts in increase sanctions 
against Iran.  Mainstream Milliyet says, "Obama has decided to relax 
the sanctions that were placed on Syria during the Bush 
administration," and the Bush administration "accused Syria of being 
a state supporter of terrorism."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, 
"The Obama Administration, in an effort to improve relations in the 
Middle East, has decided to ease economic sanctions against Syria." 
Mainstream Haberturk calls the effort, "A Trade Gesture from The 
U.S. to Syria."  In "Embargo Balance," Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
notes that the U.S. sanctions against Syria and Iran are no longer 
"balanced" between the two countries, "As the Obama Administration 
decides to relax sanctions against Syria, the subject of 
intensifying sanctions against Iran is on the agenda." 
 
Gates' Surprise Visit Delivers a Warning 
Media point out that U.S. Defense Secretary Gates made a surprise 
visit to Iraq yesterday in order to make a call for peace between 
the Sunnis, Shiites, and Kurds.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates paid a surprise visit 
to Iraq yesterday" and "made a call to Sunnis, Shiites and Kurds to 
reach an agreement by the time the U.S. withdraws at the end of 
2011."  Liberal Radikal notes, "Gates Warns Iraqi Kurds and Arabs," 
and the paper reports, "Gates warned of a potential for civil war 
over sharing oil resources and sharing Kirkuk if the groups fail to 
reach a compromise while U.S. forces are still in Iraq." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Turkey's High Board of Justices and Prosecutors (HSYK) said it was 
showing "utmost sensitivity" in ensuring the independence of the 
judiciary in the 'Ergenekon' lawsuit. 
 
- Former Turkish Ambassador to Belgium, Fuat Tanlay has been named 
the foreign policy advisor of PM Erdogan. 
 
- Turkey is convicted by the European Court of Human Rights for 
arresting a soldier charged with "separatist propaganda." 
 
- The Turkish economy is expected to shrink by 5.2 percent this 
year, Turkey's leading business gathering TUSIAD says. 
 
- 3G mobile phone service will be introduced in Turkey on July 30. 
 
ANKARA 00001087  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
World 
 
- Armenia's President Serge Sargsyan said he will not travel to 
Turkey to watch a soccer game between Turkey and Armenia in Istanbul 
next year if the border between the two countries is not opened by 
then. 
 
- The Minsk Group co-chair Matthew Bryza says the process of 
rapprochement between Turkey and Armenia has "slowed down." 
 
- Iran authorities Tuesday released 140 people who had been arrested 
in the country's post-election unrest. 
 
- Exiled Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer arrives in Japan to talk with 
the Japanese government about the difficulties Uighurs are facing in 
China. 
 
- A Christian member of the Uighur ethnic group went on trial in 
western China's Xinjiang region. 
 
 
JEFFREY