09ATHENS1265
Aegean Issues: Thoughts on CBMs, Preparing for Turkish
Fri Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Athens
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTH #1265/01 1981427
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O R 171429Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY ATHENS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0452
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0100
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0018
RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENSC O N F I D E N T I A L ATHENS 001265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2034/07/17 
TAGS: MARR MOPS PREL TU GR
SUBJECT: Aegean Issues: Thoughts on CBMs, Preparing for Turkish 
Command of the CAOC 
 
REF: BRYZA-SPECKHARD ET AL EMAIL 06/25/09 

 
CLASSIFIED BY: Daniel V. Speckhard, Ambassador, State, US Embassy 
Athens; REASON: 1.4(A), (B), (D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Embassy Athens welcomes the interagency focus on Aegean 
issues reflected in the sub-IPC reported informally in ref.  We 
recognize that it will be important for Greece to contribute to an 
improved atmosphere in the Aegean that can diffuse the tension and 
create an opportunity for more substantive negotiations to resolve 
longstanding disputes. 
 
¶2. (C) We offer the following thoughts on possible CBMs that the 
Greeks could be encouraged to consider as part of a coordinated 
effort with Turkey to reduce tensions.  We assess that doing these 
things could create an atmosphere that would permit  the Greek and 
Turkish military establishments - and particularly the respective 
air forces-- to engage in productive discussions initially on air 
safety issues, but eventually with an eye for the two governments 
to manage their differences in the Aegean.  While we will encourage 
the Greeks to avoid the "you first' trap to improving relations, we 
do believe that an observance by both sides of the normal summer 
suspension of military activity in the Aegean would be key in 
allowing them and Turks to halt the downward spiral and start on a 
new more positive footing in September.  We also offer some 
background on Greek thinking in preparation for TUAF participation 
in the command of the Larissa CAOC. 
 
----------------- 
 
Possible CBMS: 
 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  The following are possible confidence building measures 
that the Greeks could be encouraged to undertake in concert with 
reciprocal actions on the Turkish side to reduce tensions in Aegean 
and improve prospects for more substantial negotiations: 
 
-- Indirect, but helpful for atmospherics: 
 
*        Recognize elected-Muftis in Thrace. 
 
*        MoD to vacate property proposed by GoG for Muslim Cemetery 
in Athens. 
 
*        GoG to publicly characterize the over-flights as 
"nuisance" rather than "threat to sovereignty." 
 
-- Mil-Mil CBMs that have been in the works ( most Mil-Mil CBMs 
would likely need direct over flights of Greek islands to stop 
first): 
 
*        No longer "tag" as hostile TUAF planes flying in the 
Athens FIR. 
 
*        Invitation to TUAF chief to Greece/HAF visit to Turkey. 
 
*        HAF to refrain from overflying treaty demilitarized 
islands while under NATO designation. 
 
*        GoG and GoT to observe original intent of previously 
agreed CBMs such as the "summer moratorium" of flight/intercepts. 
In the event both sides don't observe, we should nevertheless press 
the GAF to unilaterally observe it as regards FIR "violations" (but 
not in cases of TUAF over flights of sovereign Greek territory). 
 
--  Other Mil-Mil CBMs: 
 
*        GoG to refrain from planning NATO exercises over treaty 
demilitarized, or disputed, islands. 
 
*        Maintain 3 mi standoff when intercepting TUAF per existing 
ROE. 
 
*        Agreement to fly unarmed. 
 
*        GoG to refrain from hard-line responses such as deploying 
frigate to waters off Agathonisi 
 
*        GoG to quietly shelve any Interpol or other legal 
extradition requests in case of Turkish pilot convicted in 
accidental death of Greek pilot. 
 
---------------- 
 
Greeks on Larissa CAOC Command 
 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (C)  Our DAO has had a series of conversations with his GoG 
counterparts on the Larissa CAOC flag structure.  The GoG expressed 
some chagrin at how the changes developed.  They aver that the US 
proposed a changed flag structure for Larissa two days before the 
plan was decided at NATO, pulling the proposed US deputy commander 
in favor of a Turkish deputy, which the GoG did not veto "under 
duress."  As a result, in Larissa both the commander and deputy 
will now rotate between Greek and Turk, always having a Turk in 
some command role. This is not "balanced" in Component Command Air 
(CC Air) Izmir where the commander is US but the deputy rotates 
between Turk and third country.  It is only at Chief of Staff level 
where a Greek is in the normal rotation, leaving six months per 
year when no Greek is in any command role in Izmir.  This is being 
played in the press as a big loss to the GoG, which is trying to 
redress in part by placing Greek officers elsewhere.   With the 
above in mind, as we counsel the Greeks and Turks on preparing for 
a Turkish command role in Larissa, we should think creatively about 
how to offer the Greeks additional visibility elsewhere in the 
region.  One option might be adding Greek Colonels to RC South 
(Naples) or to SHAPE.  In addition, we must encourage the GAF and 
TUAF to meet, and perhaps exchange officers in preparation for the 
CAOC change.  Finally, we should press the respective air force 
commanders to meet, once we are able to point to a hiatus in over 
flights of Greek-inhabited islands by the TUAF. 
SPECKHARD