09BEIJING2025
JULY 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHU AND LOCKE VISIT, RIO TINTO
Thu Jul 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9584
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2025/01 1972311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 162311Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5230
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 9745
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0463
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9370
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 0356
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2181
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 002025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MNUC CH AS RS TU
 
SUBJECT: JULY 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: CHU AND LOCKE VISIT, RIO TINTO 
ESPIONAGE CASE, MELBOURNE FILM FESTIVAL, STRATEGIC AND ECONOMIC 
DIALOGUE, SIX-PARTY TALKS 
 
¶1. Key points at the July 16 MFA press briefing: 
 
--China "opposes any country providing a platform" for Uyghur 
activist Rebiya Kadeer's "separatist activity." 
 
--China's position on mandatory caps on greenhouse gas emissions has 
been "consistent and clear" and China would "follow the principles" 
of the United Nations Framework and the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
--China hopes the United States can make commitments on climate 
change "in line with its historical responsibilities." 
 
--The Rio Tinto case is still under investigation, and China remains 
"open to cooperation" and welcomes foreign investments as long as 
there is no "loss" to China. 
 
 
--China "believes dialogue, consultations and peaceful means" to 
achieve a denuclearized Korean Peninsula were "in the interests of 
all sides." 
 
 Xinjiang and the Melbourne Film Festival and Al-Qaeda Threats 
----------------------------- -------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  "It is very clear what kind of a person Rebiya Kadeer is" and 
China "opposes any country providing a platform for her separatist 
activity" Qin said when asked whether it was true that the Chinese 
Embassy to Australia tried to get a Uyghur film banned from the 
Melbourne International Film Festival scheduled from July 24 to 
August 9, 2009.  Separately, Qin said he was not in a position to 
answer questions on how China would handle people detained following 
the July 5 incident in Xinjiang and referred journalists to 
"relevant authorities."  When asked about threats of retaliation by 
Al-Qaeda against Chinese nationals in Algeria, Qin said the "Chinese 
government attached much importance to the safety of Chinese 
nationals and institutions abroad and would take appropriate 
measures to safeguard them." 
 
 
Chu and Locke Visit 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  When asked whether U.S. Energy Secretary Stephen Chu and 
Commerce Secretary Gary Locke's visit to China had any impact on 
China's approach to mandatory caps on greenhouse gas emissions, MFA 
Spokesperson Qin Gang replied that "China's position has been 
consistent and clear" and that China would "follow the principles" 
of the United Nations Framework and the Kyoto Protocol.  China hopes 
"developed countries will provide capital and support to developing 
nations."  Qin said "developed and developing countries have common 
but differentiated responsibilities" in the international community 
to deal with climate change.  Secretary Chu and Secretary Locke 
"exchanged views with relevant authorities" and there were "positive 
developments" in the U.S. Government's position on climate change, 
Qin said.  China "hopes the United States can make commitments in 
line with its historical responsibilities." 
 
Rio Tinto Espionage Case:  "May You be Prosperous" 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4.  In response to questions on the Rio Tinto case, Qin said the 
issue was still "under investigation" and he was unaware of the 
specifics.  The Chinese government advocates "open cooperation" and 
"welcomes foreign investment," Qin said.  Quoting traditional 
Chinese sayings, Qin said that the message to foreign countries 
interested in investing in China is "May you be prosperous," but 
that "a man of noble character acquires wealth by honorable means". 
Foreign companies operating in China should have "good faith", "good 
ethics", and not engage in "selfish ways."  Rio Tinto and Stern Hu 
have "caused a loss to China" and were "clear about the pain" this 
caused. 
 
¶5.  Qin said China abides by the the rule of law and the Rio Tinto 
case will be dealt with in accordance with the law.  There are 
"noises" in Australia on the case, and this is interfering with 
China's investigation.  China opposes anyone "stirring" up issues 
with the case that will interfere with the "independent judicial 
authority" of China.  "China and Australia are important trading 
partners," Qin said, and "It is not in Australia's interests to 
interfere with China's independent judicial authority."  Qin 
belittled a journalist seeking clarification on how China would 
handle leaks to the media of other information possibly construed as 
 
BEIJING 00002025  002 OF 003 
 
 
"state secrets" such as GDP data by stating that he "felt sorry" for 
the journalist who was "not very good at his profession" since he 
could not "make a clear distinction" between economic information 
and state secrets.  Qin also declined to confirm whether Vice 
Foreign Minister He Yafei would meet with Australian Foreign 
Minister Stephen Smith in Egypt. 
 
 
 
Strategic and Economic Dialogue 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Qin announced that State Councilors Wang Qishan and Dai Bingguo 
would jointly chair the first U.S.-China bilateral Security and 
Economic Dialogue with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and 
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner on July 27 and 28 in Washington 
D.C. to "exchange views on strategic, comprehensive and long term 
issues" and to "promote trust and cooperation." 
 
Future of the Six-Party Talks 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  When asked about North Korean Foreign Minister Kim Yong-nam's 
July 15 comments at the Non-aligned Movement meeting in Egypt that 
North Korea would not return to the Six-Party Talks, Qin said that 
China "believes dialogue, consultations and peaceful means" to 
achieve a denuclearized Korean Peninsula were "in the interests of 
all sides."  "Relevant interests all made commitments and China 
hopes that they will honor those commitments" to advance the 
Six-Party Talks and "to deal with the issues and safeguard peace and 
stability in the region."  Qin said that Vice Foreign Minister Wu 
Dawei returned to China from meetings with other Six-Party Talks 
member states where he "discussed relevant issues" and relevant 
parties agreed that there should be a "peaceful solution for the 
Korean Peninsula issue."  "China hopes to maintain contact and 
communication with relevant countries by all means," Qin said. 
 
ASEAN Regional Forum 
-------------------- 
 
¶8.  Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi will lead China's delegation to the 
ASEAN Regional Forum in Phuket, Thailand from July 22 to 23.  Qin 
said that China hopes "relevant countries will exchange ideas on 
peace, stability and development in the region."  Qin said he heard 
that North Korean Foreign Minister Kim Yong-nam would not attend the 
meetings and that North Korea would send someone else, but directed 
journalists to ask the Thai government for specific details.  Qin 
also said he did not have any information on whether Vice Foreign 
Minister Wu Dawei would attend the meetings, and said China's 
bilateral meetings at ARF were "still under negotiation." 
 
 
Chinese Navy in the Gulf of Aden 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  In response to a question about the third group of Chinese naval 
vessels dispatched to the Gulf of Aden, Qin said the fleet's goal is 
to "fulfill China's obligation" to protect the safety and personnel 
of its people in the region as well as to ensure the delivery of 
needed humanitarian aid. 
 
Closing of Russian Market 
------------------------ 
 
¶10.  With respect to reports that Chinese businessman face 
"difficulties" and had their goods confiscated since the 
Cherkizovsky market was closed by Moscow police, Qin stated that the 
Chinese Embassy and Consulates in Russia have been asked to 
investigate this situation.  China will "keep an eye" on this issue 
and will "ensure the rights and safety of Chinese businesses in 
Russia." 
 
Hard Times for Environmentalist in Gansu 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Qin said he was "unaware of the case" of Sun Xiaodi, a former 
uranium mine worker who became an environmental activist in Gansu 
province who was sentenced to two years of reform through labor for 
leaking state secrets and his 25 year old daughter Sun Haiyan who 
was sentenced to 18 months of reform through labor. 
 
 
 
BEIJING 00002025  003 OF 003 
 
 
Reported of Death of a Nigerian in Guangzhou Under Investigation 
----------------------------- ---------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  On the reported death of a Nigerian man during a visa check in 
Guangzhou, Qin stated that the case was still under investigation, 
and that he was "not aware of the specifics." 
 
GOLDBERG