09BEIJING1867
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, NORTH KOREA,
Sun Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6485
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1867/01 1860857
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050857Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5031
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001867 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, NORTH KOREA, 
PAKISTAN, ENVIRONMENT 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
"The U.S. and China don't need a Fourth Joint Communiqu yet" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(07/06): "The Obama 
Administration is continuing the stable development of U.S.-China 
relations begun during the Bush administration.  Some scholars 
suggest that a "fourth joint communiqu" between the U.S. and China 
should begin.  Although there are many new issues and content in the 
bilateral relationship, there are not enough for a radical 
re-examination of the bilateral relationship.  What's more, neither 
the Chinese nor the U.S. government has the intention to begin the 
Fourth Joint Communiqu.  The two countries don't have the spare 
time and energy to discuss the Fourth Joint Communiqu while the 
financial crisis is ongoing.  If the two countries begin this way, 
rash unnecessary trouble might come to be.  If the Fourth Joint 
Communiqu is established, the Taiwan issue must be mentioned. 
Currently, however, cross-Strait relations are peacefully developing 
and the U.S. is decreasing its influence.  At this moment, formally 
sitting down to discuss this issue together may maximize the Taiwan 
issue and the influence of the U.S.  So, what's the point discussing 
the Fourth Joint Communiqu now?" 
 
¶2. NORTH KOREA 
 
"Successive North Korean missile launches release resentment" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(07/06): " Over the U.S. national day, the 
U.S. reacted with indifference to North Korea's missile gift. North 
Korea has irritated the U.S. so many times that Washington has 
become numb.  Concerns are spreading around North Korea; no one 
knows what the North Koreans want to do.  Chinese experts indicate 
that the world can't understand the strategic fear of North Korea, a 
small country amid a hostile environment.   North Korea's weird 
moves are the fault of the U.S.  North Korea's move has obvious 
political meaning.  North Korea did not launch distance missiles; it 
leaves certain room to maneuver, and not for technical reasons. 
Chinese experts further point out that the stabilities gained 
through nuclear tests and missile launches can only be low-level 
stabilities.  North Korea will gain less than it will lose in 
international relationships.  North Korea will only become more 
isolated by insisting on going its own way and pursuing peace by 
showing off its military power.  China calls for restraint from all 
parties; it's a reminder to the U.S., Japan, South and North 
Korea." 
 
¶3. PAKISTAN 
 
"The U.S. media exaggerates reports that 'China has lost Pakistan'" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(07/06): "The U.S. media reports that Pakistan 
is being included in the U.S. orbit and India will benefit from it. 
However experts on Pakistan said that although Pakistan is close to 
the U.S. in the War on Terror, the U.S. can't replace the special 
role between China and Pakistan.  This media commentary has 
stimulated activity in the relationship between China and Pakistan. 
An Indian Canadian wrote an article on the issue, saying that China 
planned to effectively crack down on India by providing assistance 
to Pakistan over 50 years ago.  However, the participation of the 
U.S. has changed the balance.  By realizing the decreasing threat 
from Pakistan, India now is expanding its military power near its 
border with China's Tibet and catching up on China's military 
development.  A Pakistan scholar also indicated that the U.S. 
media's intention to alienate China from Pakistan won't succeed." 
 
¶4. ENVIRONMENT 
 
"China and the U.S. discuss a 'carbon tariff'; China says 'no'" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(07/06): "The 
Vice Director of the National Climate Center said that if the U.S. 
levies carbon tariffs, all the developing countries will join hands 
to oppose it. The actions of the U.S. Congress violate the rules of 
the UN and will not gain any support at the Bonn Climate Change 
Conference or the Copenhagen meeting.  A professor from Peking 
University said that the action of the U.S. to levy carbon tariffs 
is not accidental, but a plan conceived a long time ago and carried 
out step by step. There are similar clauses in the energy and 
climate legislation that has been issued before. In the first half 
of this year, the frequent visits of U.S. senior officials to China 
 
BEIJING 00001867  002 OF 002 
 
 
are aimed at testing China's attitudes toward carbon tariffs. It is 
predicted that U.S. carbon tariffs will affect not only the China's 
foreign trade but also its general economic development. Given the 
general situation of China's trade to the U.S., carbon tariffs will 
negatively influence China's exports and imports. The disadvantages 
of U.S. carbon tariffs on the development of Chinese industries 
outweigh the advantages. This will counteract the effect of the 
expansionary fiscal policy adopted by the Chinese government to 
combat the international financial crisis. Besides the direct 
influence on industry development, the U.S. carbon tariffs will also 
negatively influence China's employment market, Chinese people's 
salary and welfare ." 
 
GOLDBERG