09CAIRO1333
EGYPT'S SPEAKER OF THE PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY ON
Mon Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO5749
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHEG #1333/01 1941240
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 131240Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3175
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 001333 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM KWMN PHUM SOCI EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT'S SPEAKER OF THE PEOPLE'S ASSEMBLY ON 
PROSPECTS FOR DISSOLUTION 
 
REF: A. CAIRO 1266 B. CAIRO 1183 Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)
1.Key Points: -- (C) Speaker of the People,s Assembly (PA) Dr. Fathi Sorour praised President Obama's speech as everything the Egyptians were looking for. -- (C) On the issue of the possible dissolution of the parliament, Sorour agreed events in Iran put more pressure on any election in Egypt and that early elections subject to international criticism might put the wrong kind of spotlight on Egypt. -- (C) Sorour remained unwilling to make a firm prediction, but said there were those within the ruling party pushing for dissolution. He said the real reason behind any possible dissolution was political maneuvering within the ruling party and not the logistical difficulties of organizing two parliamentary elections in one year, often cited by proponents. -- (C) While implying that he had advised against dissolution, Sorour claimed to have "convinced" President Mubarak that any dissolution would have to be accompanied by a new "project" or new "phase" in political life in Egypt. ------------------ President's Speech ------------------

2.(C) In his first meeting with the Ambassador since President Obama's June 4 speech, Sorour began the meeting by saying "we are 100 percent satisfied" with the speech. Sorour said President Obama changed how Egyptians view Americans. Sorour said that in the past US-Egypt relations had been sidetracked by issues such as Ayman Nour. The Ambassador responded that while the dialogue will continue to be respectful and reflect close ties, issues like political reform and protection of human rights remain a critical part of that dialogue. ----------------------- Possible PA Dissolution -----------------------

3.(C) The Ambassador raised speculation in the media and among political elites on the potential dissolution of the People's Assembly (PA) this summer. Sorour confirmed that he did say, as reported in the media, that "politicians need to be ready for anything," and that his comments on a local channel comparing various reasons for the dissolution of the French parliament in the last fifty years (relevant as the Egyptians had borrowed heavily from the French constitution) might have lead people to believe it was imminent. Sorour agreed that in light of events in Iran the optics of an early election, particularly a surprise election with a short campaign period, would be subject to international criticism and could have an undesired negative impact on newly reinvigorated bilateral relations with the US. In his view, the impact of fraud in the Iranian elections promised to turn any election now into a "drama," particularly as "Obama just saluted us."

4.(C) Sorour remained unwilling to make any predictions on the likelihood of dissolution and went on to underline that the decision remains constitutionally with the president. However, Sorour did admit to pressure within the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) for dissolution, saying some in the "political sphere" are asking to advance the elections for political gain. Without mentioning Gamal Mubarak by name, Sorour suggested that the internal pressure within the NDP came from Gamal and his supporters who, he said, are interested in new and loyal MPs and that are "dependant" and had "proven themselves." He added he had cautioned NDP leaders to ensure the "new cadres" were up to the task and credible. In more emphatic tones, Sorour went on to say that his recent comments on dissolution in the pro-government Al-Ahram newspaper were meant to send a message that dissolution should not be used to advance a "private interest" but the "public interest."

5.(C) After signaling an internal NDP split on dissolution, Sorour followed with a story from an "NDP insider" who said that Gamal "sent a message" at a recent meeting of the powerful NDP Policies Committee during which he continued to speak about the party's need to prepare for two parliamentary CAIRO 00001333 002 OF 002 elections next year (implying that elections for the PA would not be advanced). He added that in his view the argument most often offered, that elections for both parliamentary bodies (the Shura Council and the PA) in 2010 would be too difficult, was "not relevant" as it had been done before.

6.(C) Calling himself a political bloc unto himself, and someone known to have his own views, he said that he had recently reached out to President Mubarak "discreetly" and that his one-on-one discussion had changed the President's mind on dissolution, convincing him that it must be done only in concert with a "change in political life" in Egypt. In Sorour's view, the public would accept dissolution if followed by a political "project" that had been clearly explained before hand and was a signal of that kind of change. However, Sorour did not identify what that "project" might be.

7.(C) Sorour spoke at some length about the need to ensure "political pluralism" in Egypt. Citing Article 5 of the constitution which states that the "political regime of the Arab Republic of Egypt is based on the multi-party system," he said that pluralism is key to the Egyptian system. Specifically, he noted the political and organizational benefits of dealing with opposition members according to a clearly defined party platform. Sorour went on to say that his recent public criticism of independent members of parliament as "haphazard" and "ineffective" was a reaction to the challenge of managing large numbers of independents currently in the parliament. In response to criticism of these comments, Sorour said that he had reached out to several independent MPs to explain that his comments were not personal. (Comment: Surour was highlighting the challenge of dealing with the MB in parliament - they are all independents and, although they often vote as a bloc, their lack of party structure makes them difficult to deal with. Surour acknowledged that the issue of who could and could not form a practical party was a government-created conundrum.)

8.(C) Comment: We regularly hear from contacts that it is not in President Mubarak's nature to make big decisions, like dissolution, that shock the political system, preferring to maintain the status quo. In addition, in a separate meeting with the Ambassador, Gamal Mubarak said that any talk of dissolution was pure speculation. Sorour's comments suggest that a firm decision on dissolution has not been made within the NDP itself, and reflect what has been called a split between the "new guard" and the "old guard" on this issue and perhaps others. Amid continued rumors of pressure inside the party and within the Mubarak family, and the widespread belief that President Mubarak was deeply affected by his grandson's death, few Egyptian observers are ready to believe dissolution is off the table. SCOBEY