09DJIBOUTI883
DJIBOUTI - REQUEST FOR TDY SUPPORT FOR SOMALIA COVERAGE
Wed Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Djibouti
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDJ #0883/01 1891712
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081714Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0619
INFO RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0023UNCLAS DJIBOUTI 000883 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER PREL DJ SO
SUBJECT: DJIBOUTI - REQUEST FOR TDY SUPPORT FOR SOMALIA COVERAGE 
 
REF: 3/22/09 SWAN-PATTERSON-WYCOFF EMAIL 
 
1.Summary and Action Request:  Post requests temporary assignment 
of one TDYer for 3 - 6 months to support coverage of Somalia 
developments from Djibouti.  While continuing its responsibility to 
provide consular services for the Somaliland region, Embassy 
Djibouti sees growing demand and opportunity for other engagement 
on Somalia issues, in which Djibouti is playing an increasingly 
active role - diplomatic, informational, military, and economic. 
To capitalize on these opportunities, post requests a 
multi-functional TDY officer, working in close coordination with 
the Somalia Unit in Nairobi, to enhance Embassy Djibouti coverage 
during this critical period in USG efforts to support the 
Transitional Federal Government.  With only one reporting officer 
assigned to Embassy Djibouti, we are simply unable to do justice to 
this important account without additional staff resources.  End 
summary. 
 
 
 
The Need 
 
----------- 
 
 
 
¶2. Djibouti is increasingly involved in regional efforts to bring 
peace and stability to Somalia.  Djibouti's population is 60 
percent ethnic Somali, as is its senior leadership, including 
President Ismail Omar Guelleh.  Djibouti is playing an increasingly 
active role on Somalia issues including as host and key actor at 
the 2008-2009 "Djibouti Process" peace talks that led to the 
election of Transitional Federal Government (TFG) President Sheikh 
Sharif.  President Guelleh and Foreign Minister Mahmoud Youssouf 
are leaders in regional fora in pressing for solutions in Somalia. 
In addition to diplomatic support, Djibouti is providing training 
and other support to TFG forces.  Djibouti is a hub for Somali 
journalists and websites covering Somalia, including the newly 
inaugurated Somali Independent News Agency (SOMINSA).  It is the 
headquarters of the Somalia Business and Investment Council (SBIC) 
and home to numerous Somali businessmen.  It is a frequent site for 
travel to/from Somalia, Somaliland, and Puntland by senior 
officials from these entities, including President Sharif, who is a 
regular visitor. 
 
 
 
¶3. While post has sought to cover Somalia developments from 
Djibouti, to supplement the work of the Somalia Unit and other 
regional posts, we are unable to do justice to the rich opportunity 
here.  Embassy Djibouti has only one full-time reporting officer, 
and she is fully occupied with domestic reporting, preparation of 
legislatively mandated reports, and management of project 
activities totaling some $10 million. 
 
 
 
The Proposal 
 
---------------- 
 
 
 
¶4.  In order to provide appropriate coverage to the important 
Somalia account, especially during this critical period in USG 
efforts to bolster  the TFG and to prepare contingencies should 
that effort prove unsuccessful, we request a TDY officer for 3-to-6 
months who could perform the following functions: 
 
 
 
--Reporting:  Maintain contact with influential Somalis based in or 
transiting Djibouti.  These would include members of the Somali 
Business and Investment Council and visitors from Somalia, 
Somaliland, and Puntland transiting Djibouti.  Presidents Sharif 
(TFG), Riyale (Somaliland), and Farole (Puntland) are all frequent 
visitors. 
 
 
 
--Representation:  Represent USG at Somalia-related conferences, 
meetings, etc. held in Djibouti.  Recent conferences have focused 
on efforts to generate youth employment in Somalia and to improve 
the investment climate in Somaliland.  We expect more such 
conferences, with their rich contact opportunities, in the future. 
 
 
 
--Consular:  Deepen contacts with Somaliland officials who would be 
 
useful in responding to request for emergency American citizen 
services.  Build on work already begun by Djibouti CONOFF in her 
outreach to immigration, police, hospitals, etc. 
 
 
 
--Public Diplomacy:  Use the extensive network of Somali 
journalists based in Djibouti, as well as the GODJ's 
Somali-language broadcasts (which are also heard in parts of 
Somalia) to communicate USG messaging on Somalia, and help TFG with 
its strategic communications (STRATCOM). 
 
 
 
--CJTF-HOA:  Coordinate with Combined Joint Task Force - Horn of 
Africa on Somalia issues, especially STRATCOM related to Somalia. 
 
 
 
Action Request 
 
---------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. Post requests Department identify and fund one TDY officer to be 
assigned for 3-to-6 months to perform the functions listed above. 
Depending on the results, we may seek to extend this arrangement. 
The individual could be an existing direct-hire employee available 
for TDY, someone seeking a bridge assignment, or a WAE.  Horn of 
Africa experience and competency in the functions listed in para 
four would obviously be desirable.  Embassy is open to the 
individual being assigned either (1) to Embassy Djibouti directly, 
or (2) to the Embassy Nairobi Somalia Unit and then deployed to 
Djibouti.  Post can provide workspace and local transportation and 
may/may be able to provide TDY housing depending on the precise 
timing of the TDY. 
 
 
 
¶6. Somalia Unit Counselor Robert Patterson has cleared this 
message. 
SWAN