09JAKARTA1152
HOUSE DEMOCRACY ASSISTANCE COMMISSION VISITS
Wed Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO7737
OO RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHJA #1152/01 1890456
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080456Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2770
INFO RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JAKARTA 001152 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS, EAP/RSP, H 
NSC FOR J. CARTIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM ID
SUBJECT: HOUSE DEMOCRACY ASSISTANCE COMMISSION VISITS 
JAKARTA 
 
REF: JAKARTA 01092 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1.    (U) SUMMARY:  Congressman David Price led the House 
Democracy Assistance Commission's (HDAC) fourth visit to 
Jakarta from June 30-July 2.  The 23 person delegation 
included five other members, spouses and staff.  While in 
Jakarta, HDAC held meetings on parliamentary reform, foreign 
policy, and defense.  They also trained Indonesian Parliament 
(DPR) staff and members and met newly elected DPR Members. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
HDAC PRICE CODEL VISITS JAKARTA 
 
¶2.    (U) HDAC is a bi-partisan commission of 20 members 
formed in 2005 to promote global democracy.  It now supports 
parliamentary reform and capacity building in 14 (originally 
5) newly democratic countries.  The six members on this visit 
included: David Price (D-N.C.); Vern Buchanan (R-Fla.); Jim 
McDermott (D-Wash.); Jim Cooper (D-Tenn.); Bob Etheridge 
(D-N.C.); and Phil Gingrey (R-Ga.).  The Members' program 
addressed parliamentary reform, foreign policy, and defense. 
Staff training focused on research, staff development, 
legislative drafting, and constituent services. 
 
MEETING WITH THE SPEAKER 
 
¶3.    (U) Speaker Laksono declared that this is a perfect 
time, with President Obama in office, to strengthen 
U.S.-Indonesian ties.  He expressed his appreciation for 
HDAC's return visits.  Another Indonesian member of 
Parliament thanked the U.S. for our assistance in the 
aftermath of the 2004 tsunami. 
 
¶4.    (U) U.S. attention to Papuan issues was also at the top 
of the agenda.  Laksono criticized language on Papua that was 
recently proposed in Congressional legislation which he felt 
impinged on Indonesia's sovereignty.  He thanked Congress for 
removing the language.  Representative Price acknowledged 
Indonesia's sovereignty, and added that its democratic 
development enabled it to address challenges in Aceh and to 
make changes in the military that could help Indonesia more 
effectively govern Papua. 
 
¶5.    (U) Both sides supported strengthening Indonesia's 
democratic institutions.  Laksono discussed priorities in the 
final months of this parliament's term.  These include: 
pending legislation on the structure and role of legislative 
bodies and the State Secrets bill, as well as finalization of 
the State budget, potential accession to the International 
Criminal Court, and completing an investigation into possible 
irregularities which may have occurred during the April 
legislative elections. 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY REFORM 
 
¶6.    (U) HDAC has been intensely engaged in parliamentary 
reform efforts in the DPR since 2006.  A group of 
parliamentarians from various reform committees briefed HDAC 
on the progress to date and ongoing efforts.  In particular, 
the group focused on the bill on the structure and role of 
legislative bodies, which is at a crucial point in 
deliberations and is anticipated to pass shortly.  If passed, 
the bill would strengthen the role of the DPR (vis a vis the 
Executive Branch) and give members oversight over their own 
budget and staff. (Note: Currently the Executive Branch, 
through the office of the Secretary General, controls the 
parliamentary budget.)  Another goal is to allow for 
Parliament to participate in the selection of the Secretary 
General, currently an appointed position. 
 
¶7.    (U) The parliamentarians also hope to improve the 
ethics and participation of members.  They would like more 
public access to information.  They stated that increased 
resources aimed at improving member-constituent interaction 
and accountability are also essential.  They suggested that 
establishing local offices for members to directly interact 
with their constituents would be one way to increase member 
responsiveness.  They noted that there may be a move toward a 
district system such as in the U.S. which would strengthen 
the new focus on member-constituent relationships. 
 
MEETING NEW MPS 
 
¶8.    (U) The Ambassador hosted a coffee which offered the 
delegation an opportunity to engage with newly elected 
 
JAKARTA 00001152  002 OF 003 
 
 
members of Parliament who have not yet taken their seats. 
Ambassador Hume, Representative Price, Representative 
McDermott, and senior reformist parliamentarian Marzuki 
Darusman gave remarks on their hopes for continued U.S. 
Indonesian cooperation and the wish to engage the new DPR in 
reform efforts.  With over 60% turnover in Parliament, there 
is a sense of change and an opportunity for the Mission to 
engage these new MPs to advance U.S. priorities. 
 
DEFENSE/FOREIGN POLICY 
 
¶9.    (U) The delegation also held discussions regarding 
defense and foreign policy.  On July 1, the Members of 
Congress met with Minister Juwono Sudarsono at the Defense 
Ministry.   Representatives of the Indonesian military 
services joined Sudarsono for the discussion.  Representative 
Price noted the purpose of the delegation's visit, 
highlighting the importance of building links between 
legislatures, assisting partners in improving governance 
capabilities, and helping upgrade relations between the U.S. 
and other countries.   Sudarsono welcomed such interaction, 
commenting that the Indonesian military deeply appreciated 
training opportunities provided by the U.S.  These 
opportunities had helped the military become a more modern, 
reform-minded force.  Sudarsono added that Indonesia 
considered the U.S. role in Asia and the Pacific to be 
crucial to peace.  The U.S. played a "balancing role" which 
continued to be vital in Northeast and Southeast Asia. 
 
¶10.   (U) Sudarsono added that the Indonesian military 
continued to transform itself into a more professional force. 
 In the 1950s and stretching into the 1990s, the military had 
been highly engaged in governing the country as a form of 
"guided democracy."  With the advent of democracy in 1998, 
the military was now working under civilian management and 
trying to divest itself of businesses and other outside 
investments.  It still had many steps to take, but much 
progress had been made.  That said, because Indonesia was a 
poor country, the military--under the direction of the 
government--would remain engaged in trying to assist in 
building national  infrastructure, including health 
facilities and schools.  A high priority was also given to 
disaster response given that much of the country straddled 
"the ring of fire." 
 
¶11.   (U) In a separate meeting with parliamentarians, 
Representative Price noted Indonesia's military reform 
efforts and said that the U.S. Congress was committed to 
supporting the United States' military relationship with 
Indonesia.  He underscored the importance of legislative 
oversight of defense matters and sought Indonesian views on 
the subject.  Foreign affairs and Defense Committee 
Vice-Chairman Yusron Ihza said the DPR was committed to 
oversight of Indonesian defense and foreign policy.  This 
function, he said, was critical to safeguarding Indonesia's 
democracy.  Several parliamentarians hailed the lifting of 
Congressional restrictions on assistance to the Indonesian 
military and said that U.S. support was critical to building 
a professional and accountable military. 
 
¶12.   (U) Several parliamentarians explained that the DPR was 
pressing the GOI to make democracy and human rights a more 
central part of its foreign policy.  Many members entered 
politics after having been pro-democracy activists during 
Indonesia's authoritarian past.  Promoting democracy remained 
important to them.  Djoko Susilo said that Burma was a matter 
of the highest concern.  DPR members would continue to press 
the GOI to take a tougher line pressing the Burmese regime to 
reform.  Representative Price noted that smart power 
strategies like the HDAC were an effective way to promote 
democracy and encouraged the DPR to explore similar 
initiatives. 
 
HEALTH ISSUES 
 
¶13.   (U) Representative McDermott expressed interest in how 
the Congress could help advance health cooperation.  Mission 
provided a one page fact sheet, sent also to EAP/MTS. 
Mission also briefed the doctor accompanying the delegation. 
 
HDAC INVOLVEMENT REAPS DIVIDENDS 
 
¶14. (U) HDAC's continued engagement with the Indonesian 
Parliament over the past four years has encouraged Indonesian 
democratic initiatives.  Results of HDAC's efforts include 
the structural reform legislation currently under review. 
 
JAKARTA 00001152  003 OF 003 
 
 
More importantly, Indonesian parliamentarians have gone from 
asking why reforms are needed to asking how to enact them. 
The Indonesian commitment to parliamentary reform was evident 
in the strong turnout for all events and keen engagement in 
staff training.  Continuing to engage with the many new 
parliamentarians will be key in facilitating further 
democratic reform. 
 
¶15. (U) This message was approved by CODEL Price. 
HUME