09KABUL1902
UPDATE ON OBSERVER PRESENCE FOR AFGHAN ELECTIONS
Thu Jul 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO8991
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #1902/01 1971122
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161122Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0204
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 001902 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
USNATO FOR PHARRISON 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV PREL AF IR FR
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON OBSERVER PRESENCE FOR AFGHAN ELECTIONS 
 
REF: A. KABUL 1679 
 ¶B. KABUL 1136 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) At a July 13 press conference, the European Union 
officially launched its observer mission to the Afghan elections, 
which will deploy 86 observers around Afghanistan, including 50 
short-term observers, down slightly from earlier figures.  Post is 
negotiating grants with four implementers that would put over 250 
long-term and short-term observers into the field. The domestic 
observer organization FEFA plans to deploy 400 Afghan long-term 
observers and 7600 Afghan short-term observers which they hope will 
cover 65 percent of polling stations.  To achieve geographic 
distribution, we will rely in some cases on military support, 
including PRT support, and we are making these arrangements through 
ISAF.  We expect that frequent press conferences from now through 
the post-election period by FEFA and the outspoken EU Chief Observer 
will feature frequently in the Afghan media.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The EU launched its observer mission with a press conference 
on July 13 at Kabul's Intercontinental Hotel.  EU Chief Observer 
Gen. (Ret.) Philippe Morillon said he understood the challenges 
posed in these elections and hoped that the EU's neutral, impartial 
assessment would contribute to the strengthening of a legitimate and 
credible democratic process.  The EU long-term and short-term 
observers will evaluate the campaign season, voting day, results, 
and post-election activity.  The mission's mandate covers election 
administration, legal framework, media environment and role of civil 
society, and the participation of women and minorities. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Morillon editorialized that democracy is a prerequisite to 
harmonic development, and that, "peace is a part of Islam, and this 
beautiful country deserves it."  He said that Afghans deserve a 
future free of hegemony and terror.  He noted that international 
observers were excluded from Iran's recent elections, while 
observers helped bolster credibility of Lebanese elections.  He also 
said neighbors need to accept one another, as they are mutually 
dependent.  Comment:  Morillon hinted that in the context of looking 
at irregularities, his team will also examine outside interference 
in Afghanistan's elections.  His intent to hold frequent press 
conferences and his outspoken and extemporaneous style will likely 
make him a regular focus of Afghan media.  End Comment. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The EU is fielding 36 long-term observers and 50 
short-term observers.  It now plans to recruit short-term observers 
from EU and Canadian embassies in Kabul.  These numbers - adjusted 
for security reasons -- represent a decrease from the EU's original 
plan.  As previously reported (ref A) the EU mission will work out 
of eight regional hubs, but they will determine deployments outside 
the hubs at later dates, based on security assessments.  Morillon 
said they hope to cover all provinces in the country.  The EU 
mission expects the OSCE will embed their "experts" in the EU's 
regional hubs. 
 
U.S. Plans 
---------- 
¶5.  (SBU) The mission has signed the funding award this week with 
Democracy International (DI) for their observation mission. 
Preauthorization funding has already been approved for The Asia 
Foundation (TAF) in support of the ANFREL observer mission, the 
National Democratic Institute (NDI) and the International Republican 
Institute (IRI).  The TAF award should be finalized and signed next 
week.  All observer missions have begun their initial assessments 
and are in the process of finalizing their deployment plans, in 
consultation with USAID and the US Embassy.  These grants would put 
a total of over 250 long-term and short-term observers in the field. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Negotiations continue with several observer missions to 
ensure the most robust and extensive coverage possible given the 
current security environment.  Based on current planning, there will 
be coverage by USG funded international observers in 27 of the 32 
provinces.  This week, Ghazni, Helmand, Farah, and Zabul were added 
to the deployment plans, contingent upon support from ISAF and the 
PRTs (including lodging and transportation). 
¶7.  (SBU) Post is currently working through ISAF channels to secure 
PRT support for U.S.-funded observers where necessary (while 
cognizant of the limited resources available) and we are 
coordinating with the Europeans to de-conflict such requests.  This 
week the mission stood up the Logistics Coordination Center (LCC) to 
coordinate observers' requests for logistical support, including 
airlift and ISAF support.  The mission has received approval to 
bring in four additional aircraft to transport observers and other 
election-related entities. 
¶8. (SBU) In addition, U.S. Embassy Kabul plans to field a number of 
observer teams on election day in the greater Kabul area.  These 
teams would combine American and local staff.  We are working with 
 
KABUL 00001902  002 OF 002 
 
 
NDI to set up training for U.S. observers. 
 
Domestic Observers 
------------------ 
¶9.  (U) The Free and Fair Election Foundation of Afghanistan (FEFA), 
a coalition of Afghan groups that make up the domestic observation 
contingent, briefed donors on their election-day observation plans 
on June 14, noting that they had been observing throughout the 
electoral cycle.  To date, they have recruited 68 provincial 
representatives, of which half are women outreach officers 
responsible for recruiting and training female observers.  They are 
in the process of recruiting and training 400 long-term observers 
and 7600 short-term observers through their partner organizations 
and feel confident that they will be able to meet this target.  FEFA 
plans on holding several more press conferences between now and the 
final announcement of results: on the campaign period (August 19); 
on the opening and closing of the polls (August 20); and on the 
counting process (the last week of August).  FEFA plans to have 
observers in all 34 provinces, with fewer numbers in the most 
insecure districts.  They anticipate being able to observe in 65 
percent of all polling centers.  Per Ref B, the quality of FEFA's 
analysis has been an ongoing problem.  According to the Executive 
Director, FEFA has taken several steps to improve their data 
collection and analysis.  FEFA has created two databases, one that 
contains the contact information for their observers, and another 
that contains the information from the observers' checklists.  This 
information is then analyzed and interpreted by HQ staff.  Although 
they now have a new full-time UNDP advisor working with them on 
organizational capacity, FEFA is still looking for a new short-term 
consultant to help them with data analysis and monitoring and 
evaluation.  They are also expecting two OSCE experts to help 
formulate recommendations for the next electoral cycle. 
EIKENBERRY