09KABUL1762
Beyond 421 - Civilian Staffing Requirements for
Mon Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO0114
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #1762/01 1871531
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061531Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9989
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC
RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 14 KABUL 001762 
 
For D (Lew), M, SRAP (Jones), SCA/FO, SCA/A, NEA/SCA/EX 
STATE PASS to AID for ASIA/SCAA 
AGRICULTURE for FAS Michener 
NSC for Lute 
USFOR-A for COMISAF 
CENTCOM for CG CSTC-A 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.12958:N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER PGOV PREL ETRD EFIN AF
SUBJECT:  Beyond 421 - Civilian Staffing Requirements for 
Afghanistan 
 
Ref: A) Kabul 1093, B) 08 Kabul 2985, C) 08 Kabul 2970, D) 08 Kabul 
40 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Embassy Kabul has undertaken a review of our mission to determine 
the personnel and resourcing requirements to achieve success, a 
review that complements GEN McChrystal's ongoing 60-day review of 
ISAF's mission.  In Ref A, Embassy Kabul detailed a USG civilian 
uplift needed to implement the President's Strategy for Afghanistan 
and Pakistan that identified the structure, timing and costs of 421 
new positions across all agencies under Chief of Mission (COM) 
authority.  Over the past 60 days, Embassy Kabul has re-assessed its 
staffing requirements; this cable details the updated personnel 
requirements, the intended effects of increased civilian staff, and 
the timeline for achieving the effects.  These additional 
requirements include positions in Kabul and in the field. 
 
¶2. The President's Strategic Review for Afghanistan and Pakistan 
identified this region as our nation's highest national strategic 
and security priority.  We must resource the Mission in Afghanistan 
accordingly.  In comparison with Iraq, Afghanistan is larger and far 
more challenging geographically, has a bigger population, is more 
complex in tribal dynamics, and has been exhausted by over three 
decades of war that decimated Afghan capacity in the public and 
private sectors.  For comparison's sake, it is important to note 
that even with these additional staffing requirements, Embassy Kabul 
will remain smaller than Embassy Baghdad.  For example, in Iraq 
there are 336 State Department Foreign Service positions (not 
including USAID).  In Afghanistan, the current total of State 
Department Foreign Service positions (not including USAID) is 159, 
while the total, including the positions detailed in this cable, 
would rise to 315. 
 
¶3. For positions outside Kabul, the Embassy has worked with ISAF and 
USFOR-A to develop a civilian increase plan that establishes a 
structured civilian presence throughout the country to achieve 
civ-mil unity of effort at the sub-national level.  We have created 
a new model of the Senior Civilian Representative in Regional 
Commands (RC) East and South.  These Senior Foreign Service 
positions will permit the coordination and direction of work of all 
USG civilians under Chief of Mission authority within the region, 
ensure coherence of political direction and developmental efforts, 
and serve as the civilian counterpart to the military commander in 
the Regional Command.  In addition, at each level with civilian 
representation, we will identify a lead civilian to serve as the 
military commander's counterpart.  The responsibilities and 
authorities of the Senior Civilian Representative will be described 
in more detail in a separate cable. 
 
¶4. Employees under Chief of Mission authority receive up to 62 days 
of leave during a one-year tour; thus, when determining the staffing 
requirements, we must staff at a 1.3 multiple to ensure required 
coverage in sections -- a calculation entirely lacking from earlier 
assessments of personnel requirements. 
 
------------------------- 
Kabul Multi-Agency Effort 
------------------------- 
¶5. As noted in Ref A, new positions in Afghanistan under 
consideration in the FY-09 supplemental request from all agencies 
total 421.  This number reflected self-imposed limitations due to 
budget considerations and limited office and living space. 
Subsequently, a rigorous examination of the requirements to fully 
implement the new strategy results in an all-agency total of an 
additional 371 USDH/USPSC/3161/TCN/EFM positions and 361 LES/FSN for 
a total of 732 new positions.  This all-agency staffing will need to 
be funded through multiple sources, including the respective 
agencies' budgets. 
 
¶6. We have prioritized staffing requirements, identifying both when 
and where the positions are needed.  We have broken our requirements 
into three tranches: the positions we need immediately (summer 
2009), summer 2010 positions and summer 2011 positions.  Broken down 
by tranches, we require: 
- Summer/Autumn 2009: 148 new direct hire positions, 98 new LES; 
- Summer 2010: 183 new direct hire positions, 255 new LES; 
- Summer 2011: 40 new direct hire positions, 8 new LES. 
 
410 of the 732 positions will be based in Kabul, and 322 of the 
positions will be based in the field. 
 
KABUL 00001762  002 OF 014 
 
 
 
¶7. We have factored logistic considerations into our review of 
personnel requirements and will need Diplomatic Security waivers and 
OBO funding for new leases in order to house the staff required. 
The proposed civilian personnel increase outlined in this cable does 
not take into account those required for the proposed Corrections 
Facilities Task Force which has yet to be approved.  Lastly, this 
proposal does not include the 55 positions detailed in the GIRoA 
Civilian Technical Assistance Plan spearheaded by the Minister of 
Finance; we are considering the appropriate mechanism to hire up to 
20 (of the 55 requested by GIRoA) positions in support of the 
Civilian Technical Assistance Plan. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Management and Executive - Total new positions: 137 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶8. Current Management Section staffing is insufficient to support 
the civilian uplift needed to implement the President's Strategy. 
We need more management expertise immediately.  To underscore the 
staffing gap, Embassy Baghdad has 24 Foreign Service IRM personnel 
and 44 IRM personnel overall; in comparison, Kabul's numbers are 7 
Foreign Service and 22 IRM personnel in total. 
 
¶9. To support the civilian uplift, we need 3 positions immediately: 
- One deputy facility manager (FS-03); 
- One management officer (FS-01); and 
- One financial management officer (FS-03). 
 
¶10. In summer 2010, we need another 20 American positions (including 
4 EFM) and 87 new LES in Kabul: 
- One deputy IMO (FS-01); 
- One IMTS/Radio (FS-03); 
- One IMTS/Telephone (FS-03); 
- One IMTS/Digital (FS-03); 
- Four IMSes (FS-03) for IT support in Kabul and the field; 
- Four GSOs (FS-02/FS-03) for procurement, housing, travel, and 
property management; 
- One facility manager (FS-03); 
- One financial management officer (FS-02); 
- Two Knowledge Management specialists (contractor/3161); 
- 87 new LES (HR, financial management, procurement, property 
management, drivers, warehouse staff, maintenance personnel, 
computer and phone technicians); and 
- Four 4 EFM positions (including a third CLO). 
 
¶11. By summer 2011, we will need four additional IMSes (3 FS-04/05 
and one FS-03) and five additional LES Computer Management 
Assistants. 
 
¶12. The Embassy requires an interpretation/translation unit. 
Immediately we need to hire two LES interpreters, and by January 
2010 we need to add five LES interpreters.  One interpreter will be 
dedicated to the Ambassador and the others will be a pooled resource 
for the rest of the Embassy.  We will require seven separate LES to 
serve as document translators, mainly for Dari/Pashto-to-English, 
but also for the reverse direction.  This unit will be funded under 
ICASS or - if the ICASS committee does not support - we would scale 
back the numbers to an estimated four/four positions for exclusive 
State use. 
 
¶13. We are creating an Embassy Executive Secretariat.  To staff the 
responsibilities of this office, we require an immediate Senior 
Legal Advisor (GS-15); an immediate FS-02 Special Assistant 
position, and a second new Staff Assistant, at the FS-03 level, in 
summer 2010.  We also require an immediate FS-04 position to work in 
the embassy's new Joint Visitors Bureau. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Consular -- Total new positions: 3 
---------------------------------- 
¶14. Consular requires two additional officers immediately - a third 
entry-level officer (ELO) and a FS-03 American Citizen Services 
(ACS) officer.  ACS cases in Kabul are particularly complicated.  We 
have numerous deaths, arrest and kidnapping cases.  In handling 
these cases and all visa services, we typically have only two 
officers in the section (sometimes only one) due to the number of 
leave days officers receive.  With the expansion of full 
non-immigrant visa services on top of visas and ACS work, current 
staffing is inadequate.  We also need to ensure that HR continues to 
send excellent (and preferably second-tour) officers to fill the ELO 
billets.  In addition, we will need an additional ELO position in 
advance of opening an Immigrant Visa section, expected on/before 
summer 2010. 
 
KABUL 00001762  003 OF 014 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
The Field and the Provincial Affairs and Sub-National Governance 
Office -- Total new positions: 174 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶15. This month the Embassy will combine the State, USAID and USDA 
Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) offices into an integrated 
office.  In the field, we are integrating our effort by re-defining 
the Political Advisor positions in Regional Commands (RC) East and 
South as Senior Civilian Representatives of the Ambassador 
(described above).  We are also creating Regional Platforms at each 
Regional Command that will host sectoral experts from each technical 
office in support of regional programs. 
 
¶16. In Kabul, this new Provincial Affairs and Sub-National 
Governance Office will require an immediate additional five State 
Foreign Service positions, 16 State LES, two EFMs, and two USAID LES 
to support the work of our expanding civilian presence throughout 
Afghanistan. 
 
¶17. In the integrated office in Kabul, new State Foreign Service 
positions needed in summer 2009 are: 
 
- A Deputy Director at the FS-01 level.  This third State Department 
Deputy position will lead, mentor and support close to 150 State 
positions in the field; direct robust PRT analytical reporting on 
the four pillars of counterinsurgency; and advance integrated 
civilian-military efforts. 
 
- An Office Management Specialist (OMS) position at the FS-05 level. 
 This second OMS position for the office will provide managerial, 
logistical and administrative support for over 375 State, USAID and 
USDA positions in Kabul and the field by the end of 2009. 
 
- A Supervisory Management Officer at the FS-01 level.  This 
position will provide oversight and guidance to a newly-integrated 
State, USAID and USDA PRT Management Section, responsible for 
supporting over 375 State, USAID and USDA positions in Kabul and the 
field by the end of 2009. 
 
- A Deputy Reporting Coordinator at the FS-02 level, responsible for 
coordination of robust PRT analytical reporting on the four pillars 
of counterinsurgency and of tasking PRT reporting from all the State 
positions in the field. 
 
- A Sub-National Governance Officer at the FS-03 level.  This 
position will support the already existing State Department 
Sub-National Governance Officer in working with the Independent 
Directorate of Local Governance (IDLG), the Civil Service 
Commission, UNAMA in the field, and other GIRoA institutions and 
governance officials. 
 
- LES positions in Kabul:  Four to cover the Independent Directorate 
of Local Governance, two to assist with Provincial Affairs and 
Sub-National Governance Office public diplomacy duties, two for SBU 
Knowledge Management, three to work budget/procurement/ 
transportation issues, two to cover field admin issues, two to 
provide information technology "help desk" support to the field, one 
LES to work with 2 new EFM positions to staff a "business center" 
for field representatives to use while in Kabul, and two USAID LES. 
 
¶18. In the field, we require 25 immediate new State Department 
positions and four new USAID positions in support of civ-mil 
integration, governance, development and  strategic communications. 
 
 
¶19. Background Note:  There are ten State Department Public 
Diplomacy positions funded in the FY09 Supplemental; the Mission 
will put five of these positions in Kabul and five as Public 
Diplomacy Officers in the field at what the Mission deems the 
highest priority PRTs.  The Public Diplomacy/Strategic 
Communications positions detailed below are in addition to these ten 
FY09 Supplemental positions. 
 
¶20. In the field, the immediate positions in support of all lines of 
operation consist of: 
 
- The Regional Command-East (RC-E) Senior Civilian Representative 
(SCR) and support team.  In RC-E, the SCR platform will comprise a 
Minister Counselor SCR, an FS-01 Political Officer, an FS-02 
Governance Officer, a 3161 Public Diplomacy/Strategic Communications 
position, a USAID Regional Communications Officer, an FS-02 ROL 
Officer, an FS-02 Management Officer, an FS-02 Economic Officer, an 
 
KABUL 00001762  004 OF 014 
 
 
FS-03 Staff Assistant, and two FS-06 Office Management Specialists. 
This will entail eight new immediate FS positions and one 3161 
position because the Political and Public Diplomacy/Strategic 
Communications positions exist. 
 
- The Regional Command-South (RC-S) Senior Civilian Representative 
and support team.  In RC-S, the SCR platform will comprise of 
existing positions and new positions.  Existing positions are the 
Minister Counselor SCR (currently an FE-OC position), an FS-01 
Political Officer, a ROL Officer, and an FS-02 Management Officer. 
New positions are a 3161 Public Diplomacy/Strategic Communications 
position, a USAID Regional Communications Officer, an FS-02 Economic 
Officer, an FS-02 Public Diplomacy/Strategic Communications Officer, 
an FS-03 Staff Assistant, and two FS-06 Office Management 
Specialists. 
 
- At both RC-N and RC-W headquarters, one USAID Regional 
Communications Officer. 
 
- In RC-E, one 3161 Public Diplomacy/Strategic Communications 
position, based at Task Force Spartan. 
 
- At the "Fusion Cells" to be created by USAFOR-A at every Regional 
Command, we require the creation of State Department Civilian 
Information Operations officers.  These four 3161 positions will 
integrate intelligence and operations; support the Office of 
Messaging and Content by providing baseline data on perceptions and 
attitudes; and have direct access to data collection and analysis 
operations in the field. 
 
- In RC-S, one FS-03 Governance Deputy position for PRT Zabul. 
 
- INL Counternarcotics Advisors.  We require five PSC 
Counternarcotics (CN) Advisors positions in summer 2009.  These 
positions are in addition to the three CN Advisor positions 
currently slated to support the CJIATF in Kandahar, and will allow 
INL/NAS to provide real-time CN support and advice to PRTs, local 
governors, and other decision makers in provinces facing significant 
poppy cultivation, narco-trafficking, and/or addiction challenges, 
and, where appropriate, to oversee and support INL/NAS-funded 
projects (GPI, CNAT, DDR, etc.)  These positions will be based in 
the field in coordination with PRTs and regional commanders. 
 
 
¶21. In addition, the integrated PRT office requires 46 new immediate 
LES positions in the field, as detailed: 
 
- Senior Civilian Representative staff: three LES for admin/driver 
duties and one for protocol work. 
 
- At PRTs, add ten LES positions to give each PRT an LES and to 
provide a float of four positions necessary to cover absences due to 
leave, hiring delays, or personal security threats. 
 
- At District Support Teams (DSTs), add 35 LES positions to provide 
one political assistant in priority districts and have sufficient 
rovers to cover absences at PRTs. 
 
¶22.  In summer 2010, the Provincial Affairs and Sub-National 
Governance Office requires the addition of 52 direct hire positions 
and 24 LES positions: 
 
- In RC-E, one FS-03 Provincial Governance and Development Office 
(PGDO) State position for Panjshir; four FS-03 Governance Deputy 
positions (one each for PRTs Kapisa, Nangarhar, Wardak and Logar). 
 
- Also in RC-E, 3161 civilian IO positions in Ghazni, Gardez and TF 
Yukon in Salerno to leverage SOF operations in those areas and to 
work with the Fusion Cells. 
 
- In RC-North and RC-West, we require a second civilian IO position 
at both locations to coordinate with Special Operations Forces to 
cover all the provinces of these regional commands. 
 
- FS-02 Public Diplomacy Officers in the field at the PRTs in 
Asadabad, Parwan/Kapisa, and Ghazni; and 3161 Public Diplomacy 
positions in Qalat and Farah. 
 
- LES positions at Provincial Governance and Development Offices 
(PGDOs):  eight LES positions at each (of three) PGDOs: four LES for 
drivers/admin, two for secretarial/protocol, and two for political 
assistants. 
 
 
KABUL 00001762  005 OF 014 
 
 
¶23. In the provinces, the Department of Justice seeks to begin a 
plus-up in March 2010.  DOJ will create six attorney positions, with 
two each located in Herat, Jalalabad and Mazar-e Sharif.  These 
attorneys will mentor local investigators, prosecutors and judges on 
criminal matters.  DOJ will create three police mentor positions 
(one each in Herat, Jalalabad and Mazar-e Sharif) to work with the 
DOJ attorneys in those cities, and will support these positions with 
one LES in each of the three cities.  DOJ has no direct funding for 
its Afghanistan positions, and expects to continue to rely on 
outside funding such as INL or DOD. 
 
¶24. Rule of Law (ROL) Office.  The Mission's new Access to Justice 
initiative focuses on driving U.S. rule of law assistance to the 
community and district level, bolstering informal justice and 
finding new and creative mechanisms to extend formal justice into 
critical communities.  Extending U.S. rule of law assistance to the 
local level requires a new "front-line" of ROL officers (3161 hiring 
authority) based at Provincial Reconstruction Teams who will focus 
on the Afghan population's access to justice, coordinating the range 
of U.S. civilian and military activities.  These must be supported 
by ROL coordinators (also 3161 hiring authority) at the regional 
level who can assist this "front-line" with a flexible and timely 
toolbox of civilian and military resources.  Currently four ROL 
coordinators are on track to deploy this month to the regional 
level. 
 
- To fully implement this system, we need an additional 19 
Provincial ROL officers, managed by five Regional ROL Coordinators 
based at the integrated civilian-military teams at Brigade and 
Division headquarters in Regional Commands East and South. 
 
- INL Counternarcotics Advisors.  We require five PSC 
Counternarcotics (CN) Advisors positions in summer 2010 to 
supplement the five positions detailed above (para. 20) for summer 
¶2009. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Strategic Communications - Consolidated and Integrated 
Total new positions: 33 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶25. Public Affairs.  A new Senior Foreign Service Director for 
Public Communications will oversee an integrated Public 
Affairs/Strategic Communications office containing the following 
functions:  the Public Affairs Section, USAID Communications Office, 
Afghan Capacity Building Office, and the Office for Messaging and 
Content.  In addition to the five FY09 Supplemental positions on the 
way for Kabul, we require five immediate positions and 28 new 
positions for this integrated office by summer 2010. 
 
¶26. We require five immediate positions: the Senior Foreign Service 
Director for Public Communications, one FS-06 OMS, one FS-03 Staff 
Aide, one immediate State Department FS-01 Liaison Officer to the 
ISAF Communications Director, and one immediate State Department 
FS-02 Liaison Officer to the USFOR-A Information Operations Task 
Force (IOTF). 
 
¶27. We will need eight additional State positions in summer 2010: 
one FS-02 Management Officer, one FS-02 Deputy Spokesperson, two 
FS-03 Assistant Information Officers, one FS-03 Assistant Cultural 
Affairs Officers, and three FS-03 Public Diplomacy Officers to 
support public affairs and strategic communications in the field. 
 
¶28. An entirely new Office for Messaging and Content will be created 
by summer 2010 to implement USG messaging and content production. 
This office will include nine 3161 positions: 
- One senior advisor; 
- One content/production manager; 
- One photographer/ videographer; 
- Four public opinion/polling experts to oversee messaging; - One 
technology/infrastructure advisor; and 
- One civilian IO to ISAF HQ Fusion Cell. 
 
¶29. The USAID Communications Office requires a Deputy Director 
(Press Officer), two sectoral specialists, and a 
writer/editor/webmaster. 
 
¶30. The Afghan Capacity Building Office will include the Government 
Media Information Center (GMIC), which is the first step in building 
a functioning Afghan Government Information Service (AGIS) extending 
across the entire government.  The core of this effort will be 2,000 
trained Afghan "communicators" (ministers and governors at the top, 
elders and civil servants at the bottom - with lots in between.)  To 
build the AGIS, we require an overlay of U.S. communication 
 
KABUL 00001762  006 OF 014 
 
 
professionals for 2-3 years to mentor the process.  The direct hire 
need is for seven new positions to manage the system. 
 
¶31. The requirement for new GMIC positions in Kabul is as follows: 
 
- One 3161 Master trainer to guide the development of a capable 
Afghan training and capacity building department. 
- One 3161 Media Liaison Advisor to develop a team of Afghan 
specialists who will assist and manage visits by international 
journalists to Afghanistan. 
- One 3161 New Media Advisor to develop a team of Afghan specialists 
who will produce rapid response electronic media products. 
- One 3161 Production Advisor to oversee the training of a 
professional TV and radio production team and to supervise the GMIC 
studio. 
- One 3161 Provincial Outreach Coordinator to assist with the 
build-out of 16 or more GMIC satellite office in the provinces. 
- One 3161 Financial Management Officer to train an Afghan 
management team which will manage donor assistance to build the 
AGIS. 
- One 3161 Human Resources Officer to train and assist an Afghan 
team which will recruit and deploy 2,000 AGIS communicators. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Political and Political-Military Affairs - 
Total new positions: 28 
------------------------------------------- 
¶32. Political.  POL will require fourteen additional officers, one 
more OMS and four more LES by summer 2011.  We must add three FS-03 
officers (one to work reconciliation, one to work parliament issues, 
and one to reinforce S/SRAP global and regional diplomacy in Kabul) 
and one LES in summer 2009.  We require one FS-01, two FS-02, three 
FS-03 and two LES positions by summer 2010 to expand our coverage of 
reconciliation and Afghan foreign policy generally, with a dedicated 
officer to cover Iran.  By summer 2011, we will require one 
additional FS-01 (a new second deputy section head), two FS-02 
(reconciliation), two FS-03 (Parliament, UNAMA coverage), an OMS and 
one LES position. 
 
¶33. Political-Military.  The Political-Military section is currently 
authorized five officers and an OMS.  Under the changing conditions 
we are already experiencing -- the rapid buildup of U.S. Forces in 
Afghanistan, acceleration of training of the Afghan National 
Security Forces (ANSF), and the changing organizational structure of 
both the Embassy and USFOR-A/ISAF -- workloads are rising and the 
current section staffing level must be revised upwards. 
 
¶34. The Pol-Mil section needs an additional six political-military 
officers, two LES employees, and an EFM position.  The target date 
for filling four of the FS positions, the two LES positions and the 
EFM position is August 2009.  The two FS-02 liaison officer 
positions with the Command Groups for CJSOTF and CFSOCC-A are summer 
2010 requirements. 
 
¶35. The priority order for filling the immediate requirements for 
the Political-Military section is as follows: 
 
- One immediate FS-03 officer focused on transitioning the Pol-Mil 
role in Law of War detainee affairs into a wider role in Rule of Law 
issues, including Afghan Police (ANP) reorientation and Interior 
Ministry (MOI) reform.  The position will provide analysis/reporting 
on MOI reform and anti-corruption efforts (and international support 
of those efforts) and ANP programs and performance.  The position 
will also staff heavy schedule of multi-national meeting and 
coordination on police issues. 
 
- One immediate FS-03 officer focused on coverage of and 
analysis/reporting on:  Afghan National Army (ANA) 
training/development and performance; Defense Ministry (MOD) and 
Parliamentary defense committees; local reconciliation issues; staff 
support for multi-national meetings and coordination on ANP issues. 
 
- One immediate LES for coverage and contact work at the Interior 
Ministry and within the Afghan National Police. 
 
- One EFM, primarily to help track and manage growing Leahy vetting 
responsibilities. 
 
- One LES for coverage and contact work at the Defense Ministry and 
within the Afghan Army. 
 
- One FS-02 position for supervision of ANA police 
training/development analysis/reporting, intensified liaison with 
 
KABUL 00001762  007 OF 014 
 
 
USFOR-A/ISAF and NATO Senior Civilian Representative, relevant 
Afghan parliamentary coverage. 
 
- One FS-02 position focused on Non-proliferation issues, and 
supervision of growing programs in DIAG/demining programs/MANPADS 
recovery. 
 
¶36. In summer 2010, the Pol-Mil section needs two FS-02 Political 
Officer positions to serve as liaison officers to the Command Groups 
and strategic planning sections of the Combined Joint Special 
Operations Task Force (CJSOTF) and the Combined Forces Special 
Operations Component Command - Afghanistan (CFSOCC-A). 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Economic Development -- Total new positions: 12 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶37. The Department of Commerce has proposed to create a Commercial 
Officer position in Kabul.  The Mission supports this proposal and 
given the time that officer would be away from post, believes USDOC 
should consider adding a second, more junior position in Kabul as 
well.  USDOC has also proposed to create positions for three 
business development professionals to be stationed one each in 
Kabul, Mazar-e Sharif and Jalalabad at proposed Trade and ROZ 
Support Hubs.  The Mission believes the functions envisioned for 
these latter positions could duplicate efforts of other donors or 
the Afghan private sector, and we are not prepared to support this 
proposal at this time.  In addition to the one USDOC-funded LES 
position already extant here, we believe the two Commercial Officers 
in Kabul should be supported by two more LES positions - one to 
start when the first American arrives and the other to start when 
the second American arrives - and one OMS, who should start when the 
first American arrives. 
 
¶38. Economic Section.  Econ's current staff numbers - five officers, 
one OMS, and one LES - are inadequate to manage the expanding 
workload of the vital economic function here.  Econ requires an 
additional five officers, another OMS and another LES Economic 
Assistant.  The Embassy's current OC Border Coordinator position 
will be re-graded at the FS-02 level and folded into the Economic 
Section.  This proposal thus represents a net increase of nine 
direct hire American positions for the overall economic function. 
 
¶39. New Econ Section positions, required immediately, include 1) a 
second Deputy Economic Counselor at the FS-01 level to supervise 
work on trade and investment policy, energy, natural resources, 
transportation and telecommunications policy, labor and ESTH, etc.; 
2) two FS-02 Macroeconomic Policy Officers to report on Afghan 
macroeconomic performance and compliance with economic conditions 
agreed under programs supported by the international financial 
institutions and support Mission efforts to combat illicit finance; 
and 3) two FS-02 officers to advocate for and report on Afghan 
adoption of policies conducive to private sector development, manage 
the Embassy's participation in the Joint Coordination and Monitoring 
Board (JCMB) process, report on progress in implementing Afghan 
National Development Strategy (ANDS) goals, and support the 
Section's public outreach programs. 
 
¶40. With the enhanced staffing, the Economic Section will comprise 
two broad work areas: macroeconomics, donor coordination (JCMB), and 
regional cooperation on the one hand, and trade and investment 
policy and infrastructure on the other.  Each will be headed by a 
Deputy Counselor and each requires one OMS and one LES Economic 
Assistant. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Agriculture and Development - USDA and USAID - 
Total new positions: 134 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
¶41. USDA's Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) will open an Office of 
Agricultural Affairs in Kabul.  The Agricultural Counselor will 
coordinate the increase in USDA presence in Afghanistan from the 
present number of 14 to 64.  All of these positions are already 
approved, but are included in this cable to update recipients on FAS 
plans.  In Kabul the eight new approved positions are: one FSO 
Agricultural Counselor, one Senior Agricultural Development Officer, 
one inter-agency planner, four Ministry of Agriculture Expert 
Advisors, and one Deputy PRT Liaison.  In the field, we require 42 
USDA Field Experts.  When staffing is complete USDA will have 9 
staff in Kabul and 55 staff in the field. 
 
¶42. The United States is the largest donor to Afghanistan and the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is 
designated the principal agency for managing U.S. Government 
 
KABUL 00001762  008 OF 014 
 
 
development assistance in-country, with an overall portfolio valued 
at approximately $5.8 billion.  This is the largest USAID program in 
the world, with comprehensive sector programs in agriculture and 
alternative livelihoods development, health, education, democracy 
and governance, economic development and infrastructure 
rehabilitation and construction.  USAID/Afghanistan also has 
transitional and special initiatives involving Provincial 
Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) and sub-national governance, 
capacity-building, peace and reconciliation, civil society, women's 
rights, and support to victims affected by conflict.  Finally, USAID 
seeks to establish a presence in Afghanistan to address on-going and 
chronic natural and man-made humanitarian disasters, affecting 
vulnerable Afghan populations. 
 
¶43. The high levels of funding and the urgent need to deliver rapid 
developmental progress in Afghanistan are contingent upon personnel 
structures and capacity required for robust accountable program 
implementation.  To enable USAID to maintain professional continuity 
and program management at all times and to ensure adequate coverage, 
additional permanent staff are required on a timely basis. USAID 
will staff up to four regional platforms with technical experts to 
provide more effective program management in the field.  Up to ten 
officers representing the technical offices of agriculture, 
education, health, economic growth, and infrastructure will be on 
each platform.  Each USAID platform will be led by a Senior Foreign 
Service-ranked officer reporting operationally to the Senior 
Civilian Representative and evaluated by the USAID Mission 
Director. 
 
¶44. In view of the above, USAID/Afghanistan needs 131 LES positions 
beyond previous requests.  Almost all of these positions will be 
field-based at the regional platform, brigade, task force, PRT, and 
district level.  There will be an emphasis of these new positions in 
the COIN-focused southern and eastern regions of the country. 
 
¶45. Currently USAID/Afghanistan has a total of 384 positions, and we 
previously identified the need for 178 more positions (Ref. A); 264 
of the 384 are filled, and recruitment actions are at various stages 
for the remaining vacant or requested positions. Of the 178 
previously approved, 20 will be onboard in July 2009, 50 by October 
2009, and the remainder by January 2010.  Of the 131 LES request, 
all will be onboard by January 2010.  A significant number of new 
positions will be development experts focused on agricultural 
technical assistance and program management at the provincial 
level. 
 
¶46. CDC/HHS -- HHS will staff its first permanent Afghanistan 
position in August.  HHS will require a second USDH position (at the 
GS-14/15 level) to provide additional support to in-country HHS 
programs (maternity and neo-natal care mentoring, PEPFAR), and two 
FSN/LES for administrative and translation support. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Rule of Law and Justice Programs - 
Total new positions: 31 
----------------------------------- 
¶47. At present, six DOJ attorneys working in Kabul provide 
operational mentoring and advisory embedded support to their Afghan 
counterparts.  The creation of the nascent Major Crimes Task Force 
(MCTF) requires ten new DOJ criminal division positions in Kabul, to 
be in place by October 2009.  We also require four attorneys at the 
Afghan Anticorruption Unit of the Attorney Generals office to mentor 
handling high value corruption cases.  DOJ will also create eight 
new LES positions for a total of 12 LES slots in Kabul.  DOJ needs 
to add two more police mentors to assist investigators at the 
Counter Narcotics Justice Task Force.  In addition, as noted above, 
the DOJ seeks to increase its presence in the provinces effective in 
March 2010. 
 
¶48. The Legatt Section requires the addition of two (GS-14) 
Assistant Legal Attache (ALAT) positions, projected for summer 2010. 
 The ALAT positions will be in support of the Legatt Section's 
capacity building efforts relating to the Afghan Major Crimes Task 
Force (MCTF).  Both positions are expected to work from the U.S. 
Embassy.  These position requirements are based on an NSDD-38 in 
draft at FBIHQ. 
 
¶49. Rule of Law Office.  To support the Mission's new Access to 
Justice initiative focused on driving U.S. rule of law assistance to 
the community and district level, described above, the Rule of Law 
Coordinator's office must be enlarged.  To implement a nation-wide 
ROL program throughout Afghanistan, the ROL office requires five new 
positions in Kabul: 
 
KABUL 00001762  009 OF 014 
 
 
 
SUMMER 2009 [Note: we will ask the U.S. military to fill three of 
these positions]: 
- One FS-4 FSO to liaise with USG law enforcement offices at post 
where there is ROL overlap, and to assist with the execution of the 
ROL Implementation Mechanism; 
- One Senior Military Legal Advisor at the O-5 level to supervise 
the military portion of the ROL coordination mission and to oversee 
RC-E activities; 
- One Deputy Military Legal advisor at the O-4 level to oversee RC-S 
activities; and 
- One Military Legal Advisor at the O-4 level to track and 
coordinate all USG ROL activities (civilian and military) and to 
execute the ROL Implementation Mechanism. 
 
SUMMER 2010: 
- One FS-3 FSO to coordinate USG ROL activities with the 
international community. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Border Security -- Total new positions: 36 
------------------------------------------ 
¶50. The Border Management Task Force (BMTF) requires an additional 
36 Customs and Border Police Mentors (USG civilians or contractors) 
to focus on Kandahar, Shir Khan Bandar, Zaranj and Aquina.  Mentors 
would work with Afghan Customs Department Officers, Afghan Customs 
Police and Afghan Border Police at Border Crossing Points, Inland 
Customs Depots and other locations to increase operational 
effectiveness of these organizations. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Inter-Agency Plans, Strategy and Assessment Office 
-- Total new positions: 7 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶51. The Integrated Civilian-Military Action Group (ICMAG) currently 
facilitates USG inter-agency planning and coordination.  As the U.S. 
Mission executes the Integrated Civ-Mil Campaign Plan, the 
requirements for civ-mil strategic and operational planning and 
assessment will increase and evolve.  To ensure effective, 
integrated, and adaptive implementation of the counterinsurgency 
strategy, we will organize the inter-agency coordinating structure 
to focus on plans, strategy and assessment. 
 
¶52. The Embassy will pair this civ-mil inter-agency planning 
capability with an increased capability to measure progress in 
Afghanistan.  On the civilian side, in the summer of 2009, the 
Department of State requires seven 3161 positions with metrics and 
assessment expertise.  Three positions will reside in Kabul to 
analyze governance, rule of law, Afghan perceptions and community 
development.  The remaining four positions will provide civilian 
assessment and analysis expertise at the ISAF Regional Command 
Headquarters (RC-E, RC-S, RC-W, and RC-N). 
 
¶53. Currently, ICMAG staffing includes four USAID positions, four 
U.S. Military detailees, and five Department of State TDY 
appointments (three in Kabul, one each at RC-East headquarters and 
RC-South headquarters) provided by the Office of the Coordinator for 
Reconstruction and Stabilization (S/CRS).  The 2009 Supplemental 
includes one additional position in Kabul to work with the newly 
established ISAF civ-mil Fusion Cell.  S/CRS is currently working 
with Embassy Kabul to convert the five TDY appointments into regular 
positions.  If the appointments are not converted, the Department of 
State will require five new positions to support the inter-agency 
coordinating structure. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Transportation, including FAA - 
Total new positions: 17 
-------------------------------- 
¶54. The Department of Transportation and FAA have assessed the 
Afghan Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation and find the 
Ministry in urgent need of a significant technical 
assistance/capacity building program in both the road transport and 
civil aviation areas of responsibility.  Success in these areas 
could lead to important increases in the Afghan Government's revenue 
collection.  To best assist the Ministry of Transport, DOT and FAA 
have identified the need for eight new DOT and nine additional FAA 
positions to supplement the five FAA positions currently funded, 
increasing the number of Transportation personnel at post to 22. 
Each of these positions will be Kabul-based, and travel on TDY to 
other locations as necessary. 
 
¶55. For the Department of Transportation, the eight positions are 
 
KABUL 00001762  010 OF 014 
 
 
needed immediately and listed in priority order as follows: 
 
- One Transportation Attache (SES), to manage the USG Transportation 
assistance program, coordinate USG interagency transportation 
activities, and help the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation 
(MoTCA) coordinate with other Afghan government Ministries. 
 
- One Chief of Chief of Staff/Strategic Coordinator (GS-15), 
primarily to assist Afghan Transportation officials to develop 
transportation strategic plans and capitalize on donor 
opportunities. 
 
- One Cultural Advisor/Interpreter (GS-14/15) to coordinate and 
advise TransAtt, and to interpret for USG-GIRoA meetings. 
 
- One Project Management/Contract Advisor (GS-13/15) to manage 
contracts, ensure compliance, and develop funding sources. 
 
- One Road Infrastructure and Freight Transport Advisor (GS-15) to 
serve as management advisor to Minister of Transport and Deputy and 
to mentor/coach Afghan Kamaz Freight director and advance capacity 
building. 
 
- One Passenger Transport Advisor (GS-14/15) to mentor/coach Afghan 
Millie Bus director and advance capacity building. 
 
- One Emerging Modes Advisor (GS-14/15) to coordinate USG strategic 
planning, especially on river and/or rail transport options. 
 
- One Transportation Law and Regulation Attorney-Advisor (GS-15) to 
assist Afghan Government in developing a modern transportation law, 
regulations, and safety standards. 
 
¶56. For the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the nine 
additional positions are: 
 
- One Air Traffic Management position (GS-14/PSC) (immediate) to 
work with MoTCA staff to develop an air traffic system that complies 
with ICAO standards. 
 
- One Technical Operations position (GS-14) (summer 2010) to provide 
advice, guidance and assistance to help MOTCA build a technical 
operations system; develop and implement a communication, navigation 
and surveillance (CNS) system strategic plan and robust maintenance 
and logistics systems. 
 
- One Airports Specialist (GS-14/PSC) (immediate) to provide advice 
and guidance in the development of airport master plans and the 
establishment of an airports oversight capability. 
 
- One Legal mentor (immediate) to develop a legal support 
organization; develop bi-lateral aviation agreements; and encourage 
open sky agreements to support economic growth. 
 
- Five Business/Project Management Advisors (GS-13/14/PSC) 
(immediate).  These positions include a Procurements Specialist, a 
Budgeting Expert, an Accounting Expert, a Project Management 
Specialist, and a Civil Engineer. 
 
The Mission highlights the following five positions which are 
currently funded but require additional funding to continue beyond 
FY-2010 [Note:  these positions are not included in the sum total]: 
 
- One Senior Aviation Advisor Manager (GS-15), currently filled. 
- One Aviation Security position (GS-14/15), currently filled. 
- Two Safety Oversight positions (GS-14), funded in FY-09 
Supplemental, not yet filled. 
- One Aviation Training Programs/Assistant Manager (GS-14/15), 
funded in FY-09 Supplemental, not yet filled. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Treasury - Total new positions: 25 
---------------------------------- 
¶57. Treasury requires 22 new direct hires and three new LES hires 
for Afghanistan.  The timing of these new positions is still to be 
determined.  As we learned in Iraq, sound public financial 
management is as important to stability and effective governance as 
defense and security.  Progress in Afghanistan requires urgent 
attention to improving the ability of the Afghan state to deliver 
public services and counter illicit financing sources that sustain 
terrorist networks and the insurgency. 
 
¶58. The uplift in personnel proposed herein focuses on three of 
 
KABUL 00001762  011 OF 014 
 
 
Treasury's comparative advantages:  1) fiscal and monetary policy 
(five positions); 2) building/strengthening public financial 
management systems (six positions); and 3) detecting and disrupting 
illicit finance (three positions).  To augment the capabilities of 
Kabul's Treasury Attache office, the Department plans to add 11 
other positions. 
 
¶59. For fiscal management: 
- One Advisor to the Afghan Minister of Finance to provide strategic 
advice on budget and revenue policy formulation; 
- One Advisor to the Afghan Central Bank Governor to provide 
strategic advice on monetary policy formulation, research, and 
analysis; 
- One Advisor to the Central Bank's Financial Supervision Unit to 
work on strengthening the regulatory framework and oversight of the 
banking sector; and 
- Two locally engaged financial analysts to work in the Afghan 
Central Bank provincial offices to collect and analyze critical 
financial data for monetary authorities in Kabul. 
 
¶60. For public financial management: 
- One Advisor to the Ministry of Finance's (MoF) Budget Director to 
provide strategic support on budget formulation/execution and 
improve expenditure analysis; 
- One Advisor to the MoF Treasury Director to provide strategic 
advice on cash flow management and local debt issuance; 
- Two Advisors for PRTs in Afghanistan to work on improving the link 
between local budget execution and national budget formulation (one 
in RC-East and one in RC-South); 
- One Advisor to MoF's Internal Audit Unit to combat and reduce 
corruption and waste; 
- One Advisor on non-tax revenue collection to work with the Afghan 
Finance Ministry. 
 
¶61. For detecting and combating illicit finance: 
- One Advisor to the Afghan Central Bank's Financial Intelligence 
Units to improve tracking and interdiction of illicit financial 
activity; 
- One Advisor to the Afghan Central Bank's Financial Supervision 
Units to strengthen anti-money laundering/combating the financing of 
terrorism (AML/CFT) efforts, supervision of the formal financial 
sectors, and oversight of hawaladars and charity organizations; and 
 
- One Advisor to the Ministry of Interior (MoI) Internal Audit Unit 
to work on security -sector expenditure reform and efforts to remove 
cash from the battlefield. 
 
¶62. To support our expanded level of activity in Afghanistan: 
- One Fiscal and Monetary Policy Specialist in Kabul to provide 
strategic guidance, analysis and policy advice to the Embassy on 
economic and financial issues; 
- One Public Financial Management Specialist in Kabul to advise on 
budget, revenue and audit policy, and to facilitate communication 
and coordination among the various entities playing a role in public 
financial management capacity building, including Treasury technical 
advisors, other USG assistance providers, and the Mission's 
Coordinating Director for Development and Economic Affairs; 
- One Illicit Finance Specialist in Kabul to provide strategic 
guidance, analysis, and policy advice to the Embassy on illicit 
finance issues and to facilitate civilian and military 
coordination; 
- Two Field Operations Specialists to expand our work on illicit 
finance and revenue management issues (notionally, one in each of 
the proposed Herat and Mazar-e Sharif consulates); 
- Two Sanctions Investigators from the Office of Foreign Assets 
Control (OFAC) to pursue narcotics designations and work analyze 
narcotics financing issues (one at the ATFC and one at the Counter 
Narcotics Joint Interagency Task Force) as part of the ATFC; 
- One Intelligence Analyst from the Office of Intelligence and 
Analysis to provide reach-back analytic support to ATFC; 
- One Office of Intelligence and Analysis representative on the 
Office of the Director of National Intelligence-led Afghanistan and 
Pakistan Task Force; 
- One Logistics Specialist to manage the requirements of Treasury's 
expanded assistance; and 
- One LES for admin support and translation/interpretation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Police Training and Other INL/NAS Programs - 
Total new positions in Kabul: 48 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶63. INL.  The focus of INL programs is changing, so the following 
projections will likely be modified.  The INL/NAS office requires 48 
 
KABUL 00001762  012 OF 014 
 
 
new Foreign Service, PSC, and LES personnel in Kabul to provide 
effective oversight for growing programs in the counternarcotics, 
rule of law, and police training sectors.  INL/NAS will also 
provide, as needed, FS and PSC staff to support combined task forces 
and regional hubs in coordination with the PRT office and Senior 
Civilian Representatives. 
 
¶64. INL Police Program (12 positions).  INL/NAS currently provides 
support to CSTC-A in implementing the nation-wide Police Training 
Program with a single FS-02 police program manager (PM) and six PSC 
Police Advisors.  For INL/NAS to adequately support anticipated 
increases in the police program in the coming years, 12 new 
positions will be required.  However, if any contracting and 
oversight responsibilities are transferred to CSTC-A, these numbers 
may be reduced. 
 
- Senior Civilian Police Advisor (FE-OC), summer 2009.   This 
position would provide direct support to the CSTC-A commander and 
serve as a liaison between CSTC-A, Post, and State/INL. (Kabul/Camp 
Eggers) 
- Deputy Police Program Manager (FS-02), summer 2009.  This position 
would support NAS police program manager and serve as PM in his/her 
absence. (Kabul/Embassy) 
-  Ten (10) Police Advisors (PSC):  three positions in summer 2009 
and seven in summer 2010.  These additional advisor positions would 
give INL/NAS permanent representation at all 7 Regional Training 
Centers (RTC) (and two proposed for construction) and provide 
effective oversight of mentor programs and other activities in 
Kabul.  (RTC's/Kabul) 
 
¶65. INL Rule of Law (4 positions).  INL/NAS' Rule of Law programs -- 
primarily the Justice Sector Support Program (JSSP) and the 
Corrections Sector Support Program (CSSP) - are currently overseen 
by a single FS-01 Justice Program Manager supported by one PSC 
Justice Program advisor.  To support the anticipated growth in all 
Rule of Law/Justice areas, Post will need four additional positions 
in Kabul, in addition to the ROL positions mentioned earlier for the 
field.  [Note:  final approval of the Corrections Facilities Task 
Force could lead to reductions in these numbers.] 
 
- Deputy Justice Program Manager (FS-02), summer 2009.  This 
position would support the Justice Program Manager and serve in 
his/her absence. 
- Corrections Program Advisor (PSC), summer 2009.  This position 
would directly oversee CSSP and serve as liaison between Embassy and 
the Corrections Facilities Task Force. 
- Construction Architect/Engineer: (two PSCs), summer 2009.  INL has 
recently begun a massive prison remodeling project (Pol-i-Charkhi), 
and is beginning to work with the U.S. Military in a nation-wide 
program of Justice and Corrections system construction.  These PSCs 
will support the Lead I-COR Engineer and supervise four local staff 
engineers.  This position has been requested earlier in the fiscal 
year and is pending action in Washington INL. 
 
¶66. INL Counternarcotics.  INL/NAS' Counternarcotics programs - Good 
Performers' Initiative (GPI), Counternarcotics Advisory Teams 
(CNAT), Public Information (PI), Governor Led Eradication (GLE), and 
Drug Demand Reduction (DDR) are currently all managed by a team of 
two FSO's (FS-03 and FS-04) and two PSC staff in Kabul, under the 
direction of an FS-01 officer who also serves as the INL/NAS Section 
Deputy.  Post recently requested three PSC Counternarcotics Advisor 
positions to support Combined Joint Interagency Task Force 
open RC-S. 
 
¶67. In addition to the existing and already requested positions, and 
the ten CN Advisors in the field mentioned earlier, Post requires an 
additional two Kabul positions to allow greater oversight of INL/NAS 
operations, especially outside of Kabul, and to improve coordination 
with other agencies (including USAID and DEA) as the focus on 
interdiction and development-linked CN strategies intensifies and 
eradication is de-emphasized.  In Kabul the two new positions are: 
 
 
- One CN Program Manager (FS-01), summer 2009.  This position will 
serve as full time program manager for all counternarcotics 
operations, freeing the FS-01 Deputy Director to focus on overall 
office management and supporting the Director.  This position has 
been requested earlier in the fiscal year and is pending action in 
Washington INL. 
 
- One Interdiction Program Manager (FS-02), summer 2009.  INL 
provides funding and logistics assistance to many ongoing DEA 
functions, but does not have a dedicated position at Post supporting 
 
KABUL 00001762  013 OF 014 
 
 
this function; this position will ensure timely and effective 
coordination between DEA and INL/NAS in the field. 
 
¶68. INL Management Support/ICORs (18 positions).  Supporting the 
proposed plus up will require a significant increase in INL/NAS 
Management support staff and In-Country Contracting Officer 
Representatives (ICOR) in Kabul and in the field.  INL/NAS has 
already proposed upgrading the FS-02 Management Officer Position to 
FS-01 and making it a second Deputy Director position.  As Post 
moves to consolidate support functions, it is possible that some of 
the positions requested below may become redundant, but INL/NAS 
believes that at least 18 are currently required to provide 
appropriate management support to ongoing INL/NAS operations: 
 
- Deputy Management Officer/GSO (FS-02), summer 2009.  INL/NAS 
currently has only one full-time FS management officer overseeing 
all its programs and operations.  A second management office is 
essential to cover staffing gaps and provide adequate coordination 
within the section and between INL/NAS and other Post elements. 
This position has been requested earlier in the fiscal year and is 
pending action in Washington INL. 
 
- Office Management Specialist (FS-06), summer 2010.  INL/NAS 
currently has only one full time OMS, even though the staff is 
divided among three offices in two locations.  Even without the 
proposed increase, providing additional OMS coverage is essential. 
 
- Four new ICOR positions (PSC), summer 2010.  INL/NAS is authorized 
seven ICOR positions, but currently only has three filled.  In 
addition to filling the current authorized positions, the additional 
ICOR positions (bringing the total to 11) are necessary to provide 
adequate coverage both of INL/NAS programs and those of other 
agencies (DEA, DOJ, etc.) who depend on INL for contract oversight 
and support.  The additional positions will also allow ICOR staff to 
inspect and oversee work at the RTC's and elsewhere in the field for 
extended periods without creating unacceptable staffing gaps in 
Kabul. 
 
- Twelve Management Support LES: five in summer 2009, seven in 
summer 2010 (Varying grades; FS-08 average):  INL/NAS is currently 
authorized 21 LES positions and proposes adding an additional 12. 
These will primarily provide support in the financial/contracting 
area, including on construction projects in the field, and will 
include a mix (TBD) of financial/accounting technicians, inventory 
and purchasing agents, translators, architects and engineers. 
 
--------------------------- 
Protecting Our Personnel - 
Total new positions: 47 
--------------------------- 
¶69. Regional Security Office (RSO).  We recently proposed (Kabul 
1464) adding new RSO positions, and now add an OMS, for 40 total 
positions.  The timing of these positions will be contingent upon 
the flow of personnel throughout the Mission; we will clarify a more 
specific timeline within 30 days. 
 
- One Senior Deputy RSO - FE-OC (new); 
- One Deputy RSO - FS-01; 
- One ARSO - FS-02 (Chief of Personnel Recovery Services Unit); 
- One ARSO - FS-02 (Chief of PRT); 
- Three ARSOs - FS-03 to support COM PRT personnel; 
- One ARSO - FS-03 (RSO Ops Center); 
- Four ARSOs - FS-04 (PRS Unit); 
- 14 Security Protection Specialists (SPS); 
- One RSO - FS-02 (Mazar-e Sharif); 
- One RSO - FS-02 (Herat); 
- Four ARSO - FS-03 (two each at Consulates Mazar/Herat); 
- One ARSO-I - FS-03 (Consulate Section); 
- Three ARSOs - FS-04 (Investigations Unit); 
- One ARSO - FS-03 (LNO BAF); 
- One ARSO - FS-03 (Guard Program); 
- One Site Security Manager FS-02 (OBO Projects); and 
- One OMS - FS-06 
Note:  the Consulate staffing can be adjusted depending on size of 
COB. 
 
¶70. RSO:  Engineering Services Office.  The immediate needs for the 
ESO are an OMS (or EFM administrative assistant) and an EFM 
logistician.  Much of the ESO's work is assigned and tracked in a 
Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS), and all ESO 
ordering and reporting is done through that medium.  Administrative 
support positions will relieve the technical staff of this work; 
screen incoming service calls and work orders; dispatch appropriate 
 
KABUL 00001762  014 OF 014 
 
 
technical staff; and document activities in CMMS, greatly improving 
overall office efficiency.  Additionally, an additional STS position 
will provide more uniform coverage.  As the mission expands and the 
need for ESO services increases at consulates, the Air Operations 
Wing, DEA, and additional agencies under Chief of Mission authority, 
ESO will need an additional SEO.  Finally, as the Mission adds more 
vehicle barriers, metal detectors, explosive detection eQuipment and 
X-ray systems, we will require two additional locally-hired (Afghan) 
technicians and possibly second CB. 
 
----------------- 
Washington Action 
----------------- 
¶71. Pending approval of the relevant positions, we will look to 
State to undertake discussions with allies regarding the 
participation of State, USAID and/or USDA PRT representatives in 
coalition-led PRTs where we do not currently have a presence.  These 
coalition partners are Hungary, Norway, the Czech Republic, Turkey, 
and the German PRT in Badakhshan. 
 
EIKENBERRY