09NAIROBI1572
SOMALIA - REQUEST TDY SUPPORT FOR SOMALIA COVERAGE
Thu Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNR #1572/01 2041102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231102Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0461
INFO RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI PRIORITY 0181UNCLAS NAIROBI 001572 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E - PAMELA FIERST 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER PREL DJ SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - REQUEST TDY SUPPORT FOR SOMALIA COVERAGE 
IN DJIBOUTI 
 
REF: SWAN-PATTERSON-WYCOFF EMAILS 
 
 ¶1.  Summary and Action Request:  Post requests 
temporary assignment of one TDYer for 3-6 months to support 
coverage of Somalia developments from Djibouti. There is a 
growing demand and opportunity for engagement on Somalia 
issues, in which Djibouti is playing an increasingly active 
role - diplomatic, informational, military, and economic. 
To capitalize on these opportunities, the Somalia Unit 
requests a multi-functional TDY officer to enhance Embassy 
Djibouti's coverage during this critical period in USG 
efforts to support the Transitional Federal Government. 
With only one reporting officer assigned to Embassy 
Djibouti, they are simply unable to do justice to this 
important account without additional staff resources.  End 
summary. 
 
The Need 
--------- 
 
¶2.  Djibouti is increasingly involved in regional 
efforts to bring peace and stability to Somalia.  Djibouti,s 
population is 60 percent ethnic Somali, as is its senior 
leadership, including President Ismail Omar Guelleh. 
Djibouti is playing an increasingly active role on Somalia 
issues including as host and key actor at the 2008-2009 
Djibouti Process peace talks that led to the election of 
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) President Sheikh 
Sharif.  President Guelleh and Foreign Minister Mahmoud 
Youssouf are leaders in regional fora in pressing for 
solutions in Somalia.  In addition to diplomatic support, 
Djibouti is providing training and other support to TFG 
forces.  Djibouti is a hub for Somali journalists and 
websites covering Somalia, including the newly inaugurated 
Somali Independent News Agency (SOMINSA).  It is the 
headquarters of the Somalia Business and Investment Council 
(SBIC) and home to numerous Somali businessmen.  It is a 
frequent site for travel to/from Somalia, Somaliland, and 
Puntland by senior officials from these entities, including 
President Sharif, who is a regular visitor. 
 
¶3.  Embassy Djibouti has sought to cover Somalia 
developments and to supplement the work of the Embassy 
Nairobi Somalia Unit. With only one full-time reporting 
officer who is fully occupied with domestic reporting, 
preparation of legislatively mandated reports, and 
management of a multitude of project activities totaling 
some $10 million; she is unable to do justice to the rich 
opportunities that exist in Djibouti. 
 
The Proposal 
------------- 
 
¶4.  In order to provide appropriate coverage to the 
important Somalia account, especially during this critical 
period in USG efforts to bolster the TFG and to prepare 
contingencies should that effort prove unsuccessful, we 
request a TDY officer for 3 to 6 months who could perform 
the following functions: 
 
--Reporting:  Maintain contact with influential Somalis 
based in or transiting Djibouti.  These would include 
members of the Somali Business and Investment Council and 
visitors from Somalia, Somaliland, and Puntland transiting 
Djibouti.  Presidents Sharif (TFG), Riyale (Somaliland), 
and Farole (Puntland) are all frequent visitors. 
 
--Representation:  Represent USG at Somalia-related 
conferences, meetings, etc. held in Djibouti.  Recent 
conferences have focused on efforts to generate youth 
employment in Somalia and to improve the investment climate 
in Somaliland.  We expect more such conferences, with their 
rich contact opportunities, in the future. 
 
--Consular:  Deepen contacts with Somaliland officials who 
would be useful in responding to requests for emergency 
American citizen services.  Build on work already begun by 
Djibouti CONOFF in her outreach to immigration, police, 
hospitals, etc. 
 
--Public Diplomacy:  Use the extensive network of Somali 
journalists based in Djibouti, as well as the GODJ,s 
Somali-language broadcasts (which are also heard in parts 
of Somalia)to communicate USG messaging on Somalia, and 
help TFG with its strategic communications (STRATCOM). 
 
--CJTF-HOA:  Coordinate with Combined Joint Task Force - 
Horn of Africa on Somalia issues, especially STRATCOM 
related to Somalia. 
 
Action Request 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  Post requests Department identify and fund one 
TDY officer to be assigned for 3 to 6 months to perform the 
functions listed above.  Depending on the results, we may 
seek to extend this arrangement.  The individual could be 
an existing direct-hire employee available for TDY, someone 
seeking a bridge assignment, or a WAE. Horn of Africa 
experience and competency in the functions lists in para 
four would obviously be desirable.  The individual will be 
assigned to the Embassy Nairobi Somalia Unit and then 
deployed to Djibouti.  Embassy Djibouti has agreed to 
provide workspace and local transportation and may/may be 
able to provide TDY housing depending on the precise timing 
of the TDY. 
 
¶6. Ambassador Swan concurs with this message. 
 
ABELL 
 
ABELL