09STATE70576
DEMARCHE ON RESULTS OF U.S.-RUSSIA PRESIDENTIAL
Wed Jul 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0770
OO RUEHAG RUEHAT RUEHBL RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHED RUEHFL RUEHHT
RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHMRE RUEHNP RUEHPD RUEHPOD
RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSL RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHC #0576/01 1891601
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081538Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL EUROPE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
INFO CIS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 070576 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: RS PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE ON RESULTS OF U.S.-RUSSIA PRESIDENTIAL 
SUMMIT 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See para 2 below. 
 
¶2. All European posts are requested to deliver the following 
points in paras 3 - 18 regarding President Obama's meetings 
in Moscow July 6 - 7 orally to the highest appropriate host 
government officials.  Posts may also direct their 
counterparts to fact sheets, joint statements, press 
briefings, and presidential remarks located at 
www.whitehouse.gov. 
 
Begin Points: 
 
¶3.  President Obama and President Medvedev met in Moscow, 
Russia July 6-8 for bilateral meetings on a range of subjects 
including arms reduction, nuclear non- proliferation, 
cooperation on securing and stabilizing Afghanistan, 
cooperation on European missile defense, resuming bilateral 
military-to-military relations, and establishing a bilateral 
presidential commission, to better structure the U.S.-Russia 
bilateral relationship. 
 
¶4. The agreements reached at the summit end a period of 
dangerous drift in U.S.-Russia relations.  While there are 
many areas where the United States and Russia disagree, and 
will continue to disagree, there are many more areas where 
our interests coincide.  We seek to broaden these areas of 
cooperation in a way that is mutually beneficial, serves the 
national interests of both countries, and improves European 
security and stability. 
 
¶5. In this regard, the United States and Russia have agreed 
to continue work on a follow-on agreement to the START 
treaty, which expires on December 5, 2009.  Negotiators have 
been working non-stop and on July 6, President Obama and 
President Medvedev signed a Joint Understanding to guide the 
work of negotiators on the remainder of the agreement. 
 
¶6.  In the Joint Understanding, the United States and Russia 
agreed to reduce their strategic nuclear warheads to a range 
between 1500 and 1675, and to reduce their strategic delivery 
vehicles to a range between 500-1100.  Under the expiring 
START and Moscow treaties, the maximum allowable levels of 
warheads are 2200 and the maximum level of launch vehicles is 
¶1600. 
 
¶7. These numbers reflect a level of reductions that will be 
lower than any existing strategic arms control agreements. 
The new agreement will directly support the goals outlined by 
President Obama during his speech in Prague in April 2009 and 
will demonstrate Russian and American leadership in 
strengthening the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
 
¶8.  The Presidents also confirmed their commitment to 
strengthening their cooperation to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and to stop acts of nuclear terrorism. 
They also affirmed a common vision of growth of clear, safe, 
and affordable nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
 
¶9. On July 6, the United States and Russia also signed a 
bilateral air transit agreement that will enable the United 
States to transport its military personnel and equipment 
across Russia in support of international and Coalition 
forces in Afghanistan.  This agreement will further diversify 
our crucial supply routes and bring potential savings of up 
to 133 million dollars in fuel, maintenance, and other 
transportation costs.  The agreement is a significant Russian 
contribution to bringing security and stability to 
Afghanistan. 
 
¶10. Further to cooperation on Afghanistan, our presidents 
released a joint statement affirming U.S. and Russian 
commitments to the goals of the common fight in Afghanistan 
against the threats of terrorism, armed extremism, and 
illegal drug trafficking.  The Presidents noted they are 
prepared to increase the assistance provided to the 
Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in 
strengthening and developing the capabilities of the Afghan 
National Army and police, and in training counter-narcotics 
personnel. 
 
¶11. The U.S. and Russia agreed to renew military-to-military 
relations, which were suspended after the conflict in Georgia 
last August.  Our Chiefs of Defense signed a strategic 
framework for military-to-military engagement that sets new 
conditions, which raise military cooperation to a new level 
and deepen mutual understanding between our respective armed 
forces.  The Armed Forces of the United States and Russian 
 
STATE 00070576  002 OF 002 
 
 
Federation have agreed in their work plan for 2009 to conduct 
nearly 20 exchanges and operational events before the end of 
the year. 
 
¶12. The Presidents also agreed to continue discussing 
cooperation in responding to the challenge of ballistic 
missile proliferation and instructed our experts to work 
together to analyze the ballistic missile challenges of the 
21st century and to prepare appropriate recommendations.  Our 
experts are intensifying dialogue on establishing the Joint 
Data Exchange Center, which is to become the basis for a 
multilateral missile-launch notification regime. 
 
¶13. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the 
Russian Ministry of Health and Social Development signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in the Field of 
Public Health and Medical Science.  The Memorandum 
establishes a framework for deeper cooperation between these 
government institutions to fight infectious diseases and 
chronic and non-communicable diseases, to promote healthy 
lifestyles and protect maternal and child health. 
 
¶14. The two Presidents agreed to create a Bilateral 
Presidential Commission, which they will chair, and,  which 
Secretary of State Clinton and Foreign Minister Lavrov will 
coordinate.  The Commission will include working groups on 
nuclear energy and nuclear security; arms control and 
international security, foreign policy and fighting 
terrorism; drug trafficking; business development and 
economic relations, energy and the environment, agriculture, 
civil society, among other areas. 
 
¶15.  President Obama underscored U.S. support for the 
territorial integrity of Georgia and Ukraine, rejected the 
notion of privileged spheres of influence, and stressed the 
right of all European countries to choose their security 
alliances. 
 
¶16.  President Obama also emphasized the importance of 
democracy, free media, and an independent judiciary. 
 
¶17. The tone of the President's meetings with President 
Medvedev was positive and constructive.  The President also 
had a professional and constructive meeting with Prime 
Minister Putin.  Discussion was cordial but frank in both 
meetings. 
 
¶18. The United States welcomes an improved relationship with 
Russia. Our countries have many mutual interests and share 
many mutual threats.  The reset in our bilateral relationship 
will not come at the expense of our friends and allies in the 
region.  It is time to leave this zero-sum thinking behind. 
A better U.S. - Russia relationship will increase trust and 
cooperation and ultimately enhance European security. 
 
End Points. 
 
¶18.  Points of contact for this action are EUR/RUS Janine 
Ellison, email:  EllisonJM@state.gov, phone:  202-647-6763 
and Daphne Stavropoulos, StavropoulosDZ@state.gov, phone: 
202-736-4262. Please slug any email responses to the EUR/RUS 
collective. 
CLINTON