09STATE69790
IRPO & NEA/IR ELECTION SPOT REPORT JULY 2
Mon Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO2883
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #9790/01 1881741
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 062045Z JUL 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO IRAN COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 STATE 069790 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
C O R R E C T E D C O P Y  (ADDED CAPTION) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IR KDEM PGOV PHUM PREL
SUBJECT: IRPO & NEA/IR ELECTION SPOT REPORT JULY 2 
 
STATE 00069790  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
Note:  This will be our final daily spot report on the 
post-election crisis unless circumstances change 
dramatically. 
 
5:30 PM in Iran: 
(U) Iran's Police Chief Claims Neda,s Murder was 
Premeditated Scenario to Defame Iran 
(U) Press TV reports that Brigadier General Esma'il 
Ahmadi-Moqaddam, Iran,s police chief, has announced that 
Neda,s murder was a premeditated plot by forces trying to 
frame Iran.  Ahmadi-Moqaddam claimed that Arash Hejazi, 
the Iranian physician who tried to treat Neda, is wanted 
by the Ministry of Intelligence and Interpol for murder. 
According to Tabnak, Ahmadi-Moqaddam admitted that 20 
people have been killed in the past two weeks, and over 
one thousand have been arrested. 
 
(U) SMS Service Restored in Iran after Three Week Outage 
(SBU) According to Tabnak, SMS service is now available 
throughout the country for the first time since June 11. 
Other reports confirm that SMS text messaging is now 
working in Iran, although some Iranians are still unable 
to text internationally. 
 
(U) FM Mottaki Urges Sweden to Prosecute Iran Embassy 
Attackers 
(U)  IRINN reports that in a phone conversation with 
Swedish FM Bilt, FM Mottaki criticized the Swedish police 
for failing to prevent the attack on Iran,s embassy in 
Stockholm.  Bilt promised Mottaki that the police are 
investigating the incident.  Mottaki urged Bilt to change 
the EU,s policy on Iran now that Sweden holds the EU 
Presidency. 
 
(U) Increasing Calls for Mousavi,s Prosecution 
(U) According to Radio Farda, a number of MP,s have 
demanded that Iran,s attorney general arrest and 
prosecute Mousavi.  The Basijis, student branch has also 
sent a letter to the attorney general asking that Mousavi 
be tried for &endangering national security.8 
 
(U) Iran to Support Families of those Killed in Recent 
Unrest 
(U) Press TV reports that Iran,s Martyrs Foundation has 
announced that it will offer support to the families of 
those killed during the post-election violence. 
 
(U) Iran denies Hanging Mousavi Supporters in Mashhad 
(U) According to ILNA, the judiciary chief of Mashhad has 
rejected rumors that six individuals were recently hanged 
for protesting the election results.  &If we succeed to 
find out the source of this rumor we will officially file 
a case against him,8 the judiciary chief told 
reporters. 
 
(U) 19 Detained Members of Jebheye Mosharekat Identified 
(U) Norooz News has identified on its website at least 19 
members of the Reformer organization Jebheye Mosharekat 
who are currently imprisoned. 
 
(U) Reports that Imprisoned Etemad-e Melli Editor Has 
Confessed to Orchestrating Coup 
(U)  Javan has claimed that Mohammed Ghochani, Chief 
Editor of Etemad-e Melli, has confessed to plotting to 
overthrow the government.  According to the report, 
Ghochani admitted to traveling to Arab countries to 
receive instructions.  However, Tabnak interviewed 
Ghochani,s family yesterday, who denied the report and 
said that Ghochani does not even have a passport to travel. 
 
(U) Reports that Four Sealed Ballot Boxes Were Discovered 
in Shiraz 
(U)  According to Norooz News and a number of Twitter 
posts, the governor of Fars accidentally discovered four 
sealed ballot boxes in Shiraz,s old library during a live 
televised visit to the site.  The governor claimed that 
the ballot boxes were from a previous election, not the Jun 
e 12 presidential election. 
 
(U) Calls for July 9th Demonstrations to Commemorate 1997 
Student Protests 
(U) Iranian students have used social networking sites and 
blogs to call for commemoration ceremonies in several 
squares in Tehran on July 9th to honor the martyrs killed 
at Tehran University in the July 1997 student riots. 
 
STATE 00069790  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
(U) July 4th Protests Planned in France 
(U)  Radio Farda reports that Iranian journalists abroad 
plan to gather in front of the European Parliament in 
Strasbourg on July 4th to demand that the EU not recognize 
Ahmadinejad,s government. 
 
(U) Mohsen Sazegara Calls for Strike Next Week 
(U) Sazegara, a founder of the Revolutionary Guard and 
U.S.-based dissident, has called for a strike in Tehran 
July 6 ) 9.  He has also encouraged Iranians to hold 
brief, 5 minute rallies in Tehran,s metro stops before 
security forces are able to break them up.  ( 
http://www.sazegara.net/persian/) 
 
(U) Unconfirmed Rumors of Lebanese Hizballah Attacking 
Protesters 
(U) There are continued unconfirmed reports of Iranian 
security forces using Arabs, reportedly members of 
Lebanese Hizballah, to crack down on demonstrators.  Ali 
Reza Nourizadeh of VOA has claimed that the Arabs are 
shipped into Tehran from training camps outside the city. 
 
(U) Selected Editorials from Today,s Iranian Papers (OSC 
IAP2009070295002): 
 
     Jomhuri-ye Eslami (hard-liner): &Following the remarks 
of the spokesman of the Guardian Council confirming the 
result of the election, there is no room for more 
questions and ambiguity and the Judiciary should seriously 
deal with question makers.8 
 
     Javan (conservative): &Crisis and clashes that have 
taken place in the country since the tenth presidential 
elections were predetermined and planned by America and 
its alliances like Britain, several months before the 
elections. The aim was to carry out a soft revolution in 
the Islamic Republic.8 
 
     Hemayat (conservative): &America's 
psychological-propaganda organizations which have been 
expanding daily, have always acted as one of this 
country's main arms in war and peace...Hollywood holds a 
significant status and it is under the rule of 
international Zionism8 
 
     Resalat (conservative): &American intrusion in Iran's 
domestic affairs, and particularly the hostile remarks of 
Barack Obama regarding the presidential election in Iran, 
prove that Americans are still thinking about toppling the 
system in the country and there is no difference in 
strategies of the Republicans or the Democrats as far as 
Iran is concerned.8 
 
     Siyasat-e Ruz (conservative): &What is being pursued 
by 
the West, to return its dominance over regions of the 
world such as Iran, some Arab countries and even Latin 
American countries, is a creation of colored revolutions.8 
 
     Mardom Salari (moderate): &Bani Sadr was a person who 
cut off from people and stood against the goals of the 
Revolution which were accepted by the people.  Mr. Mousavi 
is not like him and there is no similarity between him and 
Bani Sadr and the analogy is rather a joke.8 
 
 
2:30 AM in Iran: 
 
(U) Bonyad to  Compensate Families of Victims,:  Fars 
News reports that Iran,s Martyrs Foundation (Bonyad 
Shahid va Isaargaraan) will compensate &families of the 
innocent victims of Tehran,s post-election riots.8  The 
U.S. Treasury Department designated the group a sponsor of 
terrorist activities in July 2007, saying that the 
foundation channels financial support from Iran to several 
terrorist organizations, including Hezbollah, Hamas and 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad.  Iran's Martyrs Foundation 
reportedly supports families of those martyred or maimed 
in the Iraq-Iran war.  Bonyads are controversial 
charitable trusts/foundations that dominate Iran,s 
non-petroleum economy, controlling an estimated 30% of 
Iran,s GDP.  Several bonyads are run by Khamenei 
loyalists and funded directly by the state.  As such, they 
are often exempt from official oversight, taxes and 
customs ) thereby facilitating virtual monopolies in 
import and distribution activities inside Iran. 
(U) Rafsanjani Will Not Lead Friday Prayers:  Mowj News 
has confirmed that Hashemi Rafsanjani will not lead 
tomorrow,s Friday Prayers.  According to Mowj News, 
Rafsanjani has &declined8 to lead Friday prayers for a 
second time.  No official reason has been announced on why 
 
STATE 00069790  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
Rafsanjani has not been present for his last two turns. 
&The rumors regarding resignation from his position as a 
temporary Imam have not been confirmed.8 
 
(U) Report: Four Sealed Ballot Boxes Found in Shiraz 
Library:  Mohammad Reza Nasab Abdollahi, an Iranian 
Journalist in Shiraz, said yesterday on his blog that four 
ballot boxes were discovered in Shiraz Central Library ) 
a  building he says in still under construction.  &The 
Governor of Fars (province) asked the journalists not the 
mention this discovery(According to election laws, the 
boxes should have been sent to Tehran.  Today, Abdollahi 
reported that he was put under pressure to remove this 
news from his blog and deny it.  Iranian authorities have 
announced that these ballots &have nothing to do with the 
10th presidential elections(and will not be moved to the 
National Library and Archives of Iran as national 
files.8  This report is still UNCONFIRMED. 
 
(U) Report: Mobile Phone Shut Down Costs Iran $15 Million: 
Press TV reports that Iran,s telecommunication 
companies lost $15 million during the 20-day suspension of 
the services, which had been widely used by protesters to 
organize street rallies following the election. 
 
(U) Iranian MP Condemns Violence,  Rule By One Voice, in 
Majles Address:  MP from Tabriz, Masoud Pezeshkian, speaks 
out against government actions in an address to the Majles 
on Monday (Video subtitled in English ) click on 
&arrow8 button in lower right-hand corner of the screen, 
then click on &cc8 button). 
 
(U) IRGC Commander:  Non-Military Basij Can Enter 
Political Discussions,:  According to IRNA, on sidelines 
of a Basij Forces Cooperation conference, 
Brigadier-General Ali Jafari said &Basij forces differs 
from the military forces; we should not count basij forces 
as military forces, so they can enter political discussion 
and have an active role in that field.  Jafari referred to 
the Supreme Leader,s notification on separating the 
military basij forces and non-military basij forces, with 
the aim of expanding basij activities in different 
fields.  &The corps has planned an expanded program in 
scientific, cultural, political and social fields. The 
most significant point is to develop the soft power in the 
military. It is no linked to military activities and the 
major responsibility of the basij concerns non-military 
issues.8 
 
(U) Report: Two More News Websites Blocked in Iran: 
Tabnak reports that Parliament News and Ebrat News 
websites have both been blocked without advance warning. 
According to Tabnak, Parliament News was one of the few 
news websites which had not been blocked after the 
election, and it &tried to observe the law and 
regulations regarding reformists and pro-reform 
individuals.8  Consultations to end the filtering have 
started among Majles MPs. 
 
(U) Report: Washington Times Reporter  To Be Released,: 
The Guardian reports that Iason Athanasiadis ) a 
Washington Times reporter detained for more than a week by 
Iranian authorities ) is to be released within hours. 
Athanasiadis was arrested as he was attempting to leave 
the country last Tuesday, June 23.  According to a Greek 
politician, Iran,s ambassador in Athens told Greek 
official on Thursday that the journalist would be freed 
"in the next few hours.8 
 
(U) Report:   Crisis Response Hints At Early Stages Of 
Iranian Power Struggle,:  &Over the past month, Iran has 
experienced some of its worst unrest since the founding of 
the Islamic Republic three decades ago. The focus has been 
on who should be the next president.  But in the not too 
distant future, many observers are convinced that Iran's 
political establishment will face a far greater crisis 
that revolves around who will succeed ailing Supreme 
Leader Ali Khamenei.8 
 
(U) Iran Unrest Shifts Power Dynamics, Reformists Must 
Rethink Strategy:  &But the recent protests attracted 
hundreds of thousands into Iran's streets, resulting in at 
least 17 deaths and many more injuries. The hard-liners 
have tightened their grip, leaving the reformists to 
decide whether they should keep playing the old game or 
whether the rules have changed so much that the game no 
longer exists.8 
 
(U) Report: Controversy Over Ballots Used in Guardian 
Council Recount:  There is growing commentary and 
criticism of photographs released by Iranian authorities 
of ballots included in the Guardian Council,s recount on 
 
STATE 00069790  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
Monday. Roozonline, and opposition candidate Mohsen Rezai, 
highlight two points:  1) The name &Ahmadinejad8 appears 
to have been written on many of the ballots in exactly the 
same handwriting; 2) The ballots don,t appear to have 
been folded. Photographs from Election Day seem to bear 
out that Iranian voters * and candidates * had to fold 
their ballots to fit them into ballot boxes. 
CLINTON