09USUNNEWYORK730
SRSG ANGELO BRIEFS COUNCIL ON MINURCAT
Wed Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO9402
PP RUEHBZ RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0730/01 2101739
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291739Z JUL 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6998
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNMIN/MINURCAT COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHNJ/AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA PRIORITY 0371UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000730 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPKO PREF UNSC CD CT SU
SUBJECT: SRSG ANGELO BRIEFS COUNCIL ON MINURCAT 
 
¶1. Summary.  On July 28, MINURCAT SRSG Angelo reported that 
the security and humanitarian situation in Eastern Chad and 
Northeastern CAR had further deteriorated, largely as a 
result of increased tensions between Chad and Sudan.  Despite 
this deterioration, Angelo also pointed to positive 
developments -- including the launching of a national census 
in Chad, the establishment of an electoral commission and the 
full deployment of the UN-trained Chadian security forces in 
and around IDP camps.  Council members stressed the need to 
improve the humanitarian situation and the importance of 
political reconciliation, both internally within Chad and 
Sudan, as well as between both countries and armed opposition 
groups.  The U.S., joined by several members, expressed 
concern with the slow pace of deployment and increasing 
inter-tribal tension in CAR.  Member states also urged 
MINURCAT to provide enhanced logistical support for the DIS 
and welcomed the Secretary-General,s strategic workplan, 
including benchmarks.  End Summary. 
 
SRSG Angelo Briefs the Council 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  On July 28, the Secretary-General,s Special 
Representative to the United Nations Mission in the Central 
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) Victor Angelo briefed 
the Council on recent political, security and humanitarian 
developments in CAR and Chad.  On the political front, Angelo 
praised Chad for launching a national census on May 20 and 
establishing an electoral commission in preparation for next 
year,s presidential and legislative elections.  Angelo said 
that despite this political progress, the security situation 
had deteriorated due to increased tensions between Chad and 
Sudan, triggered by the Sudan-based Chadian opposition,s 
early-May attack on Chad, which led to retaliatory strikes by 
the Chadian air force. 
 
¶3.  Angelo also reported that the humanitarian and human 
rights situation remains fragile as well.  He noted that 
sexual and gender-based violence, recruitment of child 
soldiers, arbitrary arrest and displacement of civilians are 
widespread and ongoing.   Angelo praised the full deployment 
of the Chadian Integrated Security Detachment (DIS) which  he 
said has resulted in reduced crime and violence within 
refugee and internally displaced persons (IDP) camps in 
Eastern Chad.  Lastly, Angelo introduced a strategic workplan 
for future MINURCAT operations which will measure  progress 
according to specific benchmarks and timelines. 
 
Permanent Member Views 
---------------------- 
 
¶4.  In the U.S. statement to the Council, USUN 
Minister-Counselor expressed concern over delays in the 
deployment of MINURCAT forces, increasing violence in CAR, 
and deteriorating relations between Chad and Sudan.  He also 
noted that the DIS would benefit from additional training and 
equipment.  France expressed similar concern over the 
incomplete deployment of MINURCAT forces and, along with the 
UK, noted that the continued effectiveness of the DIS is 
dependent on MINURCAT support.  France also expressed concern 
over the misconduct of some individual DIS officers.  The UK 
emphasized that peace in Chad is linked to the situation in 
Darfur while all three countries called for improvements in 
Chad-Sudan relations and voiced support for the 13 August 
2007 Agreement and the Dakar process.  France reiterated the 
importance of ending human rights abuses, sexual and 
gender-based violence and the recruitment of child soldiers. 
The UK welcomed the SRSG,s strategic workplan but asked that 
the issue of recruitment of child soldiers be included in 
further refinements to the plan. 
 
¶5.  Russia and China acknowledged that the security situation 
remains complex, especially in Eastern Chad. Both countries 
expressed concern over the deterioration in Chad-Sudan 
relations and criticized armed opposition groups and the 
Government of Chad for the escalation in violence.  Russia 
made specific reference to the failure of troop contributing 
countries to provide MINURCAT with necessary air assets and 
welcomed the benchmarks outlined in the SRSG,s report. 
China praised the recent reconciliation efforts in Tripoli 
between Chad and three opposition groups. 
 
Other Member Views 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  Most other Council members praised the completion of the 
census in Chad and establishment of the electoral commission. 
 Members also recognized the full deployment of DIS forces. 
In addition, most welcomed Libya,s efforts at brokering the 
July 26 peace agreement between the Chadian government and 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000730  002 OF 002 
 
 
three rebel Chadian groups (the Union of Forces for Democracy 
and Development-Renewal, the National Movement for Recovery, 
and the Front for the Salvation of the Republic).  There was 
general consensus that security and the humanitarian 
situation in Eastern Chad and Northeastern CAR can only be 
resolved politically -- on the basis of the Doha Accord, 
Dakar Process and 13 August 2007 Agreement.  Austria 
advocated that Chad and Sudan create a Joint Border 
Monitoring Mechanism and asked SRSG Angelo what his position 
on such a mechanism would be.  Costa Rica voiced strong 
support for the benchmarks and timelines contained in the 
SRSG,s workplan while Libya criticized the SRSG for 
attaching timeframes to the specific benchmarks. 
 
CAR and Chadian PRs Speak 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  CAR expressed gratitude for MINURCAT,s efforts but also 
stressed that violence and tribal conflicts have resulted in 
the massive displacement of people.  CAR noted that this has 
disrupted humanitarian and commercial activities, especially 
in the northeast.  CAR also stated that Lord,s Resistance 
Army (LRA) rebels from Uganda have stepped up their 
incursions into CAR.  Chad expressed gratitude for 
MINURCAT,s support of DIS forces but stressed that more aid 
would be necessary to finance the DIS in 2010.  Chad 
reasserted its right to self defense, but stated that it did 
not carry out airstrikes on Sudan or enter its airspace. 
Chad professed its willingness to cooperate fully with the UN 
and normalize relations with Sudan. 
 
SRSG Angelo,s Concluding Remarks 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  SRSG Angelo responded to the Austrian suggestion that a 
Chad-Sudan Joint Border Monitoring Group be created by 
stating that he believes the conditions are present within 
the Dakar process for a border monitoring mechanism to be set 
up.  Angelo urged the Contact Group to meet as soon as 
possible in Khartoum and said that those countries that are a 
part of this group must assist Chad and Sudan with creating 
confidence building measures.  Angelo concluded by stating 
that, if fully deployed, MINURCAT would make a difference in 
Eastern Chad and he urged the international community to come 
forward with troop contributions as well as military enablers 
RICE