09USUNNEWYORK736
UNSC: OPEN DEBATE ON THE MIDDLE EAST CONTINUES
Fri Jul 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0010
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDTA #0736 2120014
ZNR UUUUU ZZH ZUI RUEWMCE9389 2112307
O 310014Z JUL 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0000
INFO ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000736 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KWBG KPAL KPO UNSC IS LE SY
SUBJECT: UNSC: OPEN DEBATE ON THE MIDDLE EAST CONTINUES 
FOCUS ON ISRAELI SETTLEMENT ACTIVITY AND HIZBALLAH WEAPONS 
IN SOUTHERN LEBANON 
 
REF: A. STATE 77743 
     ¶B. USUN NEW YORK 721 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Assistant-Secretary-General for Political 
Affairs (A/SG) Oscar Fernandez-Taranco briefed the Security 
Council during its monthly meeting on the Middle East on July 
¶27.  He focused his briefing on continuing Israeli settlement 
activity, the humanitarian situation in Gaza, and the efforts 
of the U.S. and the Quartet.  While emphasizing that Israeli 
settlement construction in the West Bank and East Jerusalem 
undermined confidence in a two-state solution, he noted that 
Israel had implemented measures to ease movement for 
Palestinians in the West Bank.  He also recognized the 
Palestinian Authority's (PA) reform agenda.  He recalled the 
Secretary-General's statement that the situation in Gaza was 
unsustainable, called for Israel to open Gaza's border 
crossings, and reiterated that Security Council resolution 
1860 remains the way forward in Gaza.  Fernandez-Taranco also 
highlighted the June Quartet meeting in Trieste, Italy, and 
the efforts of U.S. Special Envoy George Mitchell. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary Cont'd: All 15 Council members and an 
additional 23 non-Council members spoke during the open 
debate, including Israel and the PaleQnian Observer.  Most 
delegations cited opportunities arising from U.S. diplomatic 
efforts, President Obama's Cairo speech, the Arab League's 
recommitment to the Arab Peace Initiative and Egypts push 
for intra-Palestinian reconciliation.  All statements called 
on Israel to halt its settlement activities, and most 
described settlements as obstacles to peace.  Delegations 
also noted the urgency of resuming negotiations based on 
relevant UNSC resolutions, land for peace, the Road Map and 
the Arab Peace Initiative; the need for Palestinian 
reconciliation; and, the need to open Gaza's borders for 
humanitarian and construction materials.  The Israeli Perm 
Rep focused her remarks on Hizballah and the arms cache 
incident (ref. B), and drew attention to the danger posed by 
Iran.  The Palestinian Observer welcomed "the more active, 
balanced approach" of the Obama administration, but noted 
that despite Palestinian concessions, Israel has not upheld 
its commitments.  The Lebanese Charge condemned Israel for 
destabilizing Lebanon and the region, refuted Israeli 
statements about (Hizballah) arms smuggling in southern 
Lebanon, and requested that UNIFIL's mandate be renewed 
without changes.  Arab states and others criticized Israel's 
blockade of Gaza, continuing settlement activity and home 
demolitions in East Jerusalem and the West Bank, with many 
calling for Israel to be held accountable for violations of 
international law.  European States focused on humanitarian 
access in Gaza and the exhaustibility of donor funds to the 
Palestinians.  End summary. 
 
Positive engagement tempered 
by on-the-ground realities 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  In his first briefing to the Council as Assistant 
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Oscar 
Fernandez-Taranco, recognized the international community's 
concerted efforts to create conditions for the resumption of 
negotiations on the two-state solution, pointed to the 
Quartet's meeting in Trieste, Italy in June, the efforts of 
the U.S. Special Envoy George Mitchell, and the ministerial 
Arab League meeting on the Arab Peace Initiative.  He 
emphasized the Quartet's agreement that both Israel and the 
Palestinians must implement their obligations under the Road 
Map.  He also recalled that Arab ministers welcomed President 
Obamas commitment to peace in the region, and "a new 
beginning for United States relations with the Arab and 
Muslim world" in their June 24 meeting in Cairo. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Fernandez-Taranco said that Israeli's home 
evictions, demolitions and construction in East Jerusalem 
increased tensions and undermined confidence in a two-state 
solution.  He expressed concern over plans for the 
construction of 20 new Israeli housing units in the Sheikh 
Jarrah neighborhood of East Jerusalem.  He noted outbreaks of 
settler violence iQhe West Bank and lamented Israel's 
inadequate enforcement of the rule of law regarding violent 
settlers.  Despite these setbacks, Fernandez-Taranco said 
Israel is implementing measures to facilitate movement in the 
West Bank, thereby reducing the time required for 
Palestinians to access some towns in the West Bank, and he 
assessed that if this policy is sustained and expanded, the 
potential for economic growth in the West Bank would greatly 
increase.   He recognized the ambitious reform agenda of the 
Palestinian Authority (PA) and highlighted the PA's improving 
security apparatus with the planned opening of five new 
police stations in Jenin.  Overall, he noted, the situation 
 
 
 
in the West Bank had been calm.  In Gaza, he said that 
Security Council resolution 1860 "remained the way forward," 
that the drop in violence from the previous reporting period 
had carried into the present period, and that all of Gaza's 
crossings must open.  He said that the Secretary-General had 
shared his assessment of Gaza with the Quartet: that the 
situation is unsustainable and not in the interests of any of 
those concerned.  He noted that UNRWA had opened more than 
150 summer camps in Gaza, with over 185,000 children in 
attendance, and that UNDP had begun to clear more than 
600,000 of rubble remaining from the Gaza hostilities.  On 
Lebanon, Fernandez-Taranco recalled that the investigations 
into violations of resolution 1701, following the explosion 
of an arms cache in Khirbat Salim, were ongoing.  He also 
said the situation in the Syrian Golan was quiet, although 
settlement activity continued. 
 
Council Members 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) All 15 Council members called on Israel to stop its 
settlement activity, reiterated their support for the prompt 
resumption of negotiations on the two-state solution, and 
recognized that both Israel and the Palestinians must fulfill 
their obligations under the Road Map.  The U.K. called for a 
halt of Israeli construction, saying that such settlements 
were contrary to the two-state solution and against 
international law.  The U.K. was encouraged by Arab states 
readiness to normalize relations with Israel.  Russia said 
the blockade on Gaza was unacceptable and that "we consider 
inadmissible actions that could prejudge final status 
negotiations," a reference to Israel's actions in East 
Jerusalem.  Russia also reminded members of its plans to hold 
an international conference on the Middle East in Moscow this 
year, which several other delegations echoed.  France said 
that improvements need to be made in the daily living 
conditions of Palestinians, especially with regard to access 
and movement.  In this, France called for an immediate 
opening of Israeli checkpoints to encourage a more normal 
life for Palestinians.  In welcoming the initiative of 
President Obama, France said, "Rarely has there been such an 
interest in concluding a peace deal." 
 
¶6.  Ambassador Wolff delivered the U.S. statement (see ref. 
A), reminding members that all parties--Arabs and Israelis 
alike--had their respective responsibilities to uphold.  He 
pointed again to the weapons cache that exploded in Southern 
Lebanon and noted the violation of UNSC resolution 1701. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Austria, Croatia, Mexico and Japan said they were 
encouraged by President Obama's efforts to move the peace 
process forward.  Japan said such efforts were creating 
conditions "not seen in a long time," but that the U.S. 
cannot shoulder the burden alone; Japan called on all member 
states to lend their support to U.S. efforts.  Council 
members also reaffirmed that talks must resume on the basis 
of relevant UNSC resolutions, land-for-peace, the Road Map 
and the Arab Peace Initiative.  Libya was the only Council 
member not to discuss the peace process.  Instead, Libya said 
the situation in Gaza had deteriorated since Israel's 
"massacre," that Israel's lack of desire to end the blockade 
of Gaza was a war crime, and that Israel was applying 
policies to "Judaize" Jerusalem. 
 
Israel and Palestinian Observer 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Israeli Perm Rep focused her remarks on the 
explosion of the arms depot in Khirbat Salim, in southern 
Lebanon, and the dangers of Hamas, Hizballah and Iran.  She 
cited portions of a Khirbat Salim resident's letter decrying 
Hizballah's actions that appeared in Al-Mustaqbal newspaper 
on July 16.  The letter detailed a Lebanese villager's 
disgust at Hizballah, and highlighted the dangers posed by 
Hizballah's storage of illegal weapons near civilian areas. 
She underlined that the Khirbat Salim incident, a grave 
violation of Security resolution 1701, "demonstrates to the 
world the volatile reality on the ground" and underscored 
that Hizballah's breach of Council demands "are indicative of 
the danger posed to our region by Iran," and that "from 
Southern Lebanon to Gaza, the arming, training and financing 
of terrorism bear the same certificate of origin: Tehran." 
Israel desires peace, she stressed, and continues to call for 
the immediate resumption of a political dialogue with the 
Palestinian Authority.  She noted the steps taken to improve 
Palestinian movement in the West Bank and the Palestinian 
economy, including the dismantlement or extension of the 
hours of passage for 152 roadblocks, the creation of an 
industrial zone in Jenin, an agricultural export venture in 
 
 
 
Jericho, and a tourist infrastructure project along the 
Jordan river. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Palestine Observer welcomed "the more active, 
balanced approach" of the Obama administration, but noted 
that despite Palestinian concessions, Israel has not upheld 
its commitments.  He said that the President Obama's Cairo 
speech and the diplomatic efforts of Special Envoy George 
Mitchell have "renewed hopes in the vast potential of 
responsible, fair United States leadership."  However, he 
underscored that the situation in the Occupied Territories 
and East Jerusalem remains grave and the peace process 
frozen.  He said that Israel has undermined confidence and 
progress by "illegal, destructive and unilateral measures 
prejudicing the outcome of negotiations on the core final 
status issues--Jerusalem, settlements, refugees, borders, 
security and water."  He remarked that Israel's credibility 
as a peace partner is in question, that characterizing 
Israeli acceptance of the two-State solution as a concession 
should be rejected, and that Israel must be accountable for 
war crimes. 
 
Lebanon's prickly intervention 
------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The Lebanese Charge said that each step the 
international community takes for a Palestinian state, Israel 
introduces its own definition of that state and imposes its 
own conditions.  She rhetorically asked who will defend 
Palestine, its people, the rights of refugees to return, 
Gaza, the West Bank, Jerusalem, and the peace process.  She 
said that Israel violates resolution 1701 on a daily basis 
and called for an immediate stop to Israel's overflights. 
Israel destabilizes Lebanon and threatens peace and stability 
in the region, she said, as evidenced by the dismantling of 
Israeli spy networks in Lebanon and Israel's incomplete and 
delayed information on locations of cluster munitions from 
the July 2006 war.  She said that the Security Council needs 
to be aware of Israel's attempts to change the status quo in 
southern Lebanon through creating facts along the Blue Line 
and "provocations."  Regarding the incident in Khirbat Salim, 
she said a joint United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 
(UNIFIL) and Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) investigation is 
underway and that "preliminary information of the 
investigation showed that arms and ammunitions found were 
remnants of the July 2006 war."  She underlined that Lebanon 
rejects "any accusations launched by Israel of arms smuggling 
into UNIFIL's area of operation."  She reminded Council 
members of the GOLs request to renew UNIFIL for one year 
without any changes "either in the mandate or in any relevant 
rules and concepts of operation." 
 
Others offer some signs of hope 
amid virulent criticism of Israel 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Arab States (Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Qatar, Syria, 
Tunisia), Cuba, Iran, Malaysia and Nicaragua criticized 
Israeli actions in Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem, 
and called for Israel to be held accountable for violations 
of international law.  Arab States recalled the Arab League's 
recommitment to the Arab Peace Initiative and recognized 
Egypt's efforts at intra-Palestinian reconciliation.  Many 
Arab states said Israel continues to "Judaize" East Jerusalem 
and noted Israeli "spy networks" in Lebanon.  Syria said that 
"occupied Jerusalem is experiencing the most painful moment 
in its history" and that Israeli leaders' "hostile 
declarations" are "counter to peace."  Qatar said Israel 
should be held accountable for its war crimes in Gaza and the 
continued suffering of civilians, remarking that "we must 
expose the truth of human rights violations."  Iran rejected 
Israel's "baseless and absurd allegations," and said that 
Israel is a danger to the world with nuclear weapons. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The Swedish Perm Rep, speaking on behalf of the 
EU, welcomed the U.S. administration's commitment to pursue a 
two-state solution and called on Israel to halt its 
settlement activities.  He called for full implementation of 
resolution 1860, for the Palestinians to advance 
reconciliation efforts, and for Arab countries to assist the 
PA both politically and financially.  Norway emphasized that 
donor funds cannot last forever, saying "without a political 
endgame in clear view, donor commitment at current levels can 
hardly be sustained."  Switzerland spoke about the need for a 
concerted effort to put in place a mechanism for humanitarian 
access and reconstruction in Gaza. 
 
¶13.  (U) Note: A verbatim record of the meeting is available 
on the Security Council section of the UN website, 
 
 
 
www.un.org, under "Meetings." 
RICE