04HANOI652
INPUT FOR 2004 TIP REPORT - VIETNAM
Thu Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Hanoi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 14 HANOI 000652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP,G,INL,DRL,PRM,IWI,EAP/BCLTV,EAP/RSP 
PASS TO AID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF CH TW CA VM OMIG TIP
SUBJECT:  INPUT FOR 2004 TIP REPORT - VIETNAM 
 
REFS:  A. STATE 7869 B. 03 HANOI 3232 C. 03 HANOI 3288 D. 03 
 
HANOI 2323 E. HANOI 336 F. HCMC 196 
 
¶1. Mission Vietnam's response to the TIP questions in reftel 
A follows, following the requested checklist format. 
 
¶2. OVERVIEW OF VIETNAM'S ACTIVITIES TO ELIMINATE TIP 
 
¶A. Characterization of trafficking in Vietnam: 
 
Vietnam is a country of origin for trafficked, women, and 
children, but the highest percentage of victims are 
undereducated rural women between 18 and 40 years of age. 
Exact (or even rough) numbers are very hard to come by; 
however, government and NGO sources agree that the number is 
in the "thousands" per year.  In press reports, Vietnamese 
police spokesmen have said that 50,000 Vietnamese women have 
been sold into prostitution in the past decade, but the 
source of this figure is unknown.  Vietnam now has a 
dedicated crime statistics office, but it only opened in 
August 2003.  That office tracks data only on arrests, 
prosecutions, and convictions of traffickers and therefore 
will not be a source of data on the total number of 
trafficking victims in Vietnam.  Several NGOs are currently 
applying for funding to do a comprehensive survey of the 
trafficking problem in Vietnam. 
 
Trafficking occurs within Vietnam's borders, as well as from 
Vietnam to other countries. 
 
¶B. Source and destination of trafficking victims: 
 
Vietnamese trafficking victims come from almost all 
provinces and cities in Vietnam.  The two main destinations 
for Vietnamese trafficking victims are China and Cambodia; 
in general, most northern and central trafficking victims 
are trafficked to China, while victims in the south are 
trafficked to Cambodia.  The highest concentration of 
victims trafficked north came from Thanh Hoa province, south 
of Hanoi.  The Cambodian border provinces of An Giang and 
Tay Ninh have a relatively high number of victims trafficked 
to Cambodia. 
 
A small number of women from Ho Chi Minh City and the Mekong 
Delta who married men from Taiwan were forced into 
prostitution or domestic servitude after their arrival in 
Taiwan.  Since 1995, as many as 75,000 Vietnamese women have 
gone to Taiwan as brides.  Vietnamese and Taiwan estimates 
of the number who have encountered difficulties, including 
but not limited to trafficking, range from five to ten 
percent.  The number of actual trafficking victims - as 
differentiated from women who found themselves in unhappy 
marriages - is estimated by Taiwan and Vietnam authorities 
as between one and two hundred per year. (ref B). 
 
Cambodia and China are the destinations for the vast 
majority of Vietnamese trafficking victims.  However, the 
Ministry of Public Security (MPS) notes that Vietnamese 
women have also been trafficked to Macao, Hong Kong, and 
Malaysia for prostitution, although in much smaller numbers. 
 
¶C. Changes in direction or extent: 
 
Vietnam has only recently begun collecting data on 
trafficking, and so it is not possible accurately to 
evaluate changes in the direction or extent of trafficking 
at this time.  However, there is at present no indication of 
any change in direction or extent. 
 
¶D. Reports or surveys planned or underway: 
 
In January 2003, UNICEF and MPS completed a survey of over 
1,000 trafficking cases from 10 cities and provinces in 
northern Vietnam to determine the nature and extent of the 
problem.  At the time of the 2003 TIP report, this survey 
was not yet publicly available.  MPS will release a similar 
study, examining the problem in the southern provinces, in 
the first half of 2004.  That survey is also not yet 
available.  Other NGOs, the Asia Foundation (TAF) and UNODC 
in particular, have expressed interest in doing research on 
trafficking in Vietnam and publishing their results. 
¶E. Conditions for victims trafficked into Vietnam: 
Vietnam is not known to be a destination point for 
trafficked victims. 
 
¶F. Targets and methods of traffickers: 
 
The primary population targeted by traffickers in Vietnam is 
unmarried women from poor and rural areas.  More than 90 
percent of trafficking victims have less than a high school 
education, and 92 percent reported their occupations as 
either unemployed or farmer.  There has been no systematic 
analysis of who the traffickers are, but in Mission 
interviews with trafficking victims (and their relatives and 
friends) as well as numerous press reports, traffickers have 
been residents or former residents of the trafficking 
victims' provinces or communities.  In some cases, the 
traffickers are traders or businesspeople, but in 
approximately half of the cases the traffickers were former 
trafficking victims themselves.  The primary tactic of 
traffickers is to offer a so-called "easy" job as a trader, 
waitress, or domestic helper in either China or Cambodia. 
In many (at least 25 percent, according to the UNICEF study) 
cases of victims being trafficked to China, the victims are 
told they are going to China to marry a wealthy man who 
cannot find a suitable Chinese wife.  Victims are generally 
moved across the Chinese and Cambodian borders without 
documents.  In more than 80 percent of surveyed cases, 
victims crossed the border away from legal crossing gates. 
The MPS admits that Vietnam's long land borders with China 
and Cambodia are extremely porous.  In the relatively small 
number of cases involving victims trafficked to more distant 
destinations such as Hong Kong, Taiwan, or Malaysia, MPS 
representatives stated that traffickers disguise victims as 
legitimate tourists or workers under a labor export program 
(ref c). 
 
Vietnamese authorities, in cooperation with other third 
country law enforcement officials, have documented cases of 
trafficking in Vietnamese babies for international adoption, 
especially in the area of directed adoption, involving 
payments to parents in exchange for releasing their babies 
for adoption.  In addition to this, small children and 
infants are sometimes kidnapped and sold to traffickers in 
China.  In July, police in Hanoi arrested a woman suspected 
of kidnapping six children in the impoverished provinces of 
Thanh Hoa and Nghe An for sale to China. 
 
¶G. Political will to combat TIP: 
 
There is political will at the highest levels of government 
to combat trafficking in persons.  In September 2003, Deputy 
Prime Minister Pham Gia Khiem hosted an interagency meeting 
for all involved agencies, as well as the provinces most 
affected by trafficking (ref D).  At that meeting, DPM Khiem 
reviewed the implementation of the Prime Minister's 1998 
directive number 776/TTg concerning trafficking in persons. 
He directed MPS to lead an effort to choose a GVN agency to 
lead the interagency effort against trafficking.  MPS 
created a separate office to focus on trafficking, and 
intends to upgrade that office to a department in 2004.  The 
GVN is also committed to implementing its commitments under 
the Regional Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling, 
Trafficking in Persons, and Related Transnational Crime (aka 
the Bali Process), and is moving towards concluding a 
bilateral MOU on trafficking in persons with Cambodia. 
 
The GVN does not have extensive resources, but it has 
recently focused more of its economic development efforts on 
rural and mountainous communities in part out of a desire to 
change the conditions of poverty that contribute to the 
persistence of trafficking.  On the prosecution side, it has 
created a separate office in MPS to focus on trafficking. 
Local communities, provincial-level Women's Unions, and 
provincial Departments of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs 
are charged with -- and have been generally active in -- 
facilitating the reentry and rehabilitation of trafficked 
victims. 
 
¶H. Government complicity in trafficking: 
 
There were no cases in 2003 that would lead to the 
conclusion that governmental authorities, forces, or 
individual members of the government facilitate or condone 
trafficking in persons.  However, the GVN has a persistent 
problem with corruption within its ranks, and that problem 
is particularly severe among street-level police and border 
agents.  There were several cases in 2003 where officers in 
state-owned enterprises were found to have facilitated 
illegal labor migration through labor export, a form of 
trafficking in persons.  The GVN prosecuted these cases.  In 
May 2003 three officials from the Employment Service Center 
of the Administration Department of the General Staff 
Department of the Ministry of Defense (MOD) were found to 
have participated in a scheme to cheat Vietnamese workers 
into going to Malaysia, where they were exploited.  One of 
them was prosecuted by the local police in Thai Binh 
province, and two others by MOD's Criminal Investigation 
Division.  In 2003, the press also reported that the Acting 
Chief of the Center for Development and Application of 
Technology and Science -- an NGO supported in part by the 
GVN -- was sentenced to nine years in prison for her 
involvement in a predatory labor export scheme. 
 
There have undoubtedly been other cases of officials 
prosecuted for their involvement in trafficking, but the 
statistics on criminal prosecution of traffickers are not 
disaggregated by profession.  Hard data is not available. 
 
¶I.  GVN's ability to address the problem: 
 
The limitations on the GVN's ability to address the problem 
come primarily from the socioeconomic conditions in Vietnam, 
the usually low levels of ability of the police and armed 
forces, and the extensive land borders with China and 
Cambodia, the primary destination countries for Vietnamese 
victims of trafficking. 
 
Vietnam is poor; CY 2003 per capita income was USD 480, and 
in rural and mountainous areas, the figure is much lower. 
Jobless women believe that China is a much richer place with 
significant numbers of prosperous businessmen who cannot get 
married in China because there is a lack of eligible women. 
Many in the south believe that there is money to be made in 
Cambodia working as the servant of a rich man or in the 
entertainment industry.  Real economic opportunity in 
Vietnam is concentrated in urban areas, home to less than 20 
percent of the population.  For the majority of Vietnamese 
women, a rural, uneducated life at or below the poverty line 
is the best they can expect.  The pool of potential 
trafficking victims is vast. 
 
The socioeconomic conditions in Vietnam also affect the 
ability and integrity of the police and border guards. 
Vietnam does not have the resources to train or equip these 
personnel extensively, and their salaries are low - between 
twenty and forty dollars per month.  These deficiencies 
contribute to the problems of corruption and incompetence in 
the Vietnamese police, especially at the provincial level. 
 
The porous borders between Vietnam and the two main 
destination countries represent the third limitation on the 
GVN's ability to combat trafficking.  Traffickers are able 
to evade the police easily.  MPS officers admit that the 
long borders between Vietnam and China and between Vietnam 
and Cambodia offer traffickers many options for crossing the 
border illegally with trafficking victims (ref c). 
Vietnamese border authorities in the south have admitted 
that in remote areas, they rely on locals informing the 
police in the event a stranger passes through the area 
heading for the border.  In practice, this does not 
represent an effective border control strategy.  However, 
considering the limited resources of the Border Army and the 
thousands of kilometers of easily crossable borders, it is 
difficult to implement a truly effective strategy. 
¶J. Government monitoring of anti-TIP activities: 
 
The GVN's monitoring effort exists but is not systematic. 
Deputy Prime Minister Khiem's meeting in September 2003 was 
designed to review performance in the fight against 
trafficking among all interested agencies.  The GVN shared 
the results of that meeting with the public and the 
international community through press reports and readout 
briefings with NGOs.  The GVN also held a meeting in 
February 2004 with all interested Embassies and 
international organizations regarding Vietnam's actions 
under the Bali Process, with formal assessments from the 
Ministry of Labor, Invalids, and Social Affairs (MOLISA), 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), MPS, and the Border 
Army.  In addition to these seminar-style assessments, MPS 
has been working with UNICEF to produce two comprehensive 
reviews of the actual situation of trafficking in persons to 
China and Cambodia and examining prevention and 
investigation efforts.  According to representatives of MPS, 
the second of those reports is scheduled to be released in 
"early 2004," probably in March. 
 
The GVN does not have a formal mechanism for sharing this 
information.  It is, however, sometimes available upon 
request. 
 
¶K. Legalization/decriminalization of prostitution: 
 
Prostitution is subject to penalties in Vietnam.  Brothel 
owners, procurers, prostitutes, and customers are all 
subject to arrest.  Brothel owners and procurers face jail 
time under the Penal Code, and prostitutes and customers are 
usually given "administrative punishment," imposed by the 
police without the involvement of prosecutors or courts. 
Prostitutes are routinely sent to rehabilitation centers, 
while customers face fines.  Customers who are found with 
prostitutes under the age of 18 are subject to prosecution 
and jail time. 
 
¶L. Purchase of child brides in Vietnam: 
 
The GVN admits that there may be cases of child brides being 
bought and sold; however, no cases have been identified and 
no figures are available.  It is illegal to marry before the 
age of 18.  Despite this fact, girls younger than 18 do get 
married (or at least, set up housekeeping in the absence of 
a legal wedding) regularly, especially in rural areas.  The 
issue of buying and selling is a complicated one, since 
cultural aspects of a traditional wedding in Vietnam (such 
as the groom giving gifts to the bride's family) can 
resemble a transaction in extreme cases.  This is especially 
true when foreign men come to Vietnam to marry Vietnamese 
women. In these cases, grooms frequently provide a 
significant cash gift to the parents of the bride with an 
expectation of more gifts in the future (ref B). 
 
Vietnamese men are not known to travel abroad to purchase 
child brides. 
 
¶3. PREVENTION: 
 
¶A. GVN acknowledgement of the problem: 
 
The GVN acknowledges the problem of trafficking publicly and 
privately at all levels of government and with domestic and 
international audiences.  Two representative statements 
follow: "In recent years, the situation of trafficking in 
women and children in Vietnam has become complicated and 
serious. . . in the past ten years, thousands of women and 
children were cheated to be sold abroad, forced to be wives, 
to be exploited for labor." (Vice-Director of Criminal 
Police Col. Nguyen Manh Te, at an official briefing on 
"Policies, Legislation and Measures of the Government of 
Vietnam Against People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and 
Related Transnational Crime, 26 February 2004.)  "Thousands 
of Vietnamese women and children have been victims of both 
organized and spontaneous people trafficking. . . Although 
Vietnam has done its best, as a result of numerous objective 
and subjective reasons, trafficking in women and children 
remains complicated and serious, causing deep concerns for 
the community, threatening the life of thousands of women, 
children, and their families, nurturing potential bad 
consequences for national security and social safety."  (MFA 
Consular Director General Bui Dinh Dinh, same venue.) 
 
¶B. Agencies involved in anti-TIP efforts: 
 
The lead agency falls under the MPS, which has an office 
dedicated to trafficking enforcement as well as the 
responsibility for coordinating interagency efforts.  The 
other agencies involved are the MFA, MOLISA, the Border 
Army, and the Women's Union. 
 
¶C. Government-run anti-TIP information or education 
campaigns: 
 
The GVN has not mounted separate, specific anti-TIP 
campaigns, but the issue of trafficking has been raised in 
combination with other information and education programs. 
For example, Vietnam Television occasionally addresses the 
issue in a popular television program about home economy, 
featuring returnees discussing their trafficking experiences 
and advising others on how to avoid being trafficked. 
 
Trafficking in persons is normally included with other "anti- 
social evil programs" run by MOLISA's Department of Social 
Evils Prevention. (Note: The GVN defines "social evils" as 
drug abuse, HIV/AIDS, prostitution, and trafficking in 
persons.  End note.)  For example, the GVN's official anti- 
prostitution program has been underway since 2001.  This 
program includes trafficking information and education 
campaigns.  This program, according to DSEP, targets 
victims, high-risk groups, and the entire society.  In 
addition, DSEP confirmed that MPS is now working on a 
national anti-trafficking plan of action for the 2005-2010 
period that will include an information and education 
component. 
 
¶D. GVN support of other programs to prevent trafficking: 
 
The GVN supports several domestically funded and foreign 
funded anti-trafficking programs. 
 
On February 12 2004, the GVN approved its 2004 - 2010 
National Program of Action on Protection for Children in 
Special Circumstances.  The program has four objectives 
targeted at: 
 
- providing for homeless children; 
- ending the worst forms of child labor; 
- preventing women and children from being trafficked; and 
- capacity building and advocacy. 
 
In addition to this program, the GVN also supports various 
ongoing trafficking projects throughout Vietnam, including 
international programs, such as following ILO projects: 
 
-  ILO - Japan Asian Regional Program for Extension of 
Employment Opportunities for Women, Capacity Building, 
Credit Schemes, and Income Generation; 
-  Project on Promoting More and Better Jobs for Young Women 
in Vietnam (2001 - 2004); 
-  National Program for the Prevention and Elimination of 
Child Labor in Vietnam; and 
-  The Mekong Sub-regional Project to Combat Trafficking in 
Women and Children. 
 
Other NGOs and international organizations such as IOM, 
Action Aid, Save the Children UK, UNODC, and UNICEF are 
assisting in combating trafficking.  These projects all 
contain a GVN component, mostly in the form of in-kind 
contributions (ref D). 
 
¶E. GVN ability to support prevention programs: 
 
Though prevention in the form of socioeconomic development 
for the high-poverty areas where many trafficking victims 
originate is the GVN's top priority for addressing the issue 
of trafficking in persons, the magnitude of the task of 
improving the standard of living for all those living in 
rural poverty exceeds the GVN's resources.  The GVN is 
dependent on overseas assistance to meet many of its 
developmental goals, which themselves are insufficient to 
eliminate the potential pool of victims. 
 
¶F. Relationship between government officials, NGOs, other 
relevant organizations and other elements of civil society 
on the trafficking issue: 
 
The GVN's ability to operate in an interagency context is 
limited.  Communication technology is antiquated and there 
is little tradition of interagency cooperation, although 
that is improving since the Deputy Prime Minister's decision 
to place MPS in charge of interagency coordination on the 
TIP issue.  The GVN works well with relevant organizations 
on the TIP issue, especially those connected to the UN such 
as UNICEF and UNODC.  MPS has played an active role in 
several UNICEF and UNODC trafficking projects recently, 
going so far as to assign one senior officer full time in 
the UNODC office as the national project coordinator.  This 
greatly improves UNODC's ability to work with MPS. 
 
On the trafficking issue, the civil society representation 
comes from the Women's Union, a mass organization under the 
Vietnam Fatherland Front for women's issues in Vietnam.  The 
Women's Union has branches and offices throughout the 
country down to the commune level.  Relations between the 
Women's Union and other agencies on the subject of 
trafficking are excellent. 
 
¶G. GVN border control adequacy and monitoring of 
emigration/immigration patterns for evidence of TIP: 
 
Representatives from the General Criminal Division of MPS 
have admitted that, along Vietnam's 5,000 km of land 
borders, there are "countless forest paths where people 
cross the border unofficially"(ref C).  Sophisticated 
monitoring of immigration and emigration patterns for 
evidence of trafficking would exceed the GVN's technical and 
human resource abilities.  Vietnam has only just begun 
collecting statistics on trafficking; building and 
exploiting an effective database are yet to come. 
 
¶H. Existence of trafficking and corruption task forces: 
 
MPS has overall coordination authority over a group of 
ministries charged with combating trafficking in persons. 
The GVN does not have a broad-based TIP task force, except 
for the TIP office in MPS that is focused solely on 
enforcement.  There is no interagency task force on 
corruption in Vietnam, although there is a State 
Inspectorate as well as a Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
an Internal Affairs Commission of the Communist Party of 
Vietnam (CPV), all of which have investigatory and 
supervisory powers. 
 
¶I.  GVN participation in international anti-TIP efforts: 
 
The GVN's most significant international effort to combat 
trafficking in persons is through its participation in the 
Bali Process connected with the Bali Regional Ministerial 
Conferences on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and 
Related Transnational Crime held in February 2002 and April 
¶2003.  In addition to the commitments from the Bali Process, 
Vietnam intends to participate in the Asia Regional 
Cooperation to Prevent People Trafficking Project funded by 
AusAid when that project expands beyond Thailand, Burma, 
Laos, and Cambodia.   According to the ASEAN Secretariat, 
the purpose of that project is to strengthen regional 
cooperation and legal policy frameworks through identified 
ASEAN Secretariat plus China (Yunnan Province) national 
points of contact, and build national and regional capacity 
to prevent trafficking in women and children. 
 
Vietnam also took part in the Asian Ministerial Consultation 
on Migration Labor, held in Sri Lanka in April 2003, and 
several other working-level conferences and seminars on 
migrant labor and trafficking. 
 
¶J. GVN plan of action for TIP: 
 
There is not yet a formal national plan of action to address 
trafficking in persons in Vietnam.  However, under the 
guidance of the Office of the Prime Minister and MPS, the 
agencies involved in the fight against trafficking all have 
a common set of goals and strategies that together create a 
kind of action plan.  It is comprehensive and covers 
prevention, prosecution, and protection, as well as 
socioeconomic development, legal reform and capacity 
building, and international cooperation.  NGOs were not 
formally consulted in the development of these strategies, 
but the GVN relies heavily on assistance from the ILO, 
UNODC, and UNICEF to implement the plan.  At the moment, 
trafficking in persons is addressed in the 2000 - 2005 
National Anti-criminal Plan of Action.  According to MPS, a 
separate national plan of action to address trafficking in 
persons is in the works, based on existing goals and 
strategies. 
 
¶K. Entity or person responsible for developing anti- 
trafficking programs within the government: 
 
Based on the instructions of DPM Khiem during the September 
2003 trafficking conference, MPS is the point of contact for 
anti-trafficking activities among the Ministry of Health, 
MOLISA, MFA, Ministry of Justice (MOJ), Border Army, the 
Women's Union and other mass organizations. 
 
MPS is responsible for reporting to the Office of the Prime 
Minister on the issue of trafficking in women and children 
after collecting and analyzing all information from other 
concerned ministries and agencies.  In practice, the 
Criminal Police Department within the General Department of 
People's Police (part of MPS) handles issues pertaining to 
trafficking in persons. 
 
¶4. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
¶A. Laws specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons: 
 
Most traffickers in Vietnam are prosecuted under the current 
Penal Code Articles 119 and 120, according to the Law 
Department of the Office of the National Assembly.  Article 
119 concerns trafficking in women, and provides for 
penalties ranging from 2 to 20 years in prison.  Article 120 
concerns trafficking in children, and penalties range from 3 
years to life in prison.  Trafficking in women and children 
for all purposes, not just prostitution, is covered under 
these articles.  Trafficking for the purposes of labor 
exploitation is covered in Vietnam under Penal Code 275 
(titled "organizing and/or coercing other persons to flee 
abroad or to stay abroad illegally").  GVN authorities, 
including the MOJ, recognize that although all forms of 
trafficking can be prosecuted one way or another under the 
Vietnamese Penal Code, existing legislation in Vietnam does 
not comprehensively cover trafficking in persons.  The GVN 
is engaged in a legal reform project now that is designed to 
correct the flaws in the current code concerning trafficking 
in persons and provide the legislative basis for Vietnam to 
accede to international protocols on trafficking in persons. 
According to the MPS Criminal Police Department, the GVN is 
currently "developing and gradually perfecting the legal 
system concerning the prevention, the prosecution of crimes 
and the violation of laws on trafficking in women and 
children."  Vietnamese law does not address the issue of 
trafficking in men for sexual purposes, and there are no 
indications that this is a problem in Vietnam.  If it did 
happen, however, it would be possible to prosecute the 
traffickers under laws criminalizing the procurement of 
prostitutes, according to MOJ. 
 
2003 saw substantial changes in Vietnamese law pertaining to 
labor exports, accompanied by implementing instruments to 
curb abuses (ref E).  Effective as of January 2003, 
amendments to the Vietnamese Labor Code added a section on 
"Vietnamese working abroad."  Included in this section's 
articles is a stipulation that only "Vietnamese citizens who 
are 18 years of age in full or over, who have the ability to 
work, who are voluntary and satisfy all other standards and 
conditions in accordance with Vietnamese laws and the laws 
and requirements of the foreign party may work in a foreign 
country."  The amendments also include the requirement that 
enterprises have a permit to send workers abroad, thus 
ensuring some measure of government control over the system. 
The changes more clearly detail the rights and obligations 
of both the workers and the enterprises, including the 
enterprise's obligation "to manage and protect the interests 
of laborers during the period of working abroad under their 
contracts in accordance with the law of Vietnam and the law 
of the foreign country;" "to pay compensation for damage to 
the laborer caused by the breach of the contract by the 
enterprise;" and "to complain to the authorized State body 
against breaches of the laws in the field of labor export." 
 
In July 2003, the GVN promulgated an updated Decree to 
implement these provisions.  This regulation requires that 
companies "monitor, manage, and protect the legal rights of 
labor during their time of working abroad" and "have cadres 
for the management of the labor depending upon the foreign 
market."  The enterprises are thus required regularly to 
inspect overseas workplaces both before and after signing 
labor contracts.  The information from the pre-inspection 
must be included in the registration of a labor export 
contract submitted to MOLISA.  According to one labor export 
company, MOLISA carries out both scheduled and surprise 
inspections of labor export companies. 
 
The new Decree highlights the conditions for granting and 
revoking licenses for labor export.  Presently, Vietnam has 
154 licensed labor export companies.  150 of these are state 
enterprises "owned" by a wide range of ministries and 
provinces, while the remaining four are private companies 
operating under a pilot program.  According to MOLISA's 
Department of Overseas Labor, the GVN will reissue licenses 
to labor export enterprises one year after the 
implementation of this new Decree (i.e. July 2004).  MOLISA 
will use this opportunity to reconsider all licenses, not 
granting new ones to those that do not meet the necessary 
conditions.  MOLISA has already used its power to revoke the 
licenses of "irresponsible" labor export companies ten times 
between 2001 and 2003.  It also temporarily suspended eight 
licenses.  For more serious abuses of worker's rights, 
MOLISA coordinates with MPS to prosecute violators under 
criminal statutes. 
 
¶B. Penalties for traffickers: 
 
The revised Penal Code of Vietnam states in Article 119 that 
those who commit acts of "trading" women for the purpose of 
prostitution shall be sentenced to between five and twenty 
years of imprisonment.  Article 120 provides sentences of 
between ten and twenty years of imprisonment for those who 
commit the crime of trading in, fraudulently exchanging or 
appropriating children for use for prostitution purposes. 
Traffickers of people for labor exploitation are prosecuted 
in Vietnam under Penal Code section 275 and face penalties 
of between 2 and 20 years in prison depending on the 
severity of the crime. 
 
¶C. Penalties for rape or forcible sexual assault: 
 
Penalties for rape or forcible sexual assault range from six 
months in prison to capital punishment.  Capital punishment 
is reserved for cases in which: the victim is killed, 
seriously disabled or infected with HIV/AIDS; the 
perpetrator is a participant in a gang rape; or the 
perpetrator has raped more than one person.  With the 
exception of the potential of the death penalty or life in 
prison in the circumstances mentioned above, the penalties 
for rape/sexual assault and for trafficking in persons are 
similar. 
 
¶D. Prosecution statistics: 
 
The GVN has only just begun providing statistics on arrests, 
prosecutions, and convictions of traffickers.  The 
Department of Crime Statistics was established in the 
Supreme People's Procuracy in August 2003.  It provided its 
first set of statistics to the USG in late February 2004. 
The following is the number of cases against traffickers in 
women and children (Articles 119 and 120 of the Penal Code) 
in 2003.  This data does not include cases involving those 
guilty of trafficking in men for labor exploitation. 
 
Indicted:    296 suspects in 173 cases; 
Prosecuted:  224 suspects in 127 cases; 
Convicted:   204 suspects in 115 cases. 
 
 
According to the Department of Crime Statistics, the data on 
actual sentences is still being collected and processed; 
the Department hopes to provide this data later in 2004. 
 
¶E. Information on traffickers and beneficiaries of 
trafficking: 
 
Although the GVN refers occasionally to the involvement of 
organized crime in trafficking cases, there is no evidence 
to date to indicate that international organized criminal 
syndicates are involved in trafficking in Vietnam.  Most of 
the traffickers caught and prosecuted in Vietnam are small- 
scale traffickers operating close to their home villages as 
individuals or in small groups.  In many cases, the 
traffickers are either former trafficking victims 
themselves, or relatives of the trafficking victims.  In a 
review of the cases of 428 people arrested for trafficking 
in the north of Vietnam from 1999-2002, the MPS General 
Criminal Department determined that 80 percent of the 
perpetrators were unemployed, farmers, or itinerant vendors. 
There have been several cases where "matchmaking" agencies 
in Ho Chi Minh City have been accused of defrauding women in 
the process of arranging marriages between men from Taiwan 
or South Korea and Vietnamese women, but there is so far no 
indication that trafficking is involved in these cases. 
 
The proceeds of trafficking do not appear to concentrate in 
any particular place or gravitate towards any particular 
group in Vietnam, but instead are shared among the members 
of small free-lance ad-hoc groups of traffickers, according 
to UNODC. 
 
¶F. GVN investigation of trafficking cases: 
 
The GVN actively investigates trafficking cases, prosecutes, 
and convicts traffickers.  In general, the GVN does not use 
active investigative techniques in any criminal 
investigations, including narcotics cases.  According to the 
DEA, the Vietnamese police do not have the authority or the 
capability to use wiretaps effectively in criminal cases. 
Legally, they can conduct undercover operations, but MPS 
states that it lacks implementing regulations spelling out 
exactly what is legal and illegal in undercover operations, 
and so does not yet conduct them.  Vietnamese law does not 
permit granting immunity from prosecution in exchange for 
information, and American-style plea bargains do not happen. 
In criminal cases, the judge does have the discretion to 
mitigate sentencing if defendants have been cooperative 
throughout the investigation and trial process, but a pre- 
arranged bargain is not legal. 
 
A project aimed at improving and refining the legislation 
covering tools available to investigate and prosecute cases 
is currently underway under the auspices of UNODC.  MOJ is 
the implementing agency for this project. 
 
¶G. Training for GVN officials in TIP issues: 
 
At the moment the GVN does not provide special training in 
recognizing, investigating, or prosecuting instances of 
trafficking.  However, MPS is cooperating with UNODC on a 
U.S.-funded project that is designed to train elements of 
the Border Army in recognizing and investigating trafficking 
at high-risk border crossing points in Quang Ninh and Tay 
Ninh provinces. 
 
¶H. International cooperation in TIP enforcement: 
 
The GVN cooperates with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases, but not 
often.  According to MPS, this has happened "less than ten 
times."  However, one case in April 2003 received a great 
deal of press attention when Vietnam-Cambodia cooperation 
resulted in the elimination of "several" trafficking rings 
and long prison sentences handed down to some leaders.  MPS 
officials also cited two instances in which China and 
Vietnam jointly (and successfully) investigated trafficking 
cases, both in 2001.  MFA officials have noted that, with 
the assistance of UNICEF, Chinese and Vietnamese border 
authorities meet "regularly" to exchange experience and 
information, and to "work out plans to coordinate actions to 
prevent cross-border smuggling of women and children." 
 
¶I. GVN extradition of traffickers: 
 
Vietnam can and does extradite foreigners who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries, even in the absence of 
extradition treaties, but only on a case-by-case basis. 
According to Interpol-Vietnam, statistics for extradition 
cases in 2003 and other years are unavailable, but the 
number of trafficking-related extraditions in 2003 was "less 
than ten." 
 
MOJ officials noted, however, that Vietnam does not 
extradite its own citizens anywhere for any purpose, in 
accordance with the 1998 Citizenship Law. 
 
¶J. Evidence of GVN tolerance of or involvement in TIP: 
 
Vietnam suffers from endemic corruption, particularly at the 
working levels of law enforcement.  While cases of 
trafficking-related corruption appear rarely if at all in 
the press, NGOs and international organizations believe that 
they exist.  In addition, newspapers have reported several 
high-profile cases of labor export-related trafficking in 
recent months, and the arrests and convictions of the state- 
owned enterprise employees involved. 
 
According to an article in the "Great Solidarity" newspaper 
(published by the Vietnam Fatherland Front) in February 
2004, one trafficking victim was a cousin of the police 
commander for the commune involved.  The newspaper quoted a 
Women's Union official who noted that in cases where a 
family relationship existed between the authorities and the 
traffickers, the law enforcement system broke down.  The 
article stated that, at the commune level, where most people 
have at least some distant family relationship with each 
other, the fact that many traffickers are people who return 
to their hometowns from overseas makes law enforcement is 
"more difficult".  MPS representatives declined to comment 
on general conditions in rural areas, but noted that the 
professionalism and capabilities of law enforcement in rural 
areas was usually lower than at the central level. 
 
Post has no information indicating the existence of 
trafficking-related corruption at the central level of the 
GVN. 
 
¶K. Steps to end official participation in TIP: 
 
MPS officials stated that a combination of internal 
administrative punishments and legal prosecution would be 
used to combat any official corruption or participation in 
trafficking.  To date, the GVN has not prosecuted any cases 
of corruption related to trafficking, but MPS officials 
noted that there may have been cases where traffickers also 
had some official capacity, especially at the local level. 
Those cases would be contained in the aggregate indictment, 
prosecution, and arrest statistics under Articles 119 and 
¶120.  The GVN has not analyzed that data to determine if any 
of the individuals involved were public officials. 
 
¶L. GVN ratification of international instruments: 
 
ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and immediate 
action for the elimination of the worst forms of child 
labor: Signed and ratified.  Date of ratification: December 
19, 2000. 
 
ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory labor: 
Not yet signed. 
 
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution, and 
child pornography: Signed and ratified.  Date of 
ratification: December 20, 2001. 
 
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime: Not yet 
signed, but according to UNODC and MOJ, Vietnam hopes to 
ratify the UN Convention against Transnational Organized 
Crime in 2004 and sign the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and 
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children 
simultaneously. 
 
¶5. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
¶A. GVN assistance to victims: 
 
In accordance with the Prime Minister's directive number 
776/TTg, MOLISA has the responsibility for caring for 
victims of trafficking.  In practice, MOLISA interprets this 
as the responsibility to "coordinate with relevant agencies 
in providing guidance and directions to localities to 
conduct job training and generation activities and to 
provide medical treatment to victims of trafficking."  The 
effect of this interpretation is to shift primary 
responsibility (financial and operational) for actually 
caring for victims of trafficking back to the provincial and 
local level.  At the local level, it is usually the Women's 
Union representatives who care for returnees.  In 
particularly hard-hit communes in provinces such as An 
Giang, Lang Son, and Quang Ninh, local People's Committees 
and Women's Unions work together to provide services and 
care to returnees.  The level of this care, in particular 
medical care, depends on the political will and the 
financial resources of the commune.  Medical care is 
generally rudimentary in the communities from which 
trafficking victims originate, and so many victims likely do 
not receive adequate care.  There are no statistics 
available on HIV/AIDS rates of infection among returned 
trafficking victims. 
 
¶B. GVN funding of NGOs providing services to victims: 
 
Local governments often work with NGOs to provide support to 
returned trafficking victims in the form of vocational 
training, farmland, or capital for microcredit loans.  In 
addition, nearly all international organization and NGO anti- 
trafficking programs have a GVN component, usually in the 
form of an in-kind contribution such as office space, 
personnel, or services. 
 
¶C. Treatment of victims: 
 
Trafficking victims in Vietnam are not detained, arrested, 
or placed in protective custody against their will.  The GVN 
routinely sends prostitutes to "rehabilitation centers" 
where they receive medical care and vocational training 
during a period of incarceration, but trafficking victims 
are not sent to these centers unless they are caught 
engaging in prostitution after their return to Vietnam. 
MOLISA officials noted that trafficking victims have the 
opportunity to enter a prostitute rehabilitation center 
voluntarily to take advantage of the medical care and 
vocational training, but that this is very rare. 
 
¶D. Rights of victims and treatment of returnees continued: 
 
Post has no information indicating that returned trafficking 
victims in Vietnam are treated as criminals.  In all 
official meetings, in conferences, in seminars, and in the 
press, returnees are referred to as "victims."  The Director 
of MOJ's Legal Aid Agency has advocated changing the law 
explicitly to acknowledge the victim status of returnees, 
but so far this has not occurred. 
 
¶E. Victim participation in investigations or suits against 
traffickers: 
 
According to the MOJ, trafficking victims in Vietnam are 
encouraged to assist in the investigation and prosecution 
process.  They are also encouraged to file suit against the 
traffickers.  Article 31 of a new Criminal Procedures Code 
(see section F below) explicitly states the right of any 
Vietnamese citizen to make complaints or statements during 
criminal proceedings. 
 
Depending on the court ruling, if a ruling is against an 
employer (for example, the employer is sentenced to 
imprisonment), then compensation will be awarded to the 
victim by the court, including back pay.  Article 29 of the 
new Criminal Procedures Code establishes the right to 
compensation and the restoration of reputation and other 
benefits for the victims of injustice, including 
trafficking. 
 
Victims may leave Vietnam in accordance with emigration 
regulations. 
 
¶F. Protection of victims and witnesses: 
 
On November 26, 2003, the National Assembly passed the 
Revised Criminal Procedures Code, which will take effect on 
July 1, 2004.  Point 3, Article 55 under the Code states: 
"the witness has the right to request the government to 
protect his life, health, reputation, dignity, assets and 
other legitimate rights and interests when taking part in 
the prosecutorial process." 
 
According to Article 7 of the Code, "citizens have the 
rights to have their life, health, reputation, dignity, and 
assets protected by law.  Any acts ruining life, health, 
reputation, dignity, or assets will be dealt with by law. 
If the life, health, reputation, dignity, or assets of the 
victim, witness, or anyone else taking part in the 
prosecutorial process, or their loved ones, are threatened, 
competent authorities shall apply necessary measures for 
protection as stipulated by the law."   According to the 
National Assembly's Law Department, in practice security and 
police authorities have provided protection for victims and 
witnesses, in most cases at their request.  Also according 
to the Law Department, in some exceptional cases, the GVN 
automatically offers to provide protection, depending on the 
seriousness and the importance of the case. 
 
¶G. GVN specialized training for officials dealing with 
trafficking, especially related to protection of victims: 
 
The GVN does not in general provide specialized training but 
has sent labor attaches to six of its embassies overseas 
located in countries that have the largest number of 
Vietnamese workers (ref E).  These attaches are responsible 
for working with the local authorities, the employers of 
Vietnamese workers, and other Embassy staff members to 
monitor labor conditions and intervene on behalf of 
Vietnamese workers if necessary.  These officers have access 
to a fund that can be used to help Vietnamese workers who 
find themselves in a difficult situation (such as an abusive 
workplace, or a bankrupt employer) to go home.  This 
provides an important protection for workers against being 
trafficked for labor.   In addition, MFA officers assigned 
to Taiwan receive special briefings on working with 
Vietnamese women who are married to men from Taiwan, and are 
instructed to "work with Taiwan authorities to give a 
helping hand to the victims, to detect and take timely 
action against traffickers in women under the cloak of 
marriage brokers," according to MFA Consular Director 
General Dinh. 
 
¶H. GVN assistance to repatriated nationals who are victims 
of trafficking: 
 
In accordance with the Prime Minister's directive number 
776/TTg, MOLISA has the responsibility for caring for 
victims of trafficking.  In practice, MOLISA interprets this 
as the responsibility to "coordinate with relevant agencies 
in providing guidance and directions to localities to 
conduct job training and generation activities and to 
provide medical treatment to victims of trafficking."  The 
effect of this interpretation is to shift primary 
responsibility (financial and operational) for actually 
caring for victims of trafficking back to the provincial and 
local level.  At the local level, it is usually the Women's 
Union representatives that care for returnees.  In 
particularly hard-hit communes in provinces such as An 
Giang, Lang Son, and Quang Ninh, local People's Committees 
and Women's Unions work together to provide services and 
care to returnees.  The level of this care, in particular 
medical care, depends on the financial resources of the 
commune.  Medical care is generally rudimentary in the 
communities from which trafficking victims originate, and so 
many victims do not get care. 
 
¶I. NGOs working on trafficking in Vietnam and cooperation 
with the GVN: 
 
Major ongoing NGO projects in Vietnam include: 
 
--  Oxfam Quebec, Save the Children UK, and Save the 
Children Sweden:  In the northeast (Bac Giang, Quang Ninh, 
and Lang Son provinces), this project is aimed at awareness- 
raising through the distribution of leaflets and local 
economic development through the provision of training and 
support for women starting their own businesses. 
Counterpart agency: the Women's Union. 
 
--  the ILO:  The ILO's project is part of a subregional 
project including all of the Mekong subregion countries.  It 
is located in Quang Ninh and Thanh Hoa provinces as well as 
in Ho Chi Minh City.  ILO focuses on: advocacy and awareness- 
raising; capacity building in MOLISA, Border Guards, MPS, 
and the Women's Union; and direct assistance.  Counterpart 
agencies are MOLISA, MPS, and the Women's Union. 
 
-- IOM:  The IOM is focused on protection of returnees. 
Also a regional Mekong project, IOM has opened a shelter for 
returned trafficked children in Ho Chi Minh City and 
provides assistance to trafficking victims who want to 
return to Vietnam.  IOM hopes to expand the shelter project 
to border provinces such as Tay Ninh (ref F).  Counterpart 
agencies: MOLISA and the Women's Union. 
 
--  UNICEF has a Vietnam component to a subregional 
antitrafficking project, which focuses on protection of 
victims and institutional capacity building, as well as 
legal reform.  UNICEF's project is unique in that it 
incorporates children themselves in project planning. 
Counterparts: MPS and MOLISA. 
 
--  A new UNODC project, with funding by the USG,  focuses 
on capacity building among law enforcement agencies, legal 
reform leading to accession to UN protocols on trafficking, 
and international law-enforcement cooperation.  Counterpart: 
MPS. 
 
--  The Asia Foundation, also funded by the USG, focuses on 
prevention of trafficking in Quang Ninh and An Giang 
provinces.  TAF works with Vietnamese NGOs and the Women's 
Union to improve conditions and opportunities for women in 
the provinces.  Activities include training of women 
political candidates and business managers, and provision of 
microcredit loans for women starting small businesses. 
Counterpart: the Women's Union. 
 
--  the UN Interagency Project in Bangkok administers a USD 
3 million(total project cost) project against trafficking in 
women and children in the Mekong Sub-region, including 
Vietnam, which attempts to collect data and to improve 
internal coordination among GVN agencies.  The UNIAP is 
currently on hiatus in Vietnam pending the GVN's approval of 
its "second phase" projects.  Counterpart: MOLISA. 
 
These organizations altogether are spending less than 5 
million dollars annually in Vietnam.  Most projects are 
small-scale and focused mainly on raising awareness of 
trafficking in at-risk communities, with some additional 
efforts to address "root causes" and protect returning 
victims of trafficking.  The major exception is the UNODC 
project.  In all cases, the projects have a GVN partner 
organization and draw heavily on donated staff from the 
Women's Union, MOLISA, and local Departments of Labor, 
Invalids, and Social Affairs, and in some cases MPS.  The 
GVN's contribution to these projects is nearly always in- 
kind, in the form of office space, personnel, equipment and 
supplies if available. 
 
POC AND TIME SPENT ON REPORT: 
 
POC: Benjamin Moeling, Political Officer 
(moelingbw@state.gov) tel: 84-4-772-1500x2216 fax:84-4-772- 
¶2614. 
 
Time spent on report: 
FSN-9, 2 employees, 20 hours 
FSN-8, 8 hours 
FO-03, 36 hours 
FO-01, 2 hours 
FE-MC, 1 hour 
PORTER