05ANKARA4079
ASAD VISIT TO TURKEY
Thu Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 004079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2015 
TAGS: PREL SY TU
SUBJECT: ASAD VISIT TO TURKEY 
 
REF: STATE 129621 
 
(U) Classified by CDA Nancy McEldowney, E.O. 12958, reasons 
1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Charge delivered reftel points July 13 to 
MFA U/S Tuygan who, without providing details, defended as 
"private" the upcoming Asad visit to Turkey and the AKP 
government,s policy of engaging Asad.  We received a similar 
response from AKP Vice Chairman for Political and Legal 
Affairs Firat.  We expect the AKP government to continue to 
engage Asad.  End Summary. 
 
MFA Defends Asad Visit 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Charge delivered reftel points July 13 to Turkish MFA 
U/S Tuygan.  Tuygan asserted in response that no dates are 
yet fixed for the Asad visit.  Tuygan stressed the ostensibly 
"private" nature of the visit. 
 
¶3.  (C) If there is an Asad/Erdogan meeting, that will be 
"private" as well, Tuygan asserted.  It is Erdogan,s and the 
GOT's intention that this and every contact is undertaken in 
order to convey the need for Syria to stop its "objectionable 
behavior" with regard to Iraq, Lebanon and Palestinian 
rejectionists. 
 
¶4.  (C) Charge stressed our concern that this type of 
high-level contact conveys to Asad a lack of international 
consensus about Syria,s behavior.  Moreover, the Syrians 
will portray such contacts as conferring legitimacy on the 
regime.  Charge argued that this type of high-level public 
contact is especially damaging, as Syria,s objectionable 
behavior is continuing and increasing. 
 
¶5.  (C) Tuygan claimed Turkey shares the U.S. "strategic" 
goals with regard to Syria but differs on "tactics".  Tuygan 
argued that Turkey needs high-level contact in order to 
deliver the necessary messages directly to Asad in the right 
way.  Tuygan insists Turkey has no illusions about the 
Syrians:  Turkey has a long, difficult history with Syria, 
knows Syria,s track record, and will not allow Syria to 
manipulate it. 
 
French Will Not Raise Visit with the Turks 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (C) Charge also raised the Asad visit during a July 13 
call on French Ambassador Poudade.  Poudade agreed the U.S. 
should be tough on the Turks regarding the visit but 
predicted Turkey will continue to engage Asad.  Poudade said 
that France did not intend to raise the visit with the Turks. 
 
AKP MP/Vice Chair Firat 
----------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) We also made reftel points July 13 to AK MP and VP 
for Political and Legal Affairs Dengir Firat.  Like Tuygan, 
Firat provided no details about the Asad visit, insisted it 
will be "private", and defended Turkey,s policy of engaging 
Asad. 
 
¶8.  (C) Comment:  Despite our objections, Turkey will 
continue to engage Asad.  There is wide agreement in the MFA 
and AKP government that Asad is a would-be reformer whom 
Turkey should support.  There is no sense in AKP that 
Syria,s objectionable behavior with regard to Iraq, Lebanon 
and Palestinian rejectionists directly threatens Turkey.  End 
Comment. 
MCELDOWNEY