06KABUL317
TRIP REPORT  PDAS SCHWEICH TO AFGHANISTAN
Tue Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KABUL 000317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/FO AND SA/FO AMB QUINN 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN/KAMEND 
 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER SNAR KCRM AF
SUBJECT: TRIP REPORT  PDAS SCHWEICH TO AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. Summary:  From January 11 to January 13 PDAS Thomas 
Schweich led a team from INL Washington to review the 
status of the INL-supported civilian police training, 
justice reform and counter narcotics programs in 
Afghanistan. The trip included a trip to the Kandahar air 
base and regional police training center. Other members 
included Robert Gifford, Director INL/CIV, Ranjeet Singh, 
INL/AP Acting Director, and Gary Alexander, INL/AP Senior 
Advisor. Briefers presented candid discussions of the 
status of programs making this a valuable and productive 
first visit for PDAS Schweich.  Although the Poppy 
Elimination Program (PEP) lagged in execution, Embassy 
Kabul feels that work-arounds are in effect that would 
convince the key governors to implement a strong 
eradication effort and provide for necessary verification 
of eradication claims.  The Afghan Eradication Force (AEF) 
program is in transition -- additional personnel need to be 
identified and trained but concepts of operations are being 
developed and the mobility of the new force should produce 
a more effective eradication effort. Planning for the 
arrival of INL air assets has been hampered by basing 
issues (there is no decision yet by the GOA on the 
permanent site for air assets in Kabul), but temporary 
infrastructure is being prepared in Kabul and Kandahar. 
Training continues with the Narcotics Interdiction Unit as 
DEA awaits better air support from dedicated helicopter 
capability. The new anti drug law will provide prosecutors 
with more weapons to use against the narco-traffickers. 
However, the Vertical Prosecution Task Force requires 
substantial mentoring and training. The civilian police 
program has met its initial training requirements and is 
launching into the mentoring phase.  Problems with 
credentials for trainees and tracking of graduates are 
significant in some areas but new procedures are being put 
into place to resolve issues. Meetings with CFC components 
and our British counterparts tabled various issues that 
need continued cooperation and coordination. 
End Summary 
 
Counter Narcotics Situation 
---------------------------- 
¶2. Doug Wankel (Director, Embassy Counter Narcotics Task 
Force (CNTF)) briefed the INL team followed by a full 
briefing from the Embassy CNTF pillar heads.  Although 
implementation of the PEP contract has been slow, 75 
percent of the Afghan team members are in all seven PEP 
provinces.  Between Embassy Kabul, the UK and DynCorp, 
workarounds were in place to work with provincial 
authorities.  Good news included information that the new 
Governor of Kandahar had initiated an early eradication 
campaign. Kandahars eradication program could be a trend 
setter inasmuch as neighboring provinces are looking to 
Kandahar before making their own move. Wankel warned 
however, that it would not be unreasonable to expect an 
increase in planting in Nangarhar province given the sharp 
decrease there last year. Overall, the group was encouraged 
by the positive actions taken to date by the central 
government and the participation of the Governors. However, 
Wankel was also clear that there is a difference between 
words and actions. The actions of the Governors over the 
next two months will be an indicator of the effectiveness 
of Governor Led Eradication (GLE). Following is a summary 
of briefings the INL team received in each CN pillar as 
well as briefings on the justice reform and police training 
programs. 
 
Public Information (PI) 
----------------------- 
¶3. The counter narcotics PI campaign is using paid media, 
earned media and local outreach to spread the CN message 
and is moving into Phase II of the campaign to promote the 
forced eradication effort. Since August 2005 the program 
has distributed stickers, matchbooks, posters, banners, 
SUBJECT: TRIP REPORT  PDAS SCHWEICH TO AQHANISTAN 
billboards and broadcast 19 radio spots over 7000 times. 
Survey results show that community based events and 
disQssions have the most impact on the public opinion of 
Afghans.  PDAS Schweich noted that while this information 
was useful, our surveys should focus on measuring the 
impact of the PI campaign on Afghans attitudes and on the 
CN effort as a whole. 
 
Alternative Livelihoods (AL) 
---------------------------- 
¶4. Four of the seven PEP provinces are currently targeted 
for AL programs. USAID briefed that the program has paid 
over $14 million in cash-for work strategies, providing 
over 67,000 farmers with licit wage opportunities. 
Irrigation has improved to over 67,000 hectares of land, 
which increases the ability of farmers to invest in high 
value horticulture.  The program has provided credit to 
nearly 5,500 farmers and USAID is currently working with 
several investors to open agro-processing facilities to 
increase farmer incomes and sustainable employment 
opportunities. Discussion ensued as to whether the AL 
programs are spread too thinly across the country and if 
more precise targeting of programs in key areas would be 
more useful. 
 
 
Poppy Elimination Program (PEP) 
------------------------------- 
¶5. The PEP, despite a slow start, is gradually gaining 
ground.  There are currently International Advisors (IAs) 
in three of the PEP provinces, and approximately 75% of all 
Afghan positions are filled. The contractor, in its 
proposal and original timing estimates, underestimated the 
logistical challenges that Afghanistan poses, particularly 
where it does not have a support base (i.e., the RTCs). In 
addition, no permanent provincial offices have been 
established although the contractor is in the process of 
finalizing plans for such projects.  The Afghan team 
members are currently using borrowed office space, which 
the contractor is in the process of furnishing. After 
Afghan PEP officers receive training and logistical support 
and the IAs come onboard, the PEP teams will be more mobile 
and capable of accomplishing their mission. 
 
¶6. In subsequent meetings, DynCorp explained that PEP has 
faced a number of difficulties, including attracting 
qualified candidates for the International Advisor 
positions; oversights in the original Technical Proposal 
may have failed to provide for adequate communications 
capabilities; and geographical, transportation and weather 
conditions which restrict or deny movement to the 7 PEP 
provinces.  DynCorp also noted that critical to the success 
of the PEP, and the safety of the PEP teams, will be the 
availability of adequate dedicated flight hours on a 
regional basis to support movement and sustainment 
operations. PDAS Schweich strongly indicated to DynCorp 
that PEP team success and eradication/elimination success 
this year was critical and that rapid recruitment and 
deployment of the international advisors to facilitate PEP 
monitoring and verification activities during the 
eradication season is imperative. 
 
Afghan Eradication Force (AEF) 
------------------------------ 
¶7. There have been a series of meetings with the GOA, UK 
and U.S. to develop a plan for both Governor Led 
Eradication and Centrally Directed Eradication. Forced 
eradication efforts conducted by the AEF will be focused by 
region as the crop becomes ready for harvest by region (in 
the south first and in the north later in the season). 
Targeting is provided by the Ministry of Counter Narcotics, 
Central Planning Cell which is currently led by UK 
advisors. Continued cooperation and support of this years 
effort with various partners in the field, including the 
UK, UN Office of Drugs and Crime and CFC-A will be 
critical. (NOTE: In a separate meeting with UK Drugs Team 
Deputy Graham Zebedee it was clear that there is close 
coordination and greater agreement on counter narcotics 
goals between the U.S. and UK on the ground. However, 
Zebedee expressed the UKs strong opposition to aerial 
eradication.) Governor Led Eradication will occur 
throughout the entire eradication season and has already 
been initiated by the Governor of Kandahar, who has 
received support from both the U.S. and UK.  Stepped up 
public information efforts featuring the preparations of 
the AEF for the upcoming eradication season will also be 
key to supporting the effort. To date 467 AEF personnel 
have received training in force protection and eradication 
methods; at full strength, Post envisions a 720-man force. 
During operations, a 23-man contractor support team will 
l 
deploy with a 165 ANP/AEF battalion made up of security 
and cutting teams to targeted provinces for up to 30 days 
to conduct forced eradication. Battalions can be deployed 
to three different provinces at any given time. Air assets 
in the form of troop/equipment transports, Medevacs, and 
force protection will be heavily utilized. NAS has 
developed contingency plans for smaller, more mobile 
operations once AEF is in the field.  PDAS Schweich and his 
team also visited the AEF Compound and toured the 
facilities with Afghan AEF Commander General Amiri. 
 
Interdiction 
-------------- 
¶8. DEA continues to train and mentor the National 
Interdiction Unit (NIU), which is part of the Counter 
Narcotics Police-Afghanistan (CNP-A). DEA is looking to 
expand the NIU from the present 108 members to 300 members. 
Additionally, DEA has requested that DOD build several 
Regional Operating Bases in order to facilitate the NIU 
operating regionally (Kunduz, Nangarhar, Kandarhar, and 
nd 
Herat). DEA is awaiting the arrival of eight MI-17 
helicopters (Russian-made) and one AN-12 (Russian C-130) to 
facilitate investigations. NIU/DEA continue to target Mid- 
Value and High-Value Targets (MVTs and HVTs), working in 
conjunction with the Vertical Prosecution Task Force and 
the Kabul Central Narcotics Tribunal. DEA recently 
conducted five one-week Basic Narcotic Investigator 
Seminars to members of the NIU and CNPA to support this 
effort. 
 
CN Justice Reform 
----------------------- 
¶9. Department of Justice (DOJ) representatives advised that 
the new drug law is a critical element in GOA's efforts to 
build an effective drug enforcement capability. The law 
provides authority to use more sophisticated investigative 
techniques and more modern prosecution strategies (such as 
offering reduced sentences in exchange for cooperation, 
etc.). It also provides for certain new offenses, to 
include drug related corruption, money laundering and 
violent crime cases. DOJ is focusing efforts on mentoring a 
Vertical Prosecution Task Force (VTF) of prosecutors, 
investigators and judges that concentrates on mid- to high 
level drug traffickers. The VTF will be the exclusive 
source of cases for the Counter naroctics Tribunal (CNT), 
which has national jurisdiction over major drug cases.  DOJ 
emphasized that the VTF was still not operating as a task 
force on a western model in which prosecutors and law 
enforcement work together to build cases. There is critical 
need for a protective unit and improved drug analysis 
capability, as well as wire intercept equipment and 
training, and improved internal administrative practices. 
DOJ is currently exploring ways to improve the VTF's 
infrastructure on an interim basis until the Counter 
Narcotics Justice Center is ready this fall. 
 
Justice Sector Programs 
------------------------------ 
¶10. Representatives of the INL-funded Justice Sector 
Support Program (JSSP) briefed the team on their program, 
which is designed to support the development of an 
institutionalized and legitimate Afghan criminal justice 
system. The JSSP representatives reported that their team 
of six legal experts has developed good relations with the 
GOA and the international community, placing them in 
position to implement reforms and development in concert 
with the GOA and with international cooperation. PDAS 
Schweich requested the JSSP representatives to outline 
their activities and accomplishments and future plans for 
programs with a view to the appropriate division of 
responsibility between various entities providing justice 
sector support in Afghanistan, including USG support by the 
Department of Justice, INL and USAID. 
 
INL Air Assets Support 
----------------------------- 
¶11. PDAS Schweich and INL team flew to Kandahar for a tour 
of the Kandahar airfield (KAF) and toured Kabul 
International Airport (KIA) area to review basing 
requirements for INL aircraft. Temporary locations in 
Kandahar, where the first 6 aircraft will arrive, have been 
provided by Task Force STORM at KAF pending construction of 
a permanent facility on the southwest end of the air field. 
The temporary space is large enough to accommodate all six 
aircraft and provide for unimpeded movement of any 
helicopter to a launch position without having to move 
other aircraft. The notional layout of the permanent site 
includes the ramp for aircraft, hangar space, and shops for 
maintenance, life support, SAR/Medics, and living 
facilities for the entire INL/A contingent. The site will 
be largely self-contained, including power generation 
facilities, water well, waste water handling, and 
ammunition storage. 
 
¶12. The INL team toured the KIA temporary facilities and 
proposed permanent facilities for basing the INL air 
assets. Agreement to sign a Memorandum of Understanding for 
the USG to use the 110 Acre parcel on the north side of the 
airport as a permanent site is still held up with the 
Ministry of Transportation. Temporary sites for basing of 
the aircraft are in place and will be utilized but the 
larger permanent facility will be required to support the 
arrival of the additional HUEYs in the coming months. 
 
¶13. The Afghanistan Wet Lease Program provides leased 
medium and heavy lift support to sustain INL CN and police 
operations. To date INL/DynCorp has deployed two MI-8 
helicopters, an AN-32 fixed wing, and soon to provide a MI- 
26 heavy lift helicopter to support the 2006 eradication 
season. Temporary quarters are being constructed at the AEF 
Base Camp for the Russian aircrews and flight operations 
support personnel. A permanent base camp for 280 Air Wing 
and Wet Lease personnel will need to be put in place soon. 
 
(SBU)NOTE: The GOA plans to bring down all security 
checkpoints, barriers and barricades on Kabul streets by 
this spring.  Therefore, DynCorp hopes to bring together 
separate program offices which are now scattered around 
Kabul city and develop a base of operation at the Kabul 
airport that will house over 500 personnel and bed-down the 
total program in a common operating location. The program 
will emphasize continued safe operation of the air assets 
and adequate protection of U.S. contractor personnel who 
support all of INLs assistance programs. It is not clear 
whether the GOA will approve such a large contingent of 
foreign nationals living at the airport so an alternate 
site adjacent to the AEF base camp is also being 
considered.  END NOTE. 
 
Police Training 
------------------- 
¶14. PDAS Schweich received briefings on the INL police 
training program from civilian police trainers at the 
police Regional Training Center (RTC) in Kandahar and in 
Kabul. The program has trained over 62,000 Afghan National 
Police (ANP), deployed over 100 U.S. police officers 
working with senior ANP officials across the country, and 
placed police advisors within the Ministry of Interior 
(MOI).  The RTC training team explained that the 
recruitment process relies heavily on local governance 
thereby allowing a large number of trainees with dubious 
documentation to receive training.  The RTC currently lacks 
the ability to adequately track RTC graduates highlighting 
the critical need to continue to implement the field 
training and mentoring program. In an informal feedback 
session with PDAS Schweich, U.S. police mentors also noted 
the high rate of attrition once the ANP RTC graduates are 
in the field, which anecdotal evidence indicated was due to 
corruption and rampant Taliban intimidation.  (The RTC 
Afghan Commander reported five attempts on his life outside 
the RTC.)  The officers were also concerned that the USG 
was focused on raw numbers of recruits trained. They stated 
that more attention should be given to improving and 
lengthening the curriculum. (Note: With the recent start of 
the mentoring and field training program, there will be a 
shift from quantitative to qualitative training now that 
there is a critical mass.) 
 
CFC-A 
---------- 
¶15. PDAS Schweichs discussion with CFC Deputy Commander 
Air Vice Marshal Luker focused on CN coordination issues 
including ensuring communication between the various 
organizations to ensure de-confliction both at the 
operational level and the post-operational level. PDAS 
Schweich also met with OSC-A Major General Durbin, who 
noted that CFCs view on CN issues had evolved to the point 
that counter narcotics issues, in terms of priority, are on 
par with the overall security situation in Afghanistan. 
PDAS Schweich also met separately with INL police advisor 
in OSC-A Billy Ray Fitzgerald to discuss contractor 
implementation and operational issues as well as long-term 
goals for the police training program. 
 
NORLAND 
D