06RABAT13
Family Code Implementation: Are Judges Resisting
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO2405
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHGI RUEHKUK RUEHLH RUEHMOS RUEHPW
DE RUEHRB #0013 0041450
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041450Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2415
INFO RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS RABAT 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG, NEA/PI, pass to USAID; Tunis for MEPI 
 
E.O. 12568: N/A 
TAGS: KMPI PHUM PREL PGOV MO
SUBJECT: Family Code Implementation: Are Judges Resisting 
the Changes? 
 
 
¶1.  The Casablanca Regional Bureau of the Hassanian Judges' 
Association organized a December 15 meeting between female 
parliamentarians and judges entitled "Judges and the 
Application of the Moudawana (family code)."  The meeting 
was also attended by members of civil society and human 
rights activists.  MOJ Chief of Staff Moulay Hachem Al 
Alaoui served as the panel's mediator.  (Curiously absent 
was Judge Zhor al Horr, the first women president of the 
Casablanca family court, which handles by far the greatest 
number of marital conflict cases in Morocco). 
 
 
¶2.  President of the Hassanian Judges Association Mustapha 
Fares made opening remarks stressing that "this meeting is a 
new practice adopted by the Casablanca Regional Bureau of 
the Hassanian Judges Association to communicate with all 
components of Moroccan society, to listen to them, and most 
importantly to understand citizens' expectations in order to 
establish a just and equitable justice to be respected by 
all citizens." 
 
¶3.  More generally, the conference aimed at assessing the 
family code after almost two years of implementation and 
provided an opportunity to discuss remaining problems and 
challenges.  Civil society actors viewed the main issues in 
the legislation as stemming from the many prerogatives left 
to the judge's discretion.  There was reportedly open debate 
on whether Moroccan judges respect the Moudawana and whether 
there is abuse of power.  Fares stressed that the importance 
of properly implementing the code is just as important as 
the changes brought by it. 
 
¶4.  French-language daily L'Economiste reported on December 
16 that, "Unfortunately the panel ended with neither 
conclusions nor answers on the implementation of the code. 
There was instead too much summarizing of the code itself." 
L'Economiste commented that the participants at least agreed 
on one point: the outdated mentality which still prevails 
within courts hampers effective implementation of the family 
code.  A moderate judge mentioned that "what takes place in 
courts reflects the current thinking which prevails within 
society."  The Parliamentarians and judges concluded that 
what is needed is strong will and especially time for 
conservative mentalities to change. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  While largely inconclusive and devoid of concrete 
recommendations, the conference, convened at the initiative 
of judges, was useful in bringing together judges, lawyers, 
MP's and women's rights activists to debate implementation 
of the family code.  The meeting also points to one of the 
main implementation challenges of the code, which is that 
some -- and perhaps most -- judges are either resistant to 
implementing the changes in the family code or else do not 
understand the changes well enough despite the training 
manuals prepared by the MOJ (the other challenge being 
dissemination of the changes to all sectors of society).  In 
our view, MEPI and DRL-funded programs such as ABA that 
focus on the training of family court judges are well- 
positioned to make an impact in this critical area. 
 
¶6.  Comment continued:  The new legislation can also only be 
accepted and properly practiced if those to whom it applies 
properly understand it.  While the GOM has launched various, 
disparate communication campaigns to describe the 
legislation, people with no previous legal knowledge have 
difficulties understanding it as do people who don't speak 
modern standard Arabic, a language that is spoken on 
television but not understood by the illiterate, who make up 
almost half of the Moroccan population.  As a result, 
women's movements are now asking the government to provide 
didactic material that can be understood by all segments of 
the Moroccan society.  Several MEPI-funded activities 
including World Learning, Global Rights, and the Academy for 
Educational Development work on communicating the new law in 
Moroccan dialect and other local Berber dialects.  A small 
grant given to local NGO Joussour/Aquarium Theater 
successfully reached thousands of illiterate Moroccans 
through plays performed in Moroccan dialect in primarily 
rural areas.  The funding we have contributed to these 
programs has been invaluable in spreading the message, but 
there is clearly much more work to be done in the slow 
process of changing the mentality of bygone generations. 
The results of the judges' meeting will be a valuable 
teaching aid for future USG-funded activities to bolster 
women's rights and inclusiveness in Morocco. End comment.