06TAIPEI150
MEDIA REACTION: DPP CHAIRMANSHIP
Tue Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 000150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: DPP CHAIRMANSHIP 
 
¶1. Summary: Major Chinese-language Taiwan dailies focused 
their coverage January 14-17 on Sunday's DPP chairman race, 
possible candidates for the next premier, and the year-end 
Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral elections.  The pro- 
independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a 
front-page news story January 16 headlined: "DPP Chairman 
Elected; [Chen Shui-] Bian, Yu [Shyi-kun] and Su [Tseng- 
chang] Form a Golden Triangle."  The newspaper also carried 
a banner headline on its page two January 17 that read: "Su 
[Tseng-chang Takes] up [the Premiership] and Frank Hsieh 
Steps Down; Bian's Focus Falls on Implementing [the Policies 
Announced in His] New Year's Day Address."  The pro- 
unification "United Daily News," in the meantime, ran a 
front-page news story January 17 with the headline: "Bian 
Met with [Premier Frank] Hsieh Late Last Night.  It Is 
Settled That Hsieh Will Step Down." 
 
¶2. Almost all newspapers editorialized on former 
Presidential Office Secretary-General Yu Shyi-kun's election 
as the new DPP chairman Sunday.  Editorials in the pro- 
independence "Liberty Times" and "Taipei Times" (English- 
language paper) both said Yu's major task is to restore the 
DPP members' faith in the party and to carry out the 
policies President Chen announced in his New Year's Day 
address.  A "United Daily News" editorial, however, 
cautioned Chen that with only 25,000 votes for Yu, he should 
not deem it as a stamp of approval from DPP members for his 
future political route.  An editorial in the limited- 
circulation, conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" also predicted that "with the Chen-Yu team, 
politics in Taiwan will continue to be vicious and divisive 
while cross-strait relations will remain tense."  End 
summary. 
 
A) "[We] Expect Chairman Yu [Shyi-kun] to Push for and Help 
Carry out [President Chen Shui-bian's] New Year's Day 
Address" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
wrote in an editorial (1/16): 
 
". We hope the newly elected DPP Chairman Yu [Shyi-kun] will 
stick to Taiwan's position, pushing for and helping the 
government to carry out [President Chen Shui-bian's] New 
Year's Day address.  All the more, we hope that Yu will take 
on not only the job of reviving the DPP's image but also the 
task of ensuring the safety and well-being of the 23 million 
[Taiwan] people." 
 
B) "Yu's Challenge: Restore Faith" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (1/17): 
 
"It was sad to see a political party with a glorious past 
such as the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) register a 
voter turnout of just 19.96 percent in its chairmanship 
election on Sunday.  It was an indication of the DPP rank 
and file's indifference to the election and the party's 
leadership should take note. . 
 
"In the face of these challenges, Yu's role is crucial.  He 
must transcend factional disputes within the party and 
listen to the grassroots.  Only in this way will he be able 
to act as a conduit between ordinary party members and the 
leadership, and regain the trust of the rank and file.  He 
also has to rebuild the party's image and be willing to 
adopt strict measures against any colleagues who are guilty 
of corruption. ." 
 
C) "Chen Shui-bian Cannot Possibly Break All the Deadlocks 
with a Victory of 25,000 Votes" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 
400,000] editorialized (1/16): 
 
"Yu Shyi-kun was elected DPP chairman with only 25,000 votes 
and a total voter turnout of less than 20 percent.  At this 
time when the DPP is facing a severe situation both inside 
and outside the party, one would say that such a low vote 
count and voter turnout reflect the strong divisions and 
doubts inside the DPP rather than providing a clear answer 
to the DPP. . 
 
"Perhaps Yu's victory of 25,000 votes cannot be viewed as an 
indicator or bargaining chips for Chen Shui-bian to 
determine his future political route after all.  The DPP 
chairmanship race will lose its significance if Yu's victory 
fails to become a turning point for the party to re-gain its 
past glory." 
 
D) "Yu to Enhance Chen's Rule" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China 
Post" [circulation: 30,000] wrote in an editorial (1/17): 
 
". Despite the low turnout, Yu's election was needed to 
boost President Chen's standing, whose approval rating has 
dropped to 13 percent.  Yu's mission is to rally the DPP's 
fundamentalist following to back up the president's posture 
in resisting power-sharing pressures from within the DPP as 
well as opposition parties.  Chen refuses to be a lame duck 
president. .. 
 
"In his New Year's Day speech, the president revived his 
independence agenda - to write a new Taiwan Constitution 
this year, put it for referendum next year and full 
implementation in 2008 when his term ends.  He also called 
for `active management' and `effective opening' over 
Taiwan's investments in the mainland, a reversal of his 
proclaimed policy.  The agenda was `wishful thinking;' he 
knows he can't do it, nobody can do it.  Because the U.S. 
won't allow it. 
 
"With the Chen-Yu team, politics in Taiwan will continue to 
be vicious and divisive while cross-strait relations will 
remain tense.  And Washington and Beijing will be annoyed 
for two more years.  So will be Taiwan's people and 
economy." 
 
PAAL