06TELAVIV53
CONTINUITY OF ISRAELI GOVERNMENT LEADERSHIP
Thu Jan 05 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEL AVIV 000053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR IS ELECTIONS GOI INTERNAL
SUBJECT: CONTINUITY OF ISRAELI GOVERNMENT LEADERSHIP 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  The powers of the Prime Minister have been transferred 
to Kadima minister Ehud Olmert in his capacity as Alternate 
Prime Minister, in accordance with Israel's Basic Law. 
Should Sharon die, Olmert is almost certain to be chosen as 
acting prime minister to serve until the forthcoming 
elections.  Olmert chaired his first cabinet meeting on 
January 5, and government ministers and party leaders across 
the political spectrum are urging stability and continuity. 
While the Basic Law permits postponement of the elections 
during an emergency, no serious calls have been heard urging 
such action.  If the Prime Minister dies, the Government is 
deemed to have resigned on the day of his death.  No 
indications exist, however, that Olmert's caretaker position 
will be challenged in advance of the scheduled March 28 
elections. 
 
------------------------------------ 
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL APPLIES THE LAW 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Attorney General Meni Mazuz has confirmed the 
applicability of Article 16 [B] of the Basic Law: the 
Government.  This article states that when a prime minister 
is temporarily unable to fulfill his function, his duties 
are to be carried out by the alternate prime minister for a 
period of 100 days.  If after that period the PM has not 
returned to office, he is deemed to be permanently incapable 
of doing so and the government is considered to have 
resigned on the following day.  Since elections have already 
been called for March 28th, that becomes the governing date, 
unless a move, highly unlikely, is made to postpone 
elections.  In the event of the Prime Minister's permanent 
incapacitation or death, a separate provision of law 
requires the government to choose an acting prime minister 
from among the ranks of the ministers -- five in this case - 
- who are members of the incapacitated prime minister's 
Knesset faction: Kadima.  Under that configuration, Olmert 
remains the most likely choice, and at this point all 
parties are calling for stability. 
 
--------------------------- 
OLMERT CONVENES THE CABINET 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  The Attorney General's decision cleared the way for a 
swift transfer of powers to the Alternate Prime Minister 
prior to the start of the marathon surgery on Prime Minister 
Sharon.  Olmert held a Cabinet meeting January 5 in which 
the Attorney General reviewed the special circumstances 
created by the Prime Minister's hospitalization.  Diplomatic 
sources were widely quoted by the electronic media as saying 
the purpose of the Cabinet meeting was to signal stability 
and continuity. Addressing the ministers, Olmert underscored 
the resilience and strength of the state of Israel, which he 
said would see the nation through "this difficult time." 
Olmert later spoke with Bank of Israel Governor Stanley 
Fisher and the two agreed that macro-economic policy as well 
as budgetary and monetary policy would continue. 
 
--------------------------------- 
RALLYING BEHIND A COMMON INTEREST 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  All the indications at this stage are that the major 
political players recognize a common interest in fostering 
stability and maintaining continuity of government.  The 
clearest expression so far was given by Likud Party Chairman 
Binyamin Netanyahu, who announced that, for now, he will not 
be pulling his party's ministers out of the government at 
the week's end as he had earlier intended. Netanyahu did not 
elaborate on the decision, but it clearly eases Olmert's 
administrative burden.  Kadima's minister of justice, Tzippi 
Livni, told the Cabinet meeting that she would do everything 
she could to assist Olmert in his caretaker role, and that 
all ministers would do likewise.  Statements of support for 
Olmert and offers to be of assistance have come from Likud 
Foreign Minister Sylvan Shalom, Labor party chairman Amir 
Peretz, and Shinui party leader Yossef Lapid.  Shas leader 
Eli Yshai said this was not the time for political changes. 
 
JONES