08VLADIVOSTOK127
TIGHTER CREDIT, CURRENCY SHORTFALL MAY SLOW ECONOMY IN
Mon Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vladivostok
VZCZCXRO7073
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHCHI RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFK RUEHFL RUEHHM RUEHIK
RUEHKSO RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHNAG RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHROV
RUEHSR RUEHYG
DE RUEHVK #0127/01 3150649
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100649Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1041
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZU/ASIAN PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION COLLECTIVE
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 1138UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VLADIVOSTOK 000127 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON RS
SUBJECT: TIGHTER CREDIT, CURRENCY SHORTFALL MAY SLOW ECONOMY IN 
RUSSIAN FAR EAST 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000127  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Although Russian politicians generally refuse to acknowledge 
the possibility of financial crisis in here, signs of financial 
distress have emerged in the Russian Far East.  Banks have 
significantly tightened credit terms, many areas are 
experiencing a shortage of hard currencies, and companies are 
beginning to consider layoffs.  Despite the indications, many 
Far East residents consider the financial problems in the U.S. 
to be far off, and assume Russia is insulated from global 
financial problems. 
 
Higher Interest Rates and Fees for Loans 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Banks throughout the Russian Far East have been increasing 
interest rates and introducing or raising service charges for 
all types of loans.  Primsotsbank charges 15 percent to new 
clients for one-year loans up to 150 thousand rubles, and has 
added a 1.4 percent service charge.  Only customers who have 
already repaid loans to the bank are granted a two-year 
repayment option.  Vostokbiznesbank, partially owned by the 
Ministry of Railroads, has halted all personal loans except for 
railroad employees.  Vostochniy Ekspress Bank in Vladivostok 
reduced the repayment period for personal loans from five years 
to three and increased interest from 28.85 to 30.8 percent. 
Khabarovsk's Dalkombank increased rates by four percentage 
points and Kreditniy Ostrov Credit hiked rates by five points. 
Primorye banks have raised interest on small business loans from 
an average of 15 percent to 26 percent. 
 
¶3.  Banks have also made mortgage terms stricter.  In addition 
to raising interest rates -- now ranging around 16 percent -- 
they have increased the minimum down payment from 15 to 30 
percent, and decreased the repayment period from 15 years to 10 
or 12.  Analysts Congen consulted with expect further increases 
in interest rates and possibly a 50 percent down payment 
requirement.   Aleksandr Ivashkin, Chairman of the Primorye 
League of Credit Brokers, confirmed that Primorye residents had 
a difficult time procuring credit in September, noting that 
banks' loan approval rate has declined from 50 percent to 10 
percent in the past few months.  The Primorye Kray 
Administration has refrained from commenting on the financial 
crisis and its consequences for the region. 
 
¶4.  Other regions in the Russian Far East have also felt the 
crisis.  Acting Head of the Amurskaya Oblast Financial 
Department Tatyana Farafontova stated in the media that oblast 
revenues declined by 516 million rubles (USD 20.6 million) so 
far this quarter, leaving the oblast budget with a 2.5 billion 
ruble (USD 100 million) shortfall.  Farafontova admitted that 
Oblast financial analysts did not expect the world financial 
crisis to affect the region's budget so deeply. 
 
¶5.  A Congen contact in Khabarovsk expressed worry to poloff 
that the crisis may affect his hotel business.  According to the 
terms of a ten million dollar loan he received, his crediting 
bank has the right to demand full repayment for the outstanding 
balance at any time.  This would leave him with significant cash 
flow problems, and has forced him to postpone expansion plans. 
 
Hard Currency Shortage 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  Residents in Sakhalin and Primorye are facing a shortage of 
U.S. dollars and euros at banks and exchange points as rumors 
spread quickly about further weakening of the ruble, possible 
devaluation of the currency, and sudden inflation.  Vladimir 
Apanasenko, Head of the Russian Central Bank's Sakhalin branch, 
offered to step in and supply reserve hard currency to consumers 
who submit written requests.  Vladivostok banks are also 
experiencing a shortage of U.S. dollars as demand for hard 
currency has increased in 5-6 times in the past few weeks. 
According one industry source, 60 percent of Vladivostok banks 
cannot meet consumer demand for dollars and euros. 
 
Media Coverage Skewed 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  Russian mass media tends to present the world financial 
crisis as a situation dire to the U.S., but largely irrelevant 
to Russia.  Many Congen interlocutors seem to believe that the 
U.S. is on the verge of economic collapse while Russia is an 
island of stability.  Several contacts have asked Pol/Econ FSNs 
how Americans are handling the massive unemployment, lack of 
disposable income, and high inflation.  Most are surprised when 
told by FSNs and poloff that the situation is not nearly as bad 
as that portrayed in the Russian media. 
 
Comment 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000127  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
------- 
 
¶8.  So far, the global financial crisis in the Russian Far East 
has been limited to a significant tightening of credit terms and 
a shortage hard currency.  The implications of these problems 
are not far off.  Fishing companies preparing for Pollack season 
will likely suffer significantly, as fishermen usually take 
loans to purchase fuel for their Okhotsk Sea runs.  Primorye 
construction companies will also likely be impacted and 
financing for the 2012 APEC summit may become more difficult to 
find.  So far, employment levels have remained steady, though 
several Congen business contacts have stated that they may need 
to reduce staff in the near future.  Despite the official 
media's portrayal of Russia as a bastion of stability, the 
shortage of hard currency indicates the population's lack of 
faith the government's ability to keep inflation under control 
and to support the ruble.  Despite all the bad news, one 
positive side effect for Far East residents is that real estate 
may become more affordable. 
GERSTEN