09SANJOSE23
MAGNITUDE 6.2 EARTHQUAKE STRIKES COSTA RICA,
Fri Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0023/01 0161450
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161450Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0412
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 4392
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1143
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUMIAGH/COMJTF-B SIMS SOTO CANO HO
RHMFIUU/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFIUU/HQ USSOUTHCOM J5 MIAMI FL
RHMFIUU/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SAN JOSE 000023 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/PPC, ALSO DEPT FOR USAID/OFDA: ROB 
THAYER, JAMES KESSINGER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MASS PGOV SOCI EAID AEMR ASEC PHUM SEVN
KFLO, CS 
SUBJECT: MAGNITUDE 6.2 EARTHQUAKE STRIKES COSTA RICA, 
DAMAGE LOCALIZED BUT DEVASTATING 
 
REF: A. SAN JOSE 0010 (NOTAL) 
     ¶B. 08 SAN JOSE 928 (NOTAL) 
     ¶C. 08 SAN JOSE 800 
     ¶D. 08 SAN JOSE 197 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: On January 8, a localized but devastating 6.2 
magnitude earthquake struck Costa Rica about 30 kilometers 
north of San Jose, near Poas volcano, a popular tourist 
destination.  As of January 14, there were 23 known dead, 
nearly 100 injured and 11 still missing.  The killer 
earthquake  directly affected 61 communities (over 100,000 
persons), by extensively damaging or destroying homes, 
businesses, bridges and roads.  One major hydroelectric 
plant, buried under feet of mud, may not resume operations 
for a year, according to GOCR officials.  The area continues 
to get aftershocks and some locations remain unstable; there 
could be more displaced persons over time. 
 
¶2. (U) On January 9, four JTF-B helicopters and 34 personnel 
deployed to Costa Rica to conduct rescue operations, working 
side by side with the GOCR's National Emergency Commission 
(FEMA-equivalent CNE).  The Ambassador also exercised his 
disaster assistance authority to commit $50,000 to pay for 
commercial helicopter rental to augment host GOCR and JTF-B 
assets (Ref A).  JTF-B helicopters evacuated more than 40 
victims, including two injured, and transported nearly 200 
rescue personnel plus some equipment over a three-day period. 
 In a regional first, JTF-B worked side by side with a 
Colombian Air Force UH-60 Blackhawk that also deployed to 
assist.  This earthquake assistance follows on the heels of 
extensive USG (via JTF-B) flood disaster assistance in late 
November in the Limon province of Costa Rica (septel).  JTF-B 
should again be commended for another short-notice, weekend 
deployment to Costa Rica, and for its outstanding performance 
while here.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------- 
A KILLER QUAKE 
-------------- 
 
¶3. (U) At 1:21 P.M. local time on January 8, a devastating 
6.2 magnitude earthquake struck communities in the 
mountainous area around Poas volcano, located about 30 
kilometers north of San Jose.  The quake occurred at a depth 
of approximately six kilometers.  Widescale destruction and 
landslides affected more than 100,000 inhabitants and killed 
at least 23 people with more feared lost.  More than seven 
kilometers of highway were obliterated in the event, with 
houses and vehicles buried underneath huge landslides.  The 
road that connects Vara Blanca to San Miguel is the most 
severely damaged, with the town of Cinchona essentially wiped 
off the map; road sections as long as several kilometers fell 
off the steep embankment and disappeared.  At least nine 
major bridges were destroyed and most search and rescue 
operations were initially only possible using air assets. 
 
¶4. (U) Although localized, the damage and casualties were 
worse than originally expected.  In addition to the dead and 
missing, over 2000 people are living in shelters and more 
than 500 homes/small businesses were severely damaged or 
completely destroyed.  The GOCR reports that  water, 
electricity and communications have been restored to over 80 
percent of the affected areas, but full infrastructure 
reconstruction, especially of roads, may take a long time. 
One major hydroelectric plant, buried under feet of mud, may 
not resume operations for a year.  Costa Rican officials 
currently estimate that the earthquake caused more than USD 
100 million of damage.  The GOCR has asked for a loan in the 
amount of USD 65 million (and the national assembly is 
working to approve that request) from the International Bank 
of Reconstruction and Development to help address this 
catastrophe. 
 
¶5. (U) The Cinchona earthquake, as it is now being called, 
also caused significant environmental damage, primarily as a 
result of extensive landslides and siltation of creeks and 
rivers.  Costa Rican volcanologists told us on January 13 
that they were "shocked" at the extent of damage near the 
 
earthquake's epicenter.  Previously forested ravines were 
marred by significant slope failures, leaving entire 
hillsides virtually denuded.  Although the affected Sarapiqui 
River continues to flow, the water is now moving over a 
viscous mud layer that has coated everything in its path, 
potentially killing all the fish by depriving them of oxygen. 
 Local scientists worry that the formation of natural dams 
and the extensive loss of vegetation could pose further 
hazards to public safety, particularly when Costa Rica's 
rainy season returns in late April/early May. 
 
---------------------------- 
US (AND COLOMBIA) SEND HELOS 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Following the earthquake, USAID/OFDA's regional office 
in San Jose worked closely with the GOCR's CNE to assess what 
international assistance could best help the relief efforts. 
The Ambassador authorized USD 50,000 to rent commercial 
helicopters to augment the government's efforts to evacuate 
the injured and homeless from the disaster area.  But, as the 
magnitude of the damage became clearer, President Arias asked 
the Ambassador on January 9 for additional helicopter 
support.  (His personal telephonic request followed a letter 
from Minister of Public Security Janina Del Vecchio.) 
 
¶7. (U) On the afternoon of January 9, three UH-60 Blackhawk 
and one CH-47 Chinook JTF-B helicopters deployed from 
Honduras to help the GOCR.  From January 10-12, these 
helicopters and U.S. military personnel rescued over 40 
victims, including two injured (a host nation rescue worker 
with a broken leg and an elderly lady with contusions). 
JTF-B helicopters also transported over 200 rescue workers to 
and from the disaster zone, including the Ambassador and DCM 
who surveyed the damage and met with flight and rescue crews. 
 The CH-47 Chinook airlifted a "Bobcat" excavation tractor to 
assist in digging out vehicles and structures.  In a notable 
first for the region, the U.S. units were joined by, and 
worked very closely with, a Colombian Air Force UH-60.  The 
Colombians, in addition to transporting rescue workers and 
their own personnel to the various sites, also transported 
the dead back to collection sites. 
 
------------------------- 
PRIVATE SECTOR PITCHES IN 
------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) In addition to the official assistance by the USG, 
private American businesses have also stepped up to assist in 
the recovery effort.  For example, Caterpillar's local outlet 
in Costa Rica, Matra, plans on donating machine rental time 
(16 machines in total for approximately three months free 
rental) to various municipalities throughout the disaster 
zone to assist in clean-up efforts. 
 
------------------------------ 
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE 
------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (U) On January 13, the GOCR, via a MFA media release, 
thanked international donors for their assistance and asked 
for continued help.  Amongst others, the GOCR recognized the 
U.S., China, France, Venezuela, Mexico, the rest of Central 
America, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador, Brazil, and some 
international organizations such as the EU, Rio Group and 
others.  China offered $100,000 in assistance and Venezuela 
announced that it was sending cots, tents, gas stoves, 
blankets and non-perishable food.  The GOCR requested further 
assistance in the following areas: 
 
 -- international financing to reconstruct vital 
infrastructure such as bridges and roads; 
 
 -- reconstruction of homes; and 
 
 -- revitalization of local economies of affected areas, 
such as in agriculture and dairy farming. 
 
--------------------------------- 
NO AMCITS REPORTED SERIOUSLY HURT 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) The landslides and severe road damage stranded an 
estimated 800 people, including approximately 300 tourists. 
All either made their own way out of the affected areas or 
were rescued.  The Embassy was inundated with welfare and 
whereabouts inquiries from the United States about Americans 
traveling or living in Costa Rica, but to date, no American 
citizens have been reported killed or seriously injured, and 
there is no credible information to believe that any 
Americans are truly unaccounted for.  One Amcit with a broken 
leg was medevac'd out of La Paz Waterfall Gardens Hotel a few 
hours after the earthquake struck.  On January 9, the 
Consular section issued a warden message urging Americans in 
Costa Rica to contact their families and friends and update 
them on their welfare and whereabouts.  The message also 
noted that most of Costa Rica was unaffected by the quake and 
that concerned individuals should continue to attempt to 
contact their loved ones directly via email or telephone. 
 
----------------------- 
MEDIA COVERAGE POSITIVE 
----------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Costa Rican media coverage of the earthquake 
dominated the news, with USG assistance noted and appreciated 
in print, radio, television and online; many with front-page 
photographs of JTF-B personnel working with Costa Rican and 
Embassy counterparts.  The most influential daily, La Nacion 
(cir. 120,000), reported on January 10 that the U.S. was the 
first to offer aid with the $50,000 for helicopter rental and 
fuel purchase that enabled the first rescue efforts, followed 
by the JTF-B choppers and personnel.  Popular centrist daily 
Al Dia (cir. 95,000) headlined a January 12 story "Military 
personnel an enormous help," and highlighted the U.S. and 
Colombian military personnel (the latter trained by the USG) 
and equipment that made prompt rescue possible.  All major 
television channels carried footage of the U.S. helicopter 
assistance,  and featured interviews with Embassy defense 
representatives and JTF-B personnel highlighting U.S. 
contributions. 
 
¶12. (U) The GOCR decreed national days of mourning for the 
victims from January 12-16, with the Costa Rican national 
colors at half-mast at all public buildings, and all official 
festivals suspended.  The COM sent an official condolence 
letter on behalf of the USG and the American people and 
ordered that the U.S. flag outside the Embassy be lowered to 
half-mast during this same time period to honor the victims 
of the earthquake. 
 
--------------------------- 
COMMENT:  BECOMING A HABIT? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Disaster relief is the sort of military assistance 
we, SOUTHCOM and JTF-B are happy to provide (although we hope 
it is not needed often).  It is ironic that U.S. military 
assistance has become one of the first things President Arias 
calls for (indeed, expects) in times of national emergency. 
For the Costa Rican public, meanwhile, JTF-B Blackhawks and 
Chinooks have become welcome and tangible evidence of USG and 
U.S. military commitment to help when needed.  Also, the 
sight of U.S. and Colombian crews working side by side to 
help Costa Ricans eloquently illustrated regional cooperation 
in action, and may serve as an excellent precedent for future 
humanitarian operations. 
 
¶14. (SBU) We may have to tone down GOCR expectations, 
however.  For this operation, we were almost backed into a 
corner by government-fueled, premature media reporting on 
January 8 and a release from Minister Del Vecchio on January 
9 announcing that the helos were coming (when they had not 
yet been officially requested).  In fact, the GOCR assumed 
that help was on the way as soon as the first informal query 
was made to us.  JTF-B moves quickly, but there is a cost 
 
involved for each major deployment, which may burn resources 
needed for future operations elsewhere in the region. 
Deployments must be based on considered need and an official 
request; not on presumptive advance announcements.  It would 
have been extremely disappointing to Costa Rica (and damaging 
to the U.S. image) if we could not have been able to help so 
quickly in this disaster. 
 
¶15. (SBU) There is still public diplomacy and 
capacity-building work to be done.  Although media coverage 
has been extensive and positive, and public sentiment very 
thankful, the GOCR is typically faster to acknowledge others' 
contributions (and to complain about ours).  President Arias 
publicly thanked the U.S. on January 12, for example, but 
complained in a TV press conference two days later that we 
should do more.  Image is less important than actually 
helping in these cases, of course, but public diplomacy is an 
important asset here as we slowly and successfully employ 
U.S. military "soft power" in Costa Rica.   The Arias 
administration cannot have JTF-B on speed dial without giving 
appropriate credit and understanding the extent of USG 
assistance.  Minister of Public Security Del Vecchio wants to 
visit Soto Cano to personally thank the JTF-B personnel for 
their help and to learn how to better coordinate disaster 
operations with us.  The first step may be to improve the 
GOCR's internal coordination, however.  Once the disaster 
needs have been addressed, we will turn to these longer-term 
issues. 
 
¶16. (SBU) This operation, and similarly heroic flood relief 
efforts in November, highlight the outstanding readiness and 
professionalism of our colleagues in JTF-B (as well as of our 
dedicated ODR section in the Embassy, which coordinated the 
JTF-B operations).  We are deeply grateful for their 
assistance, and proud to work with them to help those in need. 
CIANCHETTE