06ASUNCION1023
PARAGUAY SEEKS TO CLARIFY POSTURE ON IMMUNITIES
Fri Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Asuncion
VZCZCXYZ0013
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAC #1023/01 2791918
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 061918Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ASUNCION
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4888
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/USCINCSO MIAMI FL//SCJ3/SCJ33/SCJ34/SOCSO LNO// PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L ASUNCION 001023 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SUE CRONIN 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/03/2026 
TAGS: PREL MASS KICC PTER PINR VZ BR AR PA
SUBJECT: PARAGUAY SEEKS TO CLARIFY POSTURE ON IMMUNITIES 
AND U.S. MILITARY EXERCISES 
 
REF: ASUNCION 1020 
 
Classified By: PolCouns James P. Merz; Reasons 1.4(b),(d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY: FM Ramirez told the Ambassador October 6 
President Duarte had decided to terminate the extension of 
immunities to U.S. participants in military exercises after 
2006 but conveyed openness to finding a way to continue 
extending immunities for participants in Medical Readiness 
Exercises (MEDRETES).  Ramirez assured us that Paraguay was 
committed to applying the same treatment to other States, 
indicating this would require a renegotiation of Paraguay,s 
military cooperation agreements with Argentina and Brazil 
both of which will come up for renewal shortly.  The 
Ambassador signaled Paraguay,s decision could impact the 
U.S. ability to provide Paraguay with various forms of 
military assistance and training for lack of U.S. partners in 
country.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Duarte Decides Against Immunities for Military Exercises 
 
¶2.   (C)  FM Ramirez requested a meeting with the Ambassador 
to revisit their October 3 discussion of Paraguay's decision 
not to extend administrative and technical immunities to 
participants in military exercises after the current military 
cooperation agreement ends in December 2006.  The Ambassador 
had given the Foreign Minister pause when they last met by 
informing him that Paraguay extended "A&T" immunities to 
Argentina and Brazil in the context of military cooperation 
agreements with them.  The Foreign Minister told the 
Ambassador October 6 he had discussed this matter again with 
the President who had confirmed his decision not to extend 
immunities to participants in military exercises after 2006. 
He further noted that Paraguay was committed to applying the 
same  treatment to other States, indicating this would 
require a renegotiation of Paraguay,s military cooperation 
agreements with Argentina and Brazil both of which will come 
up for renewal shortly.  He assured us that Paraguay was 
prepared to continue extending immunities to military 
personnel accredited to the Embassy. 
 
Opening the Door to Medical Exercises 
 
¶3.  (C)  Ramirez appeared to want to draw a distinction 
between military exercises that take place in form of Joint 
Combined Exercise Training (JCET) with the participation of 
armed U.S. Special Forces personnel vs. humanitarian 
assistance via unarmed Medical Readiness Training Exercises 
(MEDRETES).  Paraguay would not extend immunities to the 
former, but was open to exploring a way to continue extending 
immunities to the latter by qualifying them as either 
"technicians" or "troops."  To that end, the Minister and his 
staff invited us to meet the week of October 9 to discuss the 
definition of technicians vs military personnel as part of an 
effort to better define to whom the GOP would remain prepared 
to extend immunities. 
 
Repercussions for U.S. Military Assistance 
 
¶4.  (C)   The Ambassador signaled Paraguay,s decision could 
impact the U.S. ability to provide Paraguay with various 
forms of military assistance and training.  He noted that 
President Bush had just signed an ASPA waiver allowing the 
U.S. to reextend IMET training to Paraguay military 
personnel.  Separately, Congress had authorized $1.1 million 
in assistance for PKO training and equipment and we had been 
exploring additional assistance we could provide in the form 
of equipment to Paraguay's Special Forces.   He noted, 
however, we need trainers on the ground of the variety that 
participate in the military exercises to ensure our 
assistance is effective.  SOUTHCOM would have to decide 
whether it would authorize sending troops to participate in 
training exercises without immunities.  Should the Commander 
decide that was not possible, it would become very difficult 
for us to provide our assistance. 
 
Opposition Blames Duarte's Leftist Bent 
 
¶5.  (C)  Coincidentally, the Ambassador met with the leaders 
of the opposition National Union of Ethical Citizens Party 
(UNACE) prior to his meeting with the Foreign Minister.  They 
assured us the Congress would have approved the agreement on 
military cooperation with the U.S. had President Duarte 
decided to seek ratification.  (NOTE.  This tracks with what 
we've heard from other leading opposition leaders we've 
 
lobbied privately.  END NOTE.)  They were convinced Duarte 
was responding to political pressure from abroad in deciding 
to end immunities. 
 
Talking Points 
 
¶6.  (U)  In addressing the press upon the conclusion of his 
meeting with FM Ramirez, the Ambassador made the following 
points: 
 
-- The U.S. has conducted military exercises in Paraguay for 
63 years.   Since 2000, over 100,000 Paraguayans have 
received medical attention in connection with Medical 
Readiness Exercises.  These exercises have also helped 
professionalize Paraguay's military forces. 
 
-- The U.S. has Status of Forces agreements with 80 countries 
around the world, including many in Central and South 
America.  Participants in all U.S. exercises with Paraguay 
have always received Administrative and Technical Status 
consistent with the terms of the Vienna Convention. 
 
-- The U.S. respects Paraguay's sovereign right to decide 
whether to conduct military exercises with the U.S. in 
Paraguay.  We remain committed to continued military 
cooperation and are open to future discussions with the 
Government of Paraguay to that end. 
 
 ¶7.  (C)  COMMENT.  Paraguay has made it clear it will no 
longer extend immunities for participants in strictly 
military exercises after the current agreement expires in 
December 2006.  We will meet next week to explore prospects 
for Paraguay's continuing to extend protections to 
participants in MEDRETES.  Ramirez told us that Duarte had 
made his decision in large part based on his concern about 
the political repercussions in Paraguay but it would appear 
more likely he is responding just as much if not more to 
political pressure from his neighbors.  A Vice-Presidential 
advisor has told us that Argentina offered a significant 
financial incentive.  We have no way of verifying that but it 
is evident Paraguay has come under significant external 
pressure for maintaining extensive cooperation with the U.S. 
We will need to consider carefully whether we can effectively 
to provide military training and assistance in the future in 
the absence of the experts we would like on hand to oversee 
its proper use.  END COMMENT. 
CASON