05PORTAUPRINCE1294
HAITI: GOVERNMENT, MINUSTAH, AND POLICE BATTLE
Tue May 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Port Au Prince
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PORT AU PRINCE 001294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND USOAS, DS/IP/WHA, DSERCC, DS/IP/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ASEC KCRM HA MINUSTAH
SUBJECT: HAITI: GOVERNMENT, MINUSTAH, AND POLICE BATTLE 
KIDNAPPING PHENOMENON 
 
REF: A. PAP 1252 
     ¶B. 2004 PAP 1747 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary: A recent increase in the number of 
kidnappings in Port-au-Prince has put the government and 
police under increasing pressure to respond.  The government 
has raised the penalty for kidnapping to life-imprisonment 
and announced May 9 the establishment of a joint HNP-MINUSTAH 
anti-kidnapping unit.  Over the weekend, an HNP operation led 
to the liberation of three hostages and the arrest of fifteen 
alleged kidnappers.  End Summary. 
 
Kidnappings become political issue 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  During the past several weeks, there has been an 
increase in the number of kidnappings in Port-au-Prince. 
Statistics are notoriously elusive here, but based on the 
number of cases we hear about (roughly 4-5 per week for the 
past 6-8 weeks) the range could be between 25-40 new cases in 
this latest span.  Most of the attacks have targeted 
wealthy-appearing locals and nearly all have been resolved 
within several days by the payment of a ransom, with the 
victim released unhurt, though two victims were beaten by 
their captors.  The starting ransom demand is often 
150,000-200,000 (U.S. dollars) but most ransoms end up 
significantly lower, sometimes as low as $1,000. 
Nevertheless, the fact that ransoms are paid has given 
criminals a quick method of obtaining cash.  Three 
foreigners, a Russian UN worker, an Indian businessman, and a 
Taiwanese businessman, have been kidnapped in the past month. 
 The first two were targets of opportunity, not targeted 
victims. 
 
¶3. (SBU) There is little evidence that the kidnappings have 
been politically motivated, although at least two victims 
heard politically-motivated statements from their captors. 
(One of those victims, Jean-Enold Buteau, is a well-known 
political leader but also a physician; he told us that his 
captors justified their ill treatment of him by saying he had 
helped overthrow Aristide).  The kidnapping wave has 
nonetheless become a political issue, sparking growing 
criticism of the government and police, and to a lesser 
extent of MINUSTAH, for their seeming inability to put a stop 
to it.  Haitian business leaders have been particularly 
vocal, including in recent meetings with Embassy officials, 
saying that dealing with the kidnapping threat is taking 
precedence over every other activity, political or economic. 
The private sector issued a communiqu May 4 calling for the 
mobilization of the various sectors in face of the growing 
insecurity in Haiti, and the Group 184 and a prominent 
student organization plan a protest march on May 11 to 
complain about the level of insecurity.  Interim Prime 
Minister Latortue, who has publicly called on the various 
sectors to seek dialogue on issues rather than demonstrate in 
the streets, reportedly told business leaders privately last 
week that his government could not do any more than it was 
already doing.  Among the recent victims have been several 
school directors, and the capital has witnessed several 
spontaneous demonstrations by elementary students protesting 
against their principal's kidnapping. 
 
IGOH Response: Tougher sentences, cooperation with MINUSTAH 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) In response to the problem and the growing political 
challenge it represents, the Interim Government (IGOH) has 
slowly begun to take action.  The Council of Ministers 
adopted a measure May 4 increasing the penalty for kidnapping 
to life-imprisonment with hard labor.  Justice Minister 
Gousse said that the current penalty of one to five years was 
insufficient.  Henceforth, "any individual who kidnaps, 
abducts, holds hostage, or simply attempts to kidnap somebody 
for ransom will be sentenced to forced labor for life." 
During a May 6 speech in Jeremie, PM Latortue acknowledged 
the kidnapping problem and said the decree was only the first 
step in increasing the overall level of security. 
 
¶5.  (U)  On May 7, the Haitian National Police (HNP) 
undertook several operations against kidnappers in the 
Port-au-Prince neighborhoods of Bel-Air and Delmas 42.  HNP 
spokesperson Coicou told reporters on May 8 that during the 
operations, the police had liberated three hostages, 
arrested fifteen alleged kidnappers,  seized several weapons 
and recovered an unknown number of stolen vehicles.  The 
three victims had been kidnapped throughout the previous week 
for unknown ransom demands.  One victim was a Haitian married 
to a French national. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Of potentially greater significance, PM Latortue 
announced May 8 the formation of a joint HNP-MINUSTAH 
anti-kidnapping unit.  We understand that this will bring 
together MINUSTAH military and CIVPOL units with specially 
selected HNP officers, similar to the Major Crimes Unit that 
was temporarily established last year in response to a 
similar wave of kidnappings.  We will report details on this 
new cooperation as soon as possible. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  One of the alleged kidnappers arrested in the 
operation was Francel Jasmin, identified as a member of the 
Front for National Reconstruction (FRN) political party.  No 
accusations have been raised that the FRN was involved in any 
kidnappings, but FRN Secretary General Guy Phillipe, speaking 
publicly on May 9, was quick to defend Jasmin, saying that 
the party had engaged legal services on behalf of its member. 
 He added, however, that it was impossible to keep "bad 
elements" out of the party, and that Jasmin would have to 
face the judicial process.  In a statement defending himself, 
Jasmin said HNP investigators interviewing him had also 
implied the collusion of Richard Chevalier with some of the 
kidnappers.  Chevalier, a former member of the OAS police 
advisory team funded by INL, helped with vetting HNP recruits 
and, later, supported a temporary anti-kidnapping unit set up 
by the HNP in mid-2004 (ref B).  The Embassy has long since 
severed its relationship with Chevalier, but it has come to 
light recently that he has been posing as an "agent" of the 
Embassy and/or DEA. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Kidnapping has became a major issue over the past 
month, with nearly every political commentator criticizing 
the IGOH for its inability to put a stop to it once and for 
all.  This weekend's success in breaking up an apparent 
kidnapping ring allows the IGOH and police to show they can 
back up rhetoric with action, and has provided some 
much-needed breathing room for the PM as well as a boost to 
the self-esteem of the HNP, which has been rumored to have 
some of its own members responsible for the spike in 
kidnappings.  That said, kidnapping wealthy individuals 
remains a profitable way to earn quick money, both for 
criminals and for those with more political goals.  It 
remains to be seen how much effect these latest steps will 
have.  End Comment. 
GRIFFITHS