08ANKARA1549
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Aug 27 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9663
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1549/01 2401310
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271310Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7267
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9118
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4652
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3183
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6819
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6660
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3230
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Russia Defies the World 
Media see Russia's decision to recognize the independence of 
Abkhazia and South Ossetia as a power game that defies the world and 
raises international tensions.  Mainstream Sabah reports, "Russia's 
decision increases world tensions," while Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak agrees, "Russia Defies the World," and "turns up the heat in 
the Caucasus."  Leftist Taraf accuses Russia of "paving the way to 
the most intense tension since the Cold War."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman characterizes Russia's decision as "Russia's Kosovo Missile." 
Liberal Radikal reports, "Russia Pulls the Pin on the Grenade," as 
"the noose is tightening in the Caucasus crisis," and "the winds of 
the Cold War are blowing in the Black Sea."  Mainstream Vatan 
reports in, "A Huge Crisis!" that "Russia recognizes separatist 
regions, the West reacts harshly, and Moscow says they are scared of 
nothing."  Meanwhile, Vatan notes, "Turkey is worried" about being 
caught between the U.S. and Russia.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "NATO is Establishing Itself," in the Black Sea, as Russia 
claims, "the number of NATO war ships in the Black Sea has climbed 
to 10." Cumhuriyet also criticizes Russia for "the dismemberment of 
Georgia."  Mainstream Milliyet carries the headline, "Russia Burns 
Its Bridges with the West."  The media also characterizes the 
uniquely difficult situation in which Turkey finds itself.  Hurriyet 
reports, "Ankara is trapped.  If Ankara opposes Russian recognition 
of the breakaway regions, it will create problems with Ankara's 
position regarding northern Cyprus.  If Ankara opposes independence 
for South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Russia could retaliate against 
Ankara's efforts for the recognition of northern Cyprus." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Russia/Caucasus 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Interestingly 
enough Russia recognized independence for South Ossetia and Abkhazia 
while the same Russia brutally stopped independence efforts in 
Chechnya.  Recognition of their independence is likely to have no 
significance, as both will be under Moscow's full control.  However, 
Russia succeeded in establishing itself as the leader of a bloc 
against the Western bloc, which is led by the United States.  In the 
end, this is a global competition for power.  The terms of the game 
may not be the same as they were in the Cold War, but the 
methodology will be the same." 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The broader picture of 
current developments in the Caucasus indicates that this struggle is 
about control of the Black Sea.  When the U.S. made a similar move 
in Afghanistan, Russia lost its influence there completely.   Since 
the demise of Soviet Union, former Soviet countries almost entirely 
joined the Western community, while Russia's consolation prize was 
the Commonwealth of Independent States.  The formerly Soviet areas 
are occupied by Western powers but not with military force.  Now 
Russia has told the Western world "Enough is enough."  Whether 
Russia is right or wrong for intervening in Georgia, this is the 
background that created this situation." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak:  "The United 
States is working on a long term strategy to create its own silk 
road by controlling energy resources from Europe to the Pacific. 
Russia and China are doing their best to prevent this from 
happening.  Now there is a giant energy power game between the NATO 
Pact and the Shanghai Pact.  During this game a lot of things could 
happen.  For instance, Armenia may change its political stance, the 
Karabakh issue could be resolved and the Black Sea may turn into a 
very troublesome area." 
 
Sami Kohen in wrote mainstream Milliyet:  "The crisis in the 
Caucasus reflects negatively on stability in the Middle East. 
Russia's success in Georgia has prompted initiatives to extend 
Russian influence to the Middle East.  Already, Russia has managed 
to pull Syria to its side.  If the crisis in Caucasus continues and 
the tensions between the West and Russia escalate, there will be a 
 
ANKARA 00001549  002 OF 003 
 
 
power struggle in the Middle East among the big players.   Georgian 
intervention into South Ossetia and Russia's radical retaliation 
sent shockwaves throughout the world.  These shockwaves are already 
being felt in the Middle East.   All these developments strike a big 
blow against the U.S. vision of a greater Middle East.  For the time 
being, Russia seems to be the winner, but the big game continues!" 
 
Sinan Ogan analyzed in Islamist leaning Zaman:  "Medyedev's 
recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia shows 
that Russia is ready for anything and everything and will take all 
kinds of risks with relations with the Western world.  However, this 
means the Caucasus Stability Platform initiative is weakened. 
Turkey's position is very sensitive because of Russia's recognition 
of the two breakaway republics.  Both NATO and U.S. war ships passed 
through Turkish straits under the Montreux convention.  However, 
just a little spark between these ships and the Russian ships will 
cause a very big fire.  Leaning on the West's support, Georgia can 
attack once again.  If a war starts again, Turkey, this time, might 
find itself as a mediator between Russia and the West instead of 
between Russia and Georgia.  Turkey's role and stance will determine 
the end of these crises.  Turkey should continue to remain 
impartial. These crises show the importance of the Caucasus and the 
Black Sea Region for Turkey and for the entire world." 
 
Lugar Asks Turkey to Put Brakes on Caucasus Stability Pact 
Mainstream Milliyet reports in "No Support from the U.S. for the 
Caucasus Pact," that Senator Richard Lugar spoke with Foreign 
Minister Ali Babacan yesterday and "said it was necessary to 
postpone the initiative until after Russia withdraws from the 
region."  Liberal Radikal reports Lugar "expressed his anxiety" 
regarding the proposal and noted that "the crisis in the Caucasus is 
a crisis for Turkey."  Mainstream Vatan reports, "Without American 
Consent, the Caucasus Pact Cannot Be Established." 
 
Russia Warned about Customs Restrictions on Turkish Products 
Bugun, Star, Milliyet:  Papers report that State Minister Kursad 
Tuzmen sent a warning message to Russia on Tuesday over customs 
restrictions imposed against Turkish trucks transporting Turkish 
exports to Russia.  Tuzmen said "it really bothers us that our 
trucks have been delayed by Russian customs officials for three 
weeks now."  Tuzmen warned Russia that, "Turkey might be forced to 
retaliate against these disturbing restrictions." 
 
Operations Continue against PKK 
Mainstream dailies Hurriyet, Sabah and Milliyet report PKK 
terrorists raided a village in the Mus province and 5 village guards 
were killed during clashes.  In return, the military launched 
operations in pursuit of the culprits and killed 15 of them. 
Reports also mention a separate operation against PKK terrorists in 
Mardin province, in which significant amounts of A-4 explosives and 
ammonium nitrate were seized.  During this operation, Security 
forces killed two PKK terrorists who were preparing the explosives 
for use. 
 
Former Gendarme Commander Complains 
All papers carry highlights from Gendarme Commander General 
Kosaner's remarks during a change of command ceremony as he bade 
farewell and congratulated the new Gendarme Commander Atila Isik. 
Papers note that General Kosaner made a clear reference to the 
ongoing Ergenekon case and complained about the general tendency to 
accuse institutions of crimes.  Regarding the Gendarme's duty to 
fight against terrorism, General Kosaner expressed concern about 
EU-harmonization laws which he believes 'make it more difficult for 
security forces to do their jobs properly.'  Kosaner added that 
"Turkey does not have the luxury to pretend as if it does not have 
terrorism problem." 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
ANKARA 00001549  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition party MHP leader Devlet Bahceli calls for 
Constitutional reforms. 
 
- CHP Deputy Hakki Suha Okay says his party will not support MHP's 
proposals 
 for constitutional reforms. 
 
- President Gul approves 114 laws during his first year in office. 
 
- Ferda Paksut, the wife of Constitutional Court vice-president 
Osman Paksut , has been summoned for questioning in the Ergenekon 
case. 
 
 
International News 
 
- White House spokesman Tony Fratto said North Korea would stay on 
the U.S. terrorism black list until all sides agree on a protocol to 
verify North Korea's accounting and dismantling of its nuclear 
programs 
 
- A Sudanese passenger plane with more than 100 people on board was 
hijacked and landed in Libya. 
 
- A suicide bomb attack killed 28 people in Baghdad. 
 
 
WILSON