08ANKARA1390
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2744
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1390/01 2171335
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041335Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7031
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9066
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4557
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3125
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6767
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6598
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3179
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, AUGUST 4, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
'Gungoren Bombers' Arrested in Istanbul 
All papers reported on Sunday eight suspects were arrested Saturday 
evening in connection with last week's bombing that killed 18 people 
and wounded more than 150 in Istanbul's Gungoren neighborhood. 
Interior Minister Besir Atalay told the press it was now clear that 
the bombing was perpetrated by the PKK.  Huseyin Tureli, one of the 
suspects arrested, reportedly said he was sent to Turkey three 
months ago by the PKK after receiving bomb training in northern 
Iraq.  Monday's Taraf, however, points to the fact that the suspects 
were arraigned by the court on charges of membership to an outlawed 
organization, and not for murder. 
 
Ankara-Tehran Working to Fix a Date for Ahmadinejad's Visit to 
Turkey 
Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others reported over 
the weekend Iranian President Ahmadinejad, who reportedly planned to 
visit Turkey on August 14, was reluctant to visit Ataturk's 
Mausoleum in Ankara.  Ahmadinejad prefers to visit Ankara on August 
14 and attend Friday prayers in Istanbul on August 15.  However, the 
Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) was concerned that the Iranians' 
demands to forego paying customary respects to Ataturk might stoke a 
new political controversy in Turkey, so the MFA reportedly 
recommends a one-day "working visit" for Ahmadinejad in Istanbul on 
August 14.  The MFA views the demands of the Iranian side as 
"exaggerated," according to papers.  Liberal Radikal comments 
Saturday, "Tehran deems special importance to the visit in its 
efforts to persuade the international community that Iran's nuclear 
program is for civilian purposes." 
 
Ahmadinejad: 'The U.S. in the Process of Destruction' 
All papers report Syrian Head of State Bashar Assad met with Iranian 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in Tehran on Sunday.  In "The U.S. in 
the Process of Destruction," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes 
Ahmadinejad told the press in a news conference with Assad, "The 
U.S. and Zionist Israel's powers have entered a process of decline," 
adding it would cause "important political developments in the 
region."  Assad said he did not carry any messages from the West to 
Tehran, and that Syria supported Iran's nuclear program within the 
framework of international laws.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
writes in, "Not an Atom of Concession in Ahmadinejad," that the 
Iranian leader, "has started a new crisis," after making his 
"harshest statement yet" regarding his refusal to abandon Iran's 
nuclear ambitions.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports Assad "gave support 
to Iran regarding its nuclear ambitions," as the Syrian Leader paid 
an official visit to Tehran over the weekend.  Mainstream Sabah also 
notes Assad's support for Iran as the two sides agreed "to continue 
on the same road" together regarding politics in the Middle East. 
Mainstream Milliyet carries the headline, "The Point of No Return on 
the Nuclear Road," and notes, "Assad gave support to Ahmadinejad," 
and "was also received by Iran's religious leader Ayatollah Ali 
Khomeini." 
 
Dormitory Collapses and Kills 18 Girls 
All papers reported Saturday a three-storey dormitory in the 
Balcilar town of Konya collapsed Friday night, killing 18 female 
students.  The building collapsed after an explosion was caused by a 
gas leak from an LPG storage tank in the kitchen.  The building did 
not meet building code standards, and the school had no license or 
accreditation to teach summer Koran classes for girls.  Mufti Mehmet 
Ak, the highest local religious authority, admitted he declined 
inspecting the building because it was affiliated to an influential 
Islamic sect, the Suleymancilar.  In, "The AKP Protects Illegal 
Koran Schools," Saturday's Radikal reported that the penalty for 
operating unauthorized Koran courses was reduced from three years to 
up to one year in prison, after intervention by the ruling AKP. 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports former Religious Affairs Directorate 
(Diyanet) head and former AKP lawmaker Tayyar Altikulac said he 
couldn't convince his colleagues to abandon legislation reducing the 
 
ANKARA 00001390  002 OF 003 
 
 
penalties for conducting non-accredited Koran classes.  Monday 
papers report parents of the girls who were killed have filed no 
complaints against the dormitory owners. 
 
Forest Fires Rage in Antalya 
All news outlets report efforts continue to contain the forest fires 
that have burned for five days straight in the Mediterranean 
province of Antalya.  Fires have destroyed more than 4,000 hectares 
of woodland.  Thousands of people, including fire-fighters, forestry 
officials and villagers, have fought the fire around the clock.  The 
fire broke out in Serik township on July 31 and has destroyed at 
least 60 houses, dozens of farming buildings, a school and a mosque 
in Manavgat and Serik.  Six villages were evacuated. One person 
died, and another is reported missing.  The fire also destroyed 
livestock in the villages and millions of trees in the woodlands. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Kirkuk; AKP Closure Case Aftermath 
 
"The Escalating Crisis in Kirkuk" 
Ferai Tinc commented in mainstream Hurriyet (8/5):  "The Kirkuk 
crisis has erupted again and tensions are escalating.  This 
development comes as the AKP begins cooperation with northern Iraq 
on a U.S.-supported plan to solve the Kurdish problem and as the KRG 
are increasingly isolating the PKK.  However, the Kirkuk problem 
must be solved in order for other political problems to be solved. 
On Saturday, the Iraqi President met with Kurdish leaders regarding 
the issue of Kirkuk.  During the meeting, tensions escalated so much 
that, reportedly, President Talabani fainted during the meeting. 
That night, Talabani left for the U.S. to seek medical care. 
Tensions regarding Kirkuk have worsened since KRG President Massoud 
Barzani announced that the Kirkuk Regional Government will merge 
with the Kurdish Regional Government. Ankara follows all these 
developments closely; in fact, Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan 
called Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari on Friday night 
regarding the attacks in Kirkuk.  The KRG's stubbornness regarding 
Kirkuk could damage the new and fragile detente between Turkey and 
Iraq.  It is true that Kirkuk is mainly Iraq's issue.  However, 
anything that would deepen instability in Iraq becomes an issue for 
Turkey as well." 
 
"The Constitutional Court Decision on the AKP" 
Emre Kongar wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet (8/5):  "The 
Yargitay Chief Prosecutor fulfilled his constitutional duties by 
filing a case to close the AKP.  The Constitutional Court also 
fulfilled its duty by quickly reaching a decision and announcing it 
to the public.  Moreover, the Court agreed that the chief prosecutor 
was right to file a case and noted that the AKP government had 
engaged in activities that threatened Turkey's secularist 
foundations.  But, nothing has changed in Turkey with this court 
decision.  What would have changed if the Court had closed the AKP? 
Nothing!  Why? The solution lies not only with the judiciary but 
with education, politics, and foreign dynamics.  No one can resolve 
the regime problems in Turkey with only one court decision as long 
as a dogmatic religious education system continues to produce 
graduates who will work in every state institution, as long as 
anti-democratic mechanisms in politics are supported, and as long as 
the democratic, secular and social state of law is damaged by 
foreign dynamics." 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Monday, Turkey's High Military Council (YAS) decisions will be 
announced by the outgoing military General Staff Chief General Yasar 
Buyukanit. 
 
- Eight PKK terrorists responsible for killing five village guards 
 
ANKARA 00001390  003 OF 003 
 
 
were killed in the southeastern border province of Sirnak.  One PKK 
militant was captured in Yuksekova in Hakkari province. 
 
- King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa of Bahrain will visit Ankara August 
4 as the guest of President Abdullah Gul. 
 
International News 
 
- Despite intense U.S. pressure, Iraqi leaders fail to resolve 
differences over how to govern the oil-rich city of Kirkuk. 
 
- The Washington Post quotes an unidentified White House official as 
saying the White House intends to show its commitment to a 
diplomatic approach toward Tehran and its nuclear program. 
 
- Al-Qaeda has posted a statement on the Internet saying one of its 
commanders in Afghanistan was killed by a U.S. air strike. 
 
WILSON