08BAGHDAD2663
DIYALA SOUTH: U.S. CITY COUNCIL WORKS WITH IRAQI
Wed Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4729
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2663 2331227
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201227Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8956
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 002663 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DIYALA SOUTH: U.S. CITY COUNCIL WORKS WITH IRAQI 
COUNTERPARTS 
 
This is an ePRT Diyala South reporting cable. 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On August 10 the New Bedford, Massachusetts 
City Council (Council) participated in a video 
teleconferencing (VTC) event with Iraqi officials from the 
local and district levels of Diyala Province.  The Council 
held a mock council meeting for the benefit of the Iraqis 
followed by a lively question and answer session that only 
ended because of time limitations.  Iraqi officials came away 
impressed by the relative power over budget and other 
activities at the city level in the U.S.  They also saw 
firsthand how to run an effective and more efficient council 
meeting.  The Council was excited by the opportunity to work 
with Iraqi local officials and offered to participate in 
future VTC and other activities with their Iraqi 
counterparts. End summary. 
¶2. (SBU) Over the last eleven months ePRT Diyala South has 
worked with local governments at the qadaa and nahiya 
(district and subdistrict) levels to increase their 
capability and capacity.  While progress has at times been 
uneven, all have shown gains and demonstrated a strong 
interest in better organizing themselves to carry out their 
responsibilities.  In many instances the councils have 
overcome strong sectarian divisions and terrorist 
intimidation.  The ePRT governance advisor for Khan Bani 
Sa,ad believed that the councils had reached a point that 
continued progress would be would be well served if they 
could see a good example of a working council in action. 
While on R&R in his hometown of New Bedford he secured the 
cooperation and support of the city council and then made 
arrangements with Hanscom Air Force Base in Massachusetts and 
the 2nd Stryker Cavalry Regiment (2SCR) on FOB Warhorse to 
host the VTC.  The Iraqi response proved to be almost 
overwhelming as the number of confirmations to attend 
increased daily, well beyond our anticipation.  In addition 
to the attendance by representatives of both our qadaas, 
Khalis and Baqubah, all of the qadaas, nahiyas were 
represented. 
¶3.  (SBU) The New Bedford City Council organized a mock 
council meeting for the VTC, using transcripts and agenda 
items from real council meetings.  Our Iraqi guests were 
impressed with the orderliness of the meeting and the obvious 
preparations that went into a meeting.  They had the 
opportunity to understand the role of sub-committees in 
councils and the order in which issues are dealt with by the 
council.  Following the conclusion of the mock city council 
meeting the floor was opened to questions from Iraqi council 
members.  Their questions focused on the budget process and 
relative independence of the Council to control its own 
affairs.  They displayed obvious envy as the Council 
described the budget process and how they obtained funding 
from tax and license fees, as well as other sources.  They 
were especially interested in the control their American 
colleagues had over projects, including a small municipal 
airport.  They listened attentively as Council members 
described processes in place to facilitate communication with 
their constituents. 
¶4. (SBU) At one point an Iraqi television newswoman noted 
that the New Bedford City Council had several women members, 
including the Council President.  She asked the Council what 
they thought women had to contribute to the process.  After a 
pause the Council President discussed the importance of 
elected officials reflecting the diversity of their 
communities because all members of society had important 
contributions to make in a democratic process.  Finally, 
after almost two hours we had to cut questioning because of 
time constraints. 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: The success of this event opens the door to 
future VTC exchanges between Iraqi and U.S. officials at the 
local and district levels.  Many of the Iraqis were eager to 
learn more and have expressed a strong desire to participate 
in future events.  The New Bedford City Council volunteered 
that they would like to continue to assist the Iraqi 
officials and ePRT in future events.  We are already 
discussing how future VTCs might have a more specific subject 
matter focus.  This was a great opportunity for Iraqis to see 
how our democratic process works at the local level.  The 
independence of local government in the U.S. was an 
eye-opener for the Iraqis and may serve as an inspiration for 
them to take on greater responsibilities.  As our friends of 
2SCR said of the event, "it was a home run."  End comment. 
CROCKER