08BEIJING3342
AUGUST 28 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Six-Party Talks,
Thu Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1152
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3342/01 2412256
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 282256Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9607
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI 0114
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0926
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9087
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2212
RUEHDBU/AMEMBASSY DUSHANBEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003342 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KOLY MNUC PARM UNGA EINV CH TW RU
GG, KS, KN, IQ 
SUBJECT: AUGUST 28 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Six-Party Talks, 
Russia-Georgia Conflict, SCO Summit, Taiwan UN Participation, 
China-Iraq Oil Deal, Xinjiang. 
 
¶1. Key points at the August 28 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- China calls on parties to "stay patient," to "show wisdom and 
flexibility" and to try to "meet each other halfway" to overcome 
present difficulties in the North Korean denuclearization process. 
 
-- China is concerned by the latest developments in the 
Russia-Georgia conflict and hopes the parties will resolve problems 
through dialogue and consultation.  China continues to "firmly 
support" Russia's hosting of the 2014 Winter Olympics. 
 
-- Reporters should "wait and see" whether the results of the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) summit in Tajikistan include 
a statement on the Russia-Georgia conflict. 
 
-- A "handful" of East Turkestan forces are attempting to engage in 
violence and separatist activities, and the Chinese Government and 
relevant authorities will "crack down on them according to law." 
 
-- The proposal put forward by Nauru, Gambia and a few other 
countries for expanded Taiwan participation in the UN constitutes 
interference in China's internal affairs.  China calls upon all 
countries to "continue to adhere to the one-China policy."  The 
issue of "Taiwan compatriots" taking part in international 
activities should be resolved through consultations. 
 
-- The agreement between the China National Petroleum Corporation 
and the Government of Iraq is "mutually beneficial," "conducive to 
the economic development of Iraq" and "does not harm the interests 
of any third parties." 
 
-- A handful of "East Turkestan forces" are attempting to engage in 
violence and separatist activities, and the Chinese Government will 
"crack down on them according to law." 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. Responding to a question concerning the Chinese Government's 
position in the wake of North Korea's decision to suspend nuclear 
disablement, MFA spokesman Qin Gang said at the regular August 28 
MFA press briefing that at the July meeting of Six-Party Talks 
delegations, the parties had agreed to implement the remaining 
actions of the second phase of denuclearization.  Acknowledging 
difficulties, Qin called on all parties to "stay patient," to "show 
wisdom and flexibility" and to try to "meet each other halfway" to 
overcome present difficulties and press ahead in the North Korean 
denuclearization process. As the host of the Six-Party Talks, "China 
has always and will continue to keep positive communication and 
coordination with other parties so as to play a constructive role" 
toward the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
 
Russia-Georgia Conflict/SCO Summit 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked to comment on whether Russian recognition of the breakaway 
regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia might set a "dangerous 
precedent," Qin replied that China is concerned by the latest 
developments in the Russia-Georgia conflict, and hopes that the 
parties will resolve the problems through dialogue and consultation. 
 Responding to a question about whether China will join others in 
supporting the cancellation of the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in 
Russia, Qin stated that China continues to "firmly support" Russia's 
position as host for the 2014 Games. 
 
¶4. Asked if the SCO will be taking a common stance on the issue of 
South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Qin said that the Heads of State at the 
SCO summit "will exchange views on national and regional issues of 
common interest."  As to what results could be achieved, Qin added, 
"I think that we should wait and see." 
 
Taiwan UN Participation 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. Commenting on the proposal by Nauru and Gambia supporting greater 
participation by Taiwan in UN activities, Qin stated that "creating 
two Chinas, or one China and one Taiwan, encroached upon China's 
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and interfered in China's 
sovereign internal affairs."  China calls on other countries to 
abide by the UN Charter and to "continue to adhere to the one-China 
policy," so as to support the "peaceful development of cross-Strait 
relations."  China "attaches great importance" to the well-being of 
and involvement in international activities by the 23 million 
"Taiwan compatriots," Qin stressed.  The issue of participation in 
 
BEIJING 00003342  002.3 OF 002 
 
 
international activities by Taiwan's people should be resolved 
through consultation. 
 
CNPC-Iraq Oil Deal 
------------------ 
 
¶6. Asked if the recently-signed oil deal between the China National 
Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) and the Government of Iraq might 
complicate China's relations with the United States Government, Qin 
replied that the agreement is "mutually beneficial," "conducive to 
the economic development of Iraq," adheres to market rules and 
"won't harm the interests of any third parties." 
 
Xinjiang 
-------- 
 
¶7. Asked to respond to allegations made by the Germany-based World 
Uyghur Congress that over 1,000 Uighurs have been arrested or 
detained since attacks in Xinjiang earlier this month, including 
more than 100 children aged 8 to 14, Qin stated that a "handful" of 
"East Turkestan forces" are attempting to engage in violence and 
separatist activities, and the Chinese Government and relevant 
authorities will "crack down on them according to law."  Such 
activities by the "East Turkestan forces," Qin emphasized, "have 
nothing to do with" the alleged persecution or oppression of 
Uighurs. 
RANDT