08MOSCOW2440
TFGG01:  HUMANITARIAN SITUATION FOR SOUTH OSSETIANS IN
Sat Aug 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO2226
OO RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #2440/01 2290936
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 160936Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9546
INFO RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 002440 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM/ECA AND EUR/RUS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PGOV PHUM PINR ICRC RS
SUBJECT: TFGG01:  HUMANITARIAN SITUATION FOR SOUTH OSSETIANS IN 
NORTH CAUCASUS REMAINS STABLE, IGO'S AFFIRM 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  United Nations agencies and the International 
Committee of the Red Cross operating in Russia report that 
conditions for Ossetian conflict victims who have fled to the North 
Caucasus remain satisfactory.  While the UN is still at the needs 
assessment stage, in part because the Russian Government has not 
requested its assistance, ICRC has been delivering supplies to the 
displaced for several days and plans to augment its Vladikavkaz 
(North Ossetia) staffing.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Refugee Coordinator (RefCoord) spoke with United Nations 
Children's Fund (UNICEF), World Food Program (WFP), and 
International Committee of the Red Cross representatives August 14 
and 15.  All were at full throttle responding to recent events that 
have led to the arrival of an estimated (GOR figure accepted by 
UNHCR) 30,000 South Ossetians in the republics of southern Russia. 
WFP, which had planned to conclude its Russian operations in October 
due to improved conditions and greater capacity in Chechnya, will 
now stay open until at least the end of the calendar year. 
 
WFP 
--- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Inge Breuer, WFP Russia's Country Representative, told 
RefCoord August 14 that her agency assesses that GOR food aid is 
coming through well to South Ossetian arrivals in the North 
Caucasus.  Breuer added, however, that she believes it is very 
important for WFP to be seen as helping the Ossetians as well as the 
Georgians.  That does not mean matching donations in Russia and 
Georgia ton for ton, as clearly Russia has much greater capacity 
than Georgia.  It does mean showing concern for both sides, she 
maintained.  Thus far Russia has turned down WFP assistance, but 
Breuer hopes that Russia will be included in WFP's upcoming flash 
appeal with some sort of subtle phrasing that indicates that 
donations will benefit all/all conflict victims.  As of September 1 
WFP will station a member of international staff in Vladikavkaz to 
coordinate the agency's assistance to its new set of beneficiaries. 
 
UNICEF 
------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) Kemlin Furley, UNICEF Russia's Acting Country 
Representative, stated August 14 that the GOR has not yet asked 
UNICEF for any assistance and seems to be covering the fleeing South 
Ossetians' immediate needs.  Longer term, however, Furley 
anticipated the following needs for which the GOR may request 
international assistance: 
 
-- Psycho-social/trauma counseling (UNICEF has significant 
experience from Beslan; it has also been doing psycho-social work in 
Chechnya funded by USAID and in 2008 proposed that PRM fund an 
extension of that work to Ingushetia) 
 
-- Education (schools in the region do not have enough places for 
all of the displaced children, so capacity will have to be 
increased) 
 
-- Primary health care 
 
-- Child protection (monitoring; strengthening North Ossetia's 
ombudsman) 
 
Furley, in Geneva on consultations, said she planned to travel to 
North Ossetia the week of August 18 to conduct further needs 
assessment. 
 
ICRC 
---- 
 
¶5. (SBU) In contrast to his UN counterparts' caution while they 
await an official Russian go-ahead for aid delivery, ICRC Russia 
Deputy Head of Delegation Francois Blancy was pleased August 15 to 
report already substantial Red Cross contributions.  The ICRC has 
been supporting the Russian Red Cross in North Ossetia to bring 
non-food items to collective centers housing what the ICRC is 
terming "persons fleeing hostilities" (as opposed to "refugees" or 
"internally displaced people" - or the UN's "persons of concern"). 
Blancy reported a first distribution of hygienic items and linens to 
about 600 women and children, as well as 150 surgical kits to 
hospitals caring for the conflict's wounded.  (Note:  Blancy 
declared that medical supply donations were necessary only in the 
first couple of days after the South Ossetians' arrival because 
Russia's Emergency Situations Ministry has now set up its own 
well-equipped medical centers in the region.  End note.) 
 
¶6. (SBU) Blancy described a "huge" disaster relief machine put in 
place by the GOR, backed by political will to ensure that the 
machine functions efficiently.  The Russians welcome the ICRC's 
involvement because the international organization works through the 
Red Cross's national society, thus enhancing rather than detracting 
 
MOSCOW 00002440  002 OF 002 
 
 
from the national character of the relief effort.  The GOR itself is 
bringing in psychologists and psycho-social experts, many with 
experience from the Beslan hostage tragedy, to counsel the arrivals, 
and donations are pouring in from individuals and companies all over 
Russia.  ICRC Russia has asked its headquarters for five additional 
expatriate staff members to augment its current 12 expatriate and 
200 national staff, but primarily to be ready in case access to 
Tskhinvali opens from the north.  Blancy said the GOR had assured 
his office that visas for the new staff would be expedited. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Blancy expressed himself not overly concerned about Russian 
shelters for the Ossetians that other organizations have said would 
need expensive winterization in order to serve displaced persons 
remaining in the North Caucasus into the colder months.  "What we 
hear is that everyone in the camps wants to go home," Blancy said. 
If the restoration of Grozniy is any guide, then the Russians should 
be able to whip Tskhinvali into habitable shape in a jiffy, he 
surmised. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) ICRC has taken a "constructive engagement" approach toward 
Russia, emphasizing the positive especially since its president's 
visit in January 2008 and Russian promises to help find those still 
missing from the two Chechen conflicts.  (Note:  Dr. Kellenberger 
will again visit Russia the week of August 18, Blancy announced, and 
plans are still on for the ICRC President's participation in a 
celebration of the 1868 St. Petersburg Declaration in the 
northwestern city in November.  End note.)  In light of what we are 
hearing from other IGO's, however, Blancy's praise for the Russians' 
humanitarian response may reasonably be taken at face value.  Under 
these circumstances, the challenge for other humanitarian actors 
will be to find and fill in gaps so that none can be accused of 
political bias in their outreach to this war's victims. 
 
BYERLE