08WARSAW973
POLAND'S UNCOMMON AGRICULTURAL POLICY
Wed Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO4842
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHWR #0973/01 2331412
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201412Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6909
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
INFO RUEHKW/AMCONSUL KRAKOW 2153
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATESUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WARSAW 000973 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NCE 
STATE FOR EEB/TPP/ABT/BTT FINN 
USDA FOR FAS/OSTA MHENNEY, LJONES; FAS/OCRA RCURTIS, DSEIDBAND; 
FAS/OGA MHOUSE, ARIFFKIN; FAS/OFSO DYOUNG 
BRUSSELS PASS AG MINISTER COUNSELOR; 
EUROPEAN POSTS FOR AGR/ECON 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD TBIO PGOV PL
SUBJECT:   POLAND'S UNCOMMON AGRICULTURAL POLICY 
 
REF:  Warsaw 823, Pawlak-Quanrud Meeting 
 
WARSAW 00000973  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  This cable outlines the upcoming crisis in Polish 
agriculture.  The rural economy enjoys significant subsidies from 
the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), but the CAP, drought, and a 
failure of leadership from the Ministry of Agriculture, are creating 
the circumstances under which Poland will be a net agricultural 
importer of some primary commodities.  Poland is France's strongest 
ally in support of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).  This 
partnership blunts the interest of Poland in assisting the United 
States with its EU trade problems.  Poland votes with France against 
the U.S. trade agenda in agriculture and the agenda items of the 
Transatlantic Economic Council (TEC).  Poland's support for France 
helps the two nations act as a bulwark against CAP reform and lower 
future payments, but the CAP is part of Poland's problem down on the 
farm. 
 
----------------------- 
A Trade Imbalance Looms 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Two years of subpar grain and oilseed harvests are 
beginning to take their toll on the farm economy, and 2008 is 
shaping up to be just as bad.  Poland's acreage devoted to grain 
production has slipped 500,000 hectares over the last ten years, 
while its yields have increased only slightly.  Poland produces in 
an average year as much grain as it did in 1998, and in 2008, as in 
2007, the crop will be below average due to poor weather.  Poland 
has the highest animal feed prices in Europe and input prices for 
beef, pork, poultry, and dairy are climbing.  Poland's borders with 
other EU nations are open and agricultural imports are flooding in, 
up twice as fast each year.  A Pole visiting a grocery store is now 
just as likely to purchase imported pork, the ubiquitous staple 
protein of Polish cooking.  Poland's hypermarkets are filled with 
products available from Western Europe, supplied by their economies 
of scale.  Ten percent of the live hog population of Poland is 
imported rather than produced domestically.  Crop producers are 
squeezed in the middle as high fuel costs and a 150 percent jump in 
fertilizer and pesticide costs are eating away at profits.  Bright 
spots are visible in the trade of fruits and vegetables, and dairy 
is still profitable, but Poland's exports are flat at present and 
there is less Polish-produced meat every year. 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
Biotechnology is part of the problem 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Poland has an intensive outbreak of the European Corn 
Borer that caused a $400 million corn crop loss in 2008.  With 
agriculture worth $35 billion to the economy annually, such a loss 
has a measurable impact.  Due to this problem, Poland imports $175 
million in corn each year, a number that will rise in 2008 as the 
drought and pest problem worsen.  The government banned the sale and 
registration of biotech seeds in mid-2006.  A planned ban on 
importing GM crops as animal feeds was defeated by a coalition of 
Polish industry in July 2008.  Poland is now considering adopting a 
regulation to approve coexistence principles for biotech products, 
and the Ministry of Environment has published a draft regulation. 
The strict draft law calls for regions to declare themselves GMO 
free, and threatens farmers with a three year jail term for planting 
in GM free regions.  Farmers must make financial deposits to pay 
potential damages and get neighbors' permission before planting. 
Some scientists call for a 5 kilometer barrier between GM and 
conventional crops -- even crops that are non-pollinating.  The 
Ministry of Environment uses the talking points of the anti-GMO 
movement and when it conducts education seminars or publishes 
materials they are derived from those sources.  One expert advising 
the Ministry on biotechnology works for an NGO based in the UK that 
advocates farms return to using draft animals.  (Comment.  A bit of 
reality is needed at the Ministry of Environment which is the block 
on progress with the biotech issue.  The Agriculture Ministry 
supports a new approach to biotechnology policy and acts 
accordingly.  End Comment.) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
The other problem is Poland's EU allies 
 
WARSAW 00000973  002 OF 002 
 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Poland opened its borders to Europe and closed its borders 
to non-EU nations on May 1, 2004.  Since then its farm economy 
prospered due to the import substitution of products from 
third-country markets.  U.S. farm exports to Poland are off $1 
billion since its EU accession.  Now, the more heavily subsidized 
farm economies of Old Europe are exporting their agricultural 
products to Polish consumers.  The imported products are not food 
luxuries for wealthier Poles, but basic staples produced in Western 
Europe.  Even as EU subsidy payments are supposed to equalize in 
theory as the full accession agreement factors in by 2013, Poland 
will never receive the high levels of subsidies enjoyed by France, 
for example, due to the calculation of payments based on historical 
yields.  A French hog producer receives a payment on each carcass 
and no such program is available for his Polish counterpart.  Even 
in 2013, Polish farmers will receive no more than one fifth in 
subsidy payments what a French farmer earns for the same crop.  Land 
prices in Poland have risen quickly, and input prices are the same 
for each producer, so where is the equity in modulating payments 
across member states as is required under the CAP?  Polish farmers 
know they face open borders and their own access to store shelves 
competes with other EU farmers.  While Polish farmers are becoming 
more vocal about the problem of the permanent discrimination they 
face, the Ministry of Agriculture will not shift its support away 
from France until after the CAP Health Check and the end of the 
French EU Presidency.  Poland voted against U.S. poultry access to 
the EU in Brussels last month, largely under the sway of France, but 
also because of its own current difficulties over the 
competitiveness of its poultry industry.  Polish veterinary sources 
say that the United States would have a better chance advancing U.S. 
poultry access post-French EU Presidency. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Agriculture Minister Sawicki is focused on his leadership 
fight with Minister of Economy and Deputy Prime Minister Pawlak at 
their Polish Peoples Party (PSL) party election in September. 
Sawicki's best chance to use the Agriculture Ministry to sway the 
election is to keep the spigots open for EU funds.  Sawicki is 
popular and he may win in a race against Pawlak, but sources 
indicate he plans to remain in his present post.  During 
negotiations with majority coalition partner Civic Platform (PO), 
Sawicki may wish to push Pawlak aside for his own preferred 
candidate to run the Ministry of Economy.  Andrzej Lepper held the 
post of Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture during the 
PIS-Samaobrona coalition, but getting the title will be something 
Sawicki must negotiate.  Recently, Pawlak has indicated a new 
openness to support biotechnology and market oriented CAP reform, 
see reftel.  Sawicki has proven himself capable of tackling tough 
problems such as reform of the agricultural pension system, 
defeating a ban on biotechnology in animal feeds, or pushing the EU 
Council of Ministers to expand the dairy quota.  The extent to which 
Sawicki will be allowed to change ministerial positions depends on 
the strength of the original coalition agreement with PO and whether 
he can cope with accusations of political favoritism.  The Prime 
Minister's office overruled a Sawicki appointment to the 
Agricultural Marketing Agency, the smaller of the two EU CAP payment 
agencies, due to that fact. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment.  After the French EU Presidency ends, and 
Sawicki's power base at the Ministry of Agriculture strengthens 
after PSL party elections, expect to see Poland act more 
independently on issues relating to the CAP and biotechnology. 
Poland's farmers are losing ground, and the Ag Ministry knows it. 
End comment. 
ASHE