06KIEV340
Ukraine: Bilateral Coordination Group Talks:
Thu Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kyiv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KIEV 000340 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/UMB, G/TIP, INL/AEE, AND EUR/ACE 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, NDDS AND OPDAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KCRM SMIG KFRD PREF ELAB KWMN UP
SUBJECT: Ukraine: Bilateral Coordination Group Talks: 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
 
Ref:  Kiev 168 
 
¶1. (U) In Bilateral Coordination Group talks January 24 
(see septels for other issues discussed), the U.S. side 
pointed out that progress in combating trafficking in 
persons (TIP) was important not only because it protected 
Ukrainian citizens, but also because Ukraine was currently 
on the Tier Two Watch Group list.  The GOU's recent 
positive steps - creating a Department for Combating TIP 
in the Ministry of Interior (MOI), making TIP a priority 
crime for the General Prosecutor's Office, and having 
senior officials speak out on destigmatizing victims of TIP 
- were all welcomed, but important worked remained.  Two 
immediate steps the GOU could take were underscored:  1) 
President Yushchenko could sign into law the January 12 
bill passed by the Parliament harmonizing the Ukrainian 
Criminal Code with the UN Palermo Convention and Protocol 
as it applied to TIP (ref A), and 2) the GOU could 
establish within the General Prosecutor's Office (GPO) a 
TIP division.  (Note:  Embassy has been working on the 
latter with the GPO and is awaiting a final decision.) 
Also, the U.S. urged the GOU to make a priority the funding 
of TIP victims reintegration centers, which to date have 
been funded almost exclusively by donors, and to begin 
efforts to establish a witness protection program for TIP 
victims. 
 
¶2. (U) The Ukrainian side assured that the referenced 
January 12 bill would be signed into law and acknowledged 
that funding of reintegration centers had been almost the 
exclusive domain of the donor community.  However, the GOU 
had begun funding some centers, and prosecutors would be 
stepping up their focus on the prosecution of TIP crimes. 
As for witness protection, discussions were ongoing to see 
if there were existing models that could be copied that 
were not cost prohibitive.  (Note:  Currently, the GOU has 
a witness protection plan, regardless of the type of 
criminal case, which amounts to a two-person protection 
detail for the witness in question during the course of the 
trial.  MOI officials have told us they have been grappling 
with ideas for a witness re-location program for some time, 
but the cost has always been prohibitive.  Post will seek 
to help identify models in neighboring countries that may 
ameliorate this challenge.) 
 
¶3. (U) The delegation did not have a chance to clear this 
message. 
 
Herbst