03GUATEMALA746
MARCH 17 LETTER FROM PRESIDENT PORTILLO TO
Thu Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Guatemala
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000746 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINR GT IZ
SUBJECT: MARCH 17 LETTER FROM PRESIDENT PORTILLO TO 
PRESIDENT BUSH ON IRAQ 
 
¶1. (U) President Alfonso Portillo sent President Bush a 
letter on March 17 (delivered by the Guatemalan Embassy in 
Washington to the White House and Department of State) saying 
that Guatemala stands by the United States during the current 
difficult international situation.  Following is the 
Embassy's translation of the text of the Portillo letter: 
 
¶2. (U) Begin text: 
Guatemala, March 17, 2003 
Mr. George W. Bush 
President of the United States of America 
 
Mr. President: 
 
I have the honor to address you to express my solidarity 
(with you) during this difficult moment in the international 
situation.  My government shares your concern over the 
persistence of international actors that represent a serious 
risk to international peace and security, as well as the need 
for the community of nations to act with determination to 
confront these risks. 
 
Of those risks, the most virulent is terrorism, while so 
violently has attacked your country as well as many others in 
the world.  All of the nations and peoples of the world have 
an obligation to act in concert to prevent, attack and, if 
possible, eradicate this threat. 
 
At the same time, we remember the need to maintain the great 
achievements that humanity has gradually built over the past 
century, in particular, the multilateral organizations such 
as the United Nations, which are the best guarantee that we 
will continue to build a world founded on the values of 
democracy and peace. 
 
Mr. President, permit me to repeat my desire that our nations 
conserve their friendship and shared visions for better 
societies. 
 
(complimentary closing) 
Alfonso Portillo (signed) 
end text. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Comment:  Like his public statements, in which 
Portillo has not wanted to comment on his position on 
hostilities with Iraq but has wanted to appear on the side of 
the U.S., the letter to President Bush is another attempt by 
Portillo to have it both ways. 
HAMILTON