09UNVIEVIENNA6
PARIS PACT BREAKS NEW GROUND
Mon Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNVIE
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUNV #0006/01 0121232
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121232Z JAN 09
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8884
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1438
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0249
AFGHA/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0076
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS UNVIE VIENNA 000006 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM PREL NATO EUN AF FR IR CA PK UN RS ZK
 
SUBJECT: PARIS PACT BREAKS NEW GROUND 
 
REFS: A).UNVIE 003, B).08 UNVIE 638, C).08 UNVIE 634 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Sixth Policy Consultative Group Meeting of the Paris 
Pact Initiative was held in Vienna December 15-16, 2008.  African 
states participated in this annual meeting for the first time. 
Members reviewed the 2008 roundtables and approved three for 2009. 
UNODC Executive Director Antonio Maria Costa, in his opening 
remarks, criticized the roundtables for producing too much paperwork 
but not enough practical results.  He challenged member states to 
focus on concrete results, proposing some specific goals such as 
doubling drug seizures, cutting precursors inflow, improving the 
Afghan Transit Trade Agreement (ATTA) with Pakistan, and listing 
drug criminals according to UNSC resolutions.  Rising to Costa's 
challenge and with our encouragement, Germany convened a small group 
of countries on the margins to discuss establishing practical 
benchmarks.  In the end Germany asked the Secretariat to draft a 
paper, for consideration at the next Policy Consultative Group 
meeting, on ways to make Paris Pact more results-oriented.  Although 
Costa's criticism was made particularly for dramatic effect, this 
German request could eventually lead to the adoption of specific 
indicators, and fits with our desire to make UNDOC operationally 
effective. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ambassador advocated for other member states to contribute 
to the Good Performers' Initiative and supported Costa's call for 
the Paris Pact to become more muscular. On the margins, he met with 
Afghan Minister of Counternarcotics Khodaidad and Deputy Minister of 
Interior General Daud Daud (Ref A).  END SUMMARY 
 
----------------------------- 
NEEDS "SURGERY" AGAINST OPIUM 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) In his opening remarks, Costa noted the positive trends: 
poppy cultivation declined 19 percent in 2008, production was down 6 
percent, and opium prices fell 20 percent. Afghans involved in opium 
cultivation dropped by 1 million, and the export value of opium was 
down by 15 percent to USD 3.4 billion. However, he cautioned that 
the opium problem was a "metastasizing cancer," concentrated in five 
insecure southern provinces. He estimated the Taliban received $250 
million to $470 million from levies they imposed on opium 
production, processing and trafficking.  Costa called for urgent 
"surgery," and expressed his disappointment that ISAF forces had not 
moved to strike drug targets. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Priorities and Practical Results 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Costa identified some priorities for the Pact, such as 
increasing opium interdiction rates from the current 25 percent, 
increasing the number of opium-free provinces from the current 18, 
stimulating bilateral and multilateral cooperation, and fighting 
corruption and money laundering.  He urged attention on East Africa, 
a transit stop for Afghan opium.  He claimed that the 15 Paris Pact 
roundtables over the past five years had produced a lot of paperwork 
but not enough results. Success, he argued, will be judged by 
results, not process.  He challenged participants to strengthen 
practical cooperation - on intelligence sharing, joint operations, 
and concrete measures to prevent and treat drug abuse.  He urged 
development of concrete goals in these areas, including doubling 
drug seizures, cutting precursors inflow, improving the Afghan 
Transit Trade Agreement (ATTA) with Pakistan, and listing drug 
criminals according to UNSC resolutions. "We need to give the Paris 
Pact more testosterone", Costa argued. 
 
----------------- 
Measuring Success 
----------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) At Ambassador's suggestion, German Ambassador Luedeking 
invited his counterparts from the U.S., France, Canada, and Russia, 
as well as UNODC's new Kabul office chief Jean-Luc Lemahieu, to a 
meeting on the margins to discuss benchmarks to measure success. 
Lemahieu urged a limited geographic focus. Ambassador advocated "a 
simple set of metrics" such as increasing the number of poppy-free 
provinces and increased interdiction of precursor chemicals. 
Expressing understanding for Lemahieu's position, he nevertheless 
pointed out the importance of going beyond Afghanistan's immediate 
neighbors.  Canada proposed examining the Proliferation Security 
Initiative, with "a clear set of principles," as a possible model 
for operational benchmarks for the Paris Pact. According to Canada, 
such benchmarks could include increased seizures, tightening the 
flow of containers, and arresting traffickers. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Russia cautioned against an "overnight revolution," noting 
that the Paris Pact is a partnership mechanism for a "balanced, 
comprehensive approach."  Germany suggested a two-track approach: 
benchmarks for the Rainbow Strategy on the one hand, and benchmarks 
for expert roundtables on the other.  France proposed using UNSC 
Resolution 1817 (June 2008, on Afghanistan precursor chemicals) as a 
benchmark. However, at the conclusion of the Paris Pact meeting on 
December 16, Germany only asked the secretariat to produce a paper, 
on ways to make the Pact more results-oriented, for 
discussion/consideration at the next Policy Consultative Group 
meeting in December 2009. 
 
-------------------------- 
REVIEW OF 2008 ROUNDTABLES 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The recommendations from the 2008 expert roundtables on the 
Black Sea region, eastern Africa, and financial flows were reviewed. 
 All conference presentations are available upon request 
(MoralesBA@state.gov). On the Black Sea roundtable, participants 
recognized that various platforms exist, but none encompasses all 
member states.  In the absence of a unifying platform, UNODC 
committed to developing a technical cooperation program.  The East 
Africa roundtable concluded that priority areas for that region 
include 1) research and analysis, 2) legislation, 3) national 
operational capacities, and 4) cooperation at the national and 
regional levels. UNODC presented the recently-developed two-year 
 
regional program entitled, "Promoting the Rule of Law and Human 
Security in Eastern Africa."  The discussion on financial flows 
included a presentation by the Financial Transactions and Reports 
Analysis Center of Afghanistan (FinTRACA) describing the challenges 
and approaches in dealing with hawalas. 
 
------------------------------------- 
2009 Roundtables and African Reaction 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Three roundtables (Ref B) were adopted for 2009: "Afghanistan 
and neighboring countries" to assess both demand and supply issues 
after the elections in Afghanistan; "European heroin trafficking and 
abuse" in a western European city; and "Central Asia and China" to 
be hosted in Almaty to discuss Afghan heroin trafficking and abuse 
in Central Asia and Western China.  Several East African delegations 
expressed disappointment that Africa would not be the focus of one 
of the 2009 roundtables. This feeling was exacerbated when UNODC 
suggested that East Africa should be discussed in a different 
framework outside of the Paris Pact, to which the Kenyan delegate 
responded, "then what is the purpose of Africans in the Paris Pact - 
why are we here?"  The Secretariat explained that since a roundtable 
was held in Nairobi in 2008, the Secretariat would be meeting with 
the African states regularly to evaluate the progress on 
implementing the recommendations from the roundtable. (Note: UNODC's 
Paris Pact coordinator told Counselor subsequently that such a 
meeting with seven African partner states had been previously 
scheduled for February 2009.  End Note. 
 
-------------------------- 
GOOD PERFORMERS INITIATIVE 
-------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Ambassador delivered a presentation on the Good Performers 
Initiative (GPI), encouraging other states to contribute. 
Afghanistan's Minister of Counternarcotics, General Khodaidad, 
expressed his appreciation for U.S. assistance, and called on 
Canada, Japan, the EU, and EC to support counternarcotics efforts in 
Afghanistan.  Germany and Canada appeared receptive to the GPI's 
potential. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU)  This was the first Paris Pact Policy Consultative Group 
meeting to include participants from outside the West/Central Asia 
region.  The African participants-from Ethiopia, Kenya, Mauritius, 
Nigeria, and Tanzania-were obviously pleased that an international 
forum was engaged in helping them to address their serious opium 
transit problem. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Costa's criticism of the Paris Pact for not having 
produced concrete results appears to have been intended at least in 
part to grab the attention of delegates, and to spur them to think 
ambitiously.  Also of note, given criticism from some of the EU 
members, was Costa's forthright warning that firm NATO action 
against drug-related targets is essential to extirpating the opium 
"cancer."  Through its Rainbow Strategy, the Paris Pact has improved 
counternarcotics coordination and cooperation in the region, even 
though such improvement may not be easily measurable. It has also 
shown tangible results in the seizure of precursor chemicals. 
Perhaps it is with these points--and Russia's cautious voice--in 
mind, that Germany eventually requested the Secretariat to produce a 
more general paper for discussion/consideration next December. 
Incremental as this request may be, it could still lead eventually 
to the adoption of specific indicators of success.  End Comment. 
 
Schulte 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED