05LIMA992
Mexican Summary of Meeting on Mexican HR Initiative
Wed Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 000992 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Sensitive 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL CU MX PE UNHCR
SUBJECT: Mexican Summary of Meeting on Mexican HR Initiative 
(Peru) 
 
REF: A) Lima 698 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Please handle accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Post transmits verbatim text received from the 
Peruvian Foreign Affairs Ministry of a summary, prepared by 
the Mexican Foreign Ministry, of the GRULAC working meeting 
in Mexico regarding Mexico's proposal to develop an informal 
mechanism for cooperation among GRULAC countries on human 
rights issues.  Text begins: 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Informal Mechanism for Cooperation and 
Consultation in the Area of Human Rights 
 
Report of Work Meeting 
Mexico City 
January 24-25, 2005 
 
High level governmental representatives of Latin American 
and Caribbean countries met in Mexico City on January 24-25, 
2005 in order to discuss the implementation of an informal 
mechanism for regional consultation and cooperation in 
matters of human rights, based on the following criteria: 
 
¶I.  Goals 
 
¶A. To contribute to national efforts to promote and protect 
human rights; 
 
¶B.  To strengthen regional coordination in international 
forums in matters of human rights. 
 
II.  Principles 
 
¶A. To acknowledge and respect national idiosyncrasies, as 
well as the various historical, cultural and religious 
patrimony of each one of our countries. 
 
¶B. To avoid becoming a mechanism to supervise, monitor or 
evaluate any specific country. 
 
¶C. To seek cooperation and coordination in matters deemed 
appropriate by the governments. 
 
¶D. To include and be open to all countries in the region. 
 
¶E. To avoid substituting and duplicating existing mechanisms 
and efforts, and to offer support to strengthen them. 
 
¶F. To reaffirm the universality, indivisibility and 
interdependence of all human rights, as well as the 
universality, objectivity and non-selectivity of the 
analysis of the issues related to them (Vienna Declaration). 
 
III.  Domestic Policies in the Area of Human Rights 
 
Goal: To promote the exchange of information on good 
practices, including experiences and international, regional 
and bilateral cooperation in human rights, in areas such as: 
 
¶A. Interagency coordination to implement public policies and 
fulfillment of international obligations on human rights: 
 
¶1. Coordination mechanisms among central and local 
governments 
 
¶2. Consultation and Participation resources for civil 
society 
 
¶3. Domestic coordination practices and arrangements to 
insure compliance with international obligations 
 
¶B. Norms and public policies: 
 
¶1. Legislative measures in the area of human rights 
 
¶2. Domestic human rights programs (including specific plans 
in the area of education and non discrimination, among 
others) 
 
¶3. Legislation and public policies in: Non-discrimination; 
Violence against women; Children; Handicapped persons; 
Trafficking in Persons; Migrants; Indigenous population; 
Indemnifying damages 
 
¶C. Civilian and Political Rights (administration of 
justice): Fight against torture; Justice for minors; Prison 
system 
 
¶D. Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
 
¶F. Possible international, regional and bilateral 
cooperation in the area of human rights: 
 
¶1. Exchange of information and experiences on cooperation 
with international mechanisms in: 
a. Submitting periodical reports on the application of 
international treaties 
 
b. Visits by international mechanisms of protection and 
representatives of international organizations of human 
rights 
 
c. Litigation and negotiation 
 
¶2. Cooperation with relevant agencies, funds and programs of 
the United Nations and other international organizations 
 
¶3. Cooperation in the area of education and training in 
human rights 
 
IV. Regional Coordination in International Forums 
Purpose: To Foster informal consultations for the exchange 
of information on human rights stands, in order to 
coordinate and strengthen GRULAC's actions. 
 
¶A. Discussion on common elements for the Reform of the UN's 
Human Rights Commission (HRC). 
 
¶B. Coordination of consultations in the periods of sessions 
of the HRC, upon the summoning of the country in charge of 
GRULAC's coordination. 
 
¶V. Activities for 2005 
Based on the issues mentioned above, a discussion was held 
about carrying out the following activities in the year 
2005: 
 
¶A. Creation of an informal network of focal points of 
contact in the member countries' Chanceries to insure a 
smooth and prompt communication, exchange of information and 
coordination of activities. 
 
¶B. Mexico, as GRULAC Coordinator for the 61 HRC (March 14- 
April 22, 2005), will summon and coordinate informal 
consultations among countries belonging to the Group. 
 
¶C. Exchange of information on experiences and good 
practices. 
 
¶D. To carry out informal consultations as necessary, 
preferably along with multilateral meetings on human rights. 
 
¶E. The conducting of one or two regional seminars.  The 
possibility of carrying out seminars on the following topics 
was mentioned, while additional proposals are awaited: the 
fight against torture; trafficking in persons; violence 
against women, domestic Programs in the area of Human Rights 
mechanisms. 
Struble