04TEGUCIGALPA853
MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Wed Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tegucigalpa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000853 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PD, WHA/CCA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL, DRL/MLA, IO, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO PHUM PREL KDEM CU HO CHR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON UNCHR RESOLUTION ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
IN CUBA, APRIL 14, 2004 
 
 
¶1. Editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily "El 
Heraldo" on 4/14 entitled "Ours and theirs."  "To take to 
Congress the resolution presented by Honduras to the UNCHR 
will stir a meaningless discussion when we have other issues 
and laws that, despite their importance, are being ignored 
by our deputies." 
 
"Why should they keep talking about this?  For better or 
worse, the Maduro government has gotten the attention of the 
international community on this issue, confirming a position 
that the Maduro and previous administrations have maintained 
on the alleged violations of human rights by the Castro 
regime." 
 
"We should be clear on something: nothing should be more 
important than promoting the respect for human rights here, 
in Cuba, or anywhere else." 
 
"We have so many problems here that we can't afford to go on 
with this issue.  We should save our energy to solve our own 
problems." 
 
¶2. Op-ed by Jorge Ramon Hernandez in the Tegucigalpa-based 
moderate daily "El Heraldo" on 4/14 entitled "The curious 
case of Cuba."  "It's been curious to see the commotion 
caused by some people on the resolution presented by the 
Honduran government to the UNCHR, which only asks the Cuban 
government to allow a visit of a U.N. representative, to 
report on the human rights situation in Cuba." 
 
"It's curious to notice that those who have said that our 
resolution is aggression against the Cuban people have 
remained silent when journalists, intellectuals, political 
leaders, workers, and other dissidents haven't been able to 
express their opinions and have failed to take notice of the 
fact that the Cubans don't have the same freedom and 
guarantees as we do here in Honduras." 
 
"It's curious that they have a double standard when judging 
human rights, and that what's an obligation for the Honduran 
government isn't for others." 
 
"Sovereignty or friendship between some governments can't be 
in opposition to the respect for life and to freedom in all 
its forms." 
 
"The protection of the rights of any human being is beyond 
the slogans, the demonstrations, the opinions, and even 
political ideologies." 
 
¶3. Op-ed by Mayra Navarro in the Tegucigalpa-based liberal 
daily "La Tribuna" on 4/14 entitled "Why don't they just 
tell the truth?"  "We know our authorities aren't used to 
telling the truth, but sometimes to be honest is the only 
honorable way to get out of trouble.  Most of the criticism 
that President Maduro has gotten from Honduras and abroad 
could have been avoided just by telling the truth, but the 
loyalty to the U.S. has driven him to sacrifice the 
country's and his own reputation." 
 
"The error of the Maduro government is not wanting to tell 
the whole truth to the people.  The government isn't just 
doing a big favor to the U.S., it's also trying to make them 
unaccountable for this decision, and that is just 
inexcusable.  One thing is having to do something under 
pressure, and other is trying to defend foreign interests 
without regard to our own dignity." 
 
Palmer