06BEIJING4766
MARCH 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN AND DPRK NUCLEAR
Tue Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7997
OO RUEHCN RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHPA
DE RUEHBJ #4766/01 0731159
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141159Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0234
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0356
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6309
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 0826UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 004766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM CH JP IR KN
SUBJECT: MARCH 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN AND DPRK NUCLEAR 
ISSUES, PRC/AUSTRALIA URANIUM PACT, UNITED STATES/PRC 
MILITARY EXCHANGES, PRC/PAKISTAN, TRILATERAL SECURITY 
TALKS, PRC/BRAZIL, PRC/AFRICA, PRC/JAPAN 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the March 14 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- China supports the Russia-Iran talks, wants to see 
the Iranian nuclear issue resolved through 
negotiation, wants to ensure the authority of the 
international nuclear nonproliferation, hopes Iran 
will build confidence and urges all sides to exercise 
restraint and avoid escalating the situation.  There 
is still room to resolve the issue through 
negotiation. 
 
- Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei and ROK Deputy 
Foreign Minister Chun Young Woo, new Head of the ROK 
Six-Party Talks Delegation, met March 10 for an in- 
depth exchange of views.  Qin had no information when 
asked about reports of a meeting between Wu and DPRK 
MFA Director General Li Gun.  When asked about Banco 
Delta Asia, he said the PRC will take action according 
to law to combat money-laundering 
 
- The PRC believes military exchanges between the 
United States and China are mutually beneficial. 
 
- Qin sidestepped the question of whether the PRC and 
Australia signed a uranium sales pact. 
 
- President Musharraf's recent visit covered a range 
of bilateral and international affairs.  China will 
work together with Pakistan and South Asian countries 
to promote prosperity and maintain stability in South 
Asia. 
 
- Vice Premier Wu Yi and VP Alencar will co-chair the 
first session of the PRC/Brazil High-level Committee 
on Consultation and Cooperation in Beijing during 
Alencar's March 19-24 visit to China.  End Summary. 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  Asked about Iran's nuclear ambitions, Qin remarked 
that China and most members of the international 
community seek to maintain the seriousness and 
authority of the international nuclear 
nonproliferation regime.  China supports Russia's 
negotiations with Iran.  China is trying to play a 
constructive role with intensive negotiations with all 
parties concerned.  The PRC hopes Iran will do more to 
build mutual confidence but does not wish to see the 
situation destabilized.  There is still room to 
resolve the issue through negotiation, according to 
Qin, who urged all parties to exercise restraint and 
avoid escalating the situation. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked to comment on the March 10 consultations 
between Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei and ROK Deputy 
Foreign Minister Chun Young Woo, th new Head of the 
ROK Six-Party Talks delegatin, Qin said they held an 
in-depth exchange of views and agreed to stay in close 
contact on atters related to peace and stability in 
Northeast Asia.  DFM Chun also met Assistant Foreign 
Minister Cui Tiankai, Assistant Foreign Minister He 
Yafei and DG for North American and Oceanian Affairs 
Liu Jieyi to exchange views on relevant issues, Qin 
added. 
 
¶4.  Asked to comment on information that DPRK Six- 
Party Talks delegate Li Gun was spotted departing 
Beijing airport on March 14, following a purported 
meeting with VFM Wu, Qin said he had no information on 
the Li Gun-Wu Dawei meeting. 
 
¶5.  Qin said the PRC attaches great importance to 
anti-money laundering and signed the Anti-Money 
Laundering Convention when he was asked for an update 
on anti-money laundering investigations related to 
 
BEIJING 00004766  002 OF 003 
 
 
Banco Delta Asia in Macau.  If money laundering is 
discovered, Chinese authorities will take action.  The 
Macau government will handle its investigation in 
accordance with the law, asserted Qin. 
 
United States/PRC Military Exchanges 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  With Secretary Rumsfeld's visit to China in 
October, 2005, the PRC and United States agreed to 
strengthen military exchanges, Qin said in response to 
a question on the nature of such exchanges.  He stated 
that talks occur at a number of levels, from high- 
level visits to exchanges between academics and 
defense-related institutions.  The exchanges are rich 
in content, cover a wide range of topics and are 
mutually beneficial.  China wants to enhance trust and 
ensure the stable development of relations with the 
United States in the twenty-first century, Qin noted. 
 
Sino-Australian Uranium Pact? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Questioned whether the PRC and Australia had 
signed an agreement on uranium sales that will be 
announced during Premier Wen Jiabao's planned April 
visit to Australia, Qin said he did not have any 
information on such an agreement but would keep the 
press updated.  He noted that Sino-Australian 
cooperation on nuclear energy serves the interests of 
both countries and deepens bilateral ties.  Both 
countries support the international nonproliferation 
regime and will honor their nonproliferation 
commitments, Qin added. 
 
Trilateral Security Talks 
------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Questioned about United States/Australia/Japan 
trilateral security talks and concerns about China's 
military buildup, Qin noted Premier Wen Jiabao's March 
14 NPC press conference focused on China's peaceful 
development.  He referred the press to Premier Wen's 
ten points, hoping this will help the international 
community gain a better, more comprehensive 
understanding of how China's foreign policy serves its 
goal of peaceful development.  China is a force for 
peace in the Asia/Pacific region and the world, Qin 
asserted. 
 
PRC/Japan Relations 
------------------- 
 
¶9.  When asked about China's relations with Japan, Qin 
referred to Premier Wen's statement at his March 14 
press conference, saying that Beijing's relations with 
Tokyo relations are based on the three PRC/Japan 
political documents.  Japan should use history as a 
mirror and look to the future while handling properly 
the Taiwan issue.  Asked about Tokyo's response to 
Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing's recent criticism of 
Prime Minister Koizumi for visiting the Yasukuni 
Shrine, Qin questioned rhetorically whether Tokyo 
should harm and undermine relations by misleading the 
public or should guide the media and public opinion in 
a correct and comprehensive manner.  China hopes Japan 
will earnestly express remorse regarding its history, 
Qin stated. 
 
¶10.  Asked to clarify Premier Wen's remarks on 
PRC/Japan relations, Qin noted Premier Wen described 
the three aspects to the relations: strategic 
dialogue; cultural exchange; and economic and trade 
ties.  All are equally important and indispensable. 
They ensure all around stable development, Qin said. 
 
Pakistan and South Asia 
----------------------- 
 
¶11.  Asked to describe China's cooperation with 
Pakistan and South Asia in light of President 
Musharraf's recent visit, Qin cited Premier Wen's 
remarks at the National People's Conference (NPC) 
 
BEIJING 00004766  003 OF 003 
 
 
closing press conference and said China's foreign 
policy is designed to promote amicable relations and 
partnerships in the region.  Relations with Pakistan 
are friendly and based on equal respect and mutual 
benefit.  As a neighbor and friend, China will work 
together with Pakistan and other South Asian countries 
to deepen ties.  Last year, China and Pakistan began 
strategic cooperation.  President Musharraf's visit 
covered a range of bilateral and international 
affairs.  China will work together with Pakistan and 
South Asian countries to promote prosperity and 
maintain stability in the South Asia, Qin said. 
 
PRC Hosts African Journalists 
----------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Qin noted that 43 African journalists from 23 
countries attended the press conference as part of a 
PRC-hosted two-week seminar.  The seminar is designed 
to boost further PRC/Africa friendship and 
cooperation.  Qin said he hoped the journalists would 
report to their countries that China's government and 
people value their friendship with Africa and seek to 
enhance the relationship.  PRC/Africa relations mark 
their fiftieth anniversary in 2006 and China will host 
the Forum for China-Africa Cooperation in November, 
Qin added. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶13.  Brazil's Vice President Jose Alencar will visit 
China from March 19 to 24 at the invitation of Vice 
President Zeng Qinghong.  During the visit, Vice 
Premier Wu Yi and VP Alencar will co-chair the first 
session of the PRC/Brazil High-level Committee on 
Consultation and Cooperation in Beijing.  Separately, 
President of the Commonwealth of Dominica Nicolas 
Liverpool will pay an informal visit to China from 
March 19 to 25. 
RANDT