06BEIJING5618
DOE OLYMPIC RADIATION SECURITY WORKSHOP IN BEIJING
Mon Mar 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2443
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #5618/01 0860941
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 270941Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1221
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BEIJING 005618 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 6000/ITA/TD/RPACE 
USDOE FOR OFFICE OF SECRETARY 
USDOE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
DS/P/PL FOR MIKE VANBUSKIRK 
S/CT FOR TIM WALSH 
EAP/CM FOR NOAH ZARING 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER KNNP MNUC ENRG ECON ETRD BTIO RGY
CH, KOLY 
SUBJECT: DOE OLYMPIC RADIATION SECURITY WORKSHOP IN BEIJING 
PROMPTED MANY QUESTIONS FROM PRC OFFICIALS 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security 
Administration (NNSA), in conjunction with the China 
Institutes for Contemporary International Relations (CICIR), 
held an Olympic Radiation Security Workshop on February 28. 
DOE officers made two presentations titled: "The DOE's 
Emergency Response Capabilities and Support Provided at the 
2004 Olympics" and "Second Line of Defense Prevention and 
Preparedness Support to the 2004 Olympics and Possibilities 
for Supporting the 2008 Olympics".  Each presentation was 
followed by an extensive question and answer period where 
Chinese officials from many agencies peppered the DOE 
delegation with a wide range of questions, exposing the 
concerns of China's security apparatus and their 
understanding of how to provide security for a large 
international event.  NNSA Delegation Head Admiral Krol 
congratulated the Beijing Organizing Committee for the 29 
Olympiad Games (BOCOG) for its forward leaning approach to 
tackling Olympic Security issues, noting that in Greece this 
process began only one year before the opening of the Games. 
He also reiterated the USG's offer to send an assessment team 
to evaluate opportunities for security cooperation. End 
Summary. 
 
Security Needs Assessment Process 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Beijing Olympic Games Organizing Committee, 
Coordinating Office for Olympic Security Division Chief Zhang 
Jian was interested in the process for assessing a venue's 
vulnerabilities to nuclear or radiological attacks and how 
should responses to these types of emergencies be organized. 
Admiral Krol emphasized that China must determine its own 
nuclear oversight structure and the approach it takes to 
handling a crisis.  The DOE has a search capability to check 
venues before events and to monitor them during the events. 
In cooperation with Beijing's Olympic Committee, the DOE is 
ready to provide appropriate assistance.  Beijing must take 
into careful consideration how it will handle public 
perception of its ability to provide a safe and secure 
environment for the Games.  A prank phone call claiming that 
a radiological device has been set off inside a venue could 
be just as damaging to the Games as an actual attack if China 
cannot assuage public perceptions that venue security is weak. 
 
Timeline for Security Needs Assessment 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Beijing People's Police College Vice President Zhang 
Wenping requested more details on the actual assistance 
programs DOE provided the Government of Greece (GOG) during 
the 2004 Olympics.  In particular, he wanted to know how far 
in advance DOE and the GOG began collaborating, what specific 
training DOE provided the Greek police and what was the Greek 
Government's feedback. Admiral Krol congratulated BOCOG for 
its forward-leaning approach to tackling Olympic Security 
issues, noting that in Greece this process began only one 
year before the opening of the Games.  He stressed that the 
host country must first request assistance and then a joint 
assessment of the threat situation will be created. 
 
¶4. (SBU) During the Greek Olympics, joint assessments were 
conducted of the various venues as well as the hosting 
cities.  The FBI, DOD and local police worked together to 
draw up plans for various contingency situations.  Krol said 
that having an outside entity assess your security situation 
provides you with a different perspective and often can 
reveal previously overlooked risks. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The United States is willing to provide a Foreign 
Emergency Support Team (FEST) tailored to China's needs 
should the PRC request such assistance through the U.S. 
Embassy in Beijing and after completing an initial joint 
assessment.  DOE Response and Exercise Program Manager Steven 
Buntman pointed out that during the 2004 Games, DOE provided 
the Greek police with radiological pagers, isotopes analysis 
and training of various protocols for interviewing 
individuals who set off radiological detectors. 
 
 
BEIJING 00005618  002 OF 006 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Beijing People's Police College Vice President Zheng 
Weiping asked what specific methods he should employ when 
planning exercises for his police team.  Mr. Buntman replied 
that DOE together with the State Department held a tabletop 
exercise in Athens with GOG agencies where the parties 
involved walked through responses to 20 emergency scenarios. 
The exercise exposed interagency command and cooperation 
issues.  Admiral Krol suggested that a similar exercise could 
be held in preparation for the 2008 Games. 
 
Guidelines For Conducting an Assessment 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Beijing People's Police College Vice President Zheng 
Weiping stated that China should cooperate with United States 
to ensure the safety of the Games.  To that end what kind of 
documents and what type of data does the United States need 
from China to make an assessment?  Admiral Krol responded 
that the assessment process should be completed together. 
Working together would provide the best information for both 
sides to identify vulnerabilities.  The assessment should 
address current responses to crisis situations, the overall 
response to the Beijing Olympics in terms of how many people, 
from how many different countries, will be attending as well 
as a review of all venues, transportation and services 
associated with the Games. 
 
Airport Security and Assessments 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Beijing Capital International Airport Public 
Security Director of the General Office Li Xuha was 
interested in how the United States provided assistance to 
monitor Greece's international airport.  Dr. Charles Massey 
responded that DOE conducted an assessment one year prior to 
the Olympic Games focusing on the flow of people, luggage and 
cargo.  Based on this assessment the two countries developed 
a system to screen all people and cargo moving through the 
airport.  The program was implemented well in advance of the 
Games to prevent terrorists from attempting to move 
radiological devices into Greece ahead of the Games. 
 
Securing Ground Transportation and Responding to Incidents 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Deputy Director of the Beijing Subway Command Center 
Wang Haiying requested information on how to best monitor the 
subway and local ground traffic.  He also wanted to know how 
to handle a suspected radiological device and whether or not 
he should cover it with a box or blanket until experts could 
assess the situation.  Wang went on to explain that he was 
not familiar with radiological devices and is concerned that 
calling in radiological specialists to inspect each 
suspicious item would disable the subway system.  Admiral 
Krol said the best way to handle a suspected radiological 
device is to put as much space as possible between it and 
people by closing the immediate area around the suspicious 
device.  In the United States, first responders such as the 
police and fire companies have basic equipment that can 
determine whether or not the suspect item is radioactive. 
Admiral Krol stated that the subway system and local 
transportation, particularly into the Olympic Village, should 
be monitored.  One way to do this is by setting up 
checkpoints were several roads or trains converge. 
 
Dirty Bombs and Special Teams 
----------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Beijing Olympic Games Organizing Committee 
Coordinating Office for Olympic Security Division Chief Zhang 
Jian requested information on how to handle a dirty bomb and 
whether or not each specific type of radiological device 
needs a special dedicated team to handle it.  Admiral Krol 
said that DOE has not inactivated an actual dirty bomb but 
has conducted numerous exercises.  The United States has 
teams of specialists that include weapons designers and 
engineers that respond to all radiological events. 
 
Speed Requirements for Train Detectors 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00005618  003 OF 006 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) Zhang Jian wanted to know the maximum speed at 
which a radiological detector could effectively monitor a 
train.  He noted that train transportation is still the 
backbone of China's transportation infrastructure and could 
not handle long delays without interrupting services across 
the country.  Dr. Charles Massey replied that the slower the 
train passes through the detector the better and noted that 
eight km per hour is the optimal speed.  Detectors are 
usually placed along the rail lines in places where trains 
are starting or stopping so that the optimal speed is built 
into the system and does not impede normal train operations. 
 
Terrorist Radiological Attacks by Underwater Explosives 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) China Institutes for Contemporary International 
Relations (CICIR) Assistant President Yang Mingjie wanted to 
know if the United States had the capability to detect 
radiological bombs attached to the bottom of ships and said 
that he believed that this was an easy scenario with high 
probability.  Dr. Robert York from the U.S. DOE Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory explained that four feet of water 
provides a shield for gamma particles and neutrons, making it 
impossible to detect a radiological device at that depth or 
deeper.  The water acts as a perfect shield.  Admiral Krol 
stated that swimmers or divers could be used to inspect 
suspect ships. 
 
Intranet Vice Internet 
---------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) CICIR Assistant President Yang Mingjie wanted to 
know if Second Line of Defense detectors are linked together 
by using computers operating on the Internet, noting that 
this would make the system very vulnerable to hackers.  Dr. 
Charles Massey said the host government is responsible for 
how it sets up its network.  Most governments use intranets 
or resident systems. 
 
Managing Public Perception of a Crisis 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) CICIR President Yang Mingjie asked for best 
practices in managing the public's desire to know details 
about an incident.  Yang said that without an official 
government statement, the media tends to speculate and create 
panic surrounding a suspected event.  Yang wondered if the 
United States uses a national broadcast system to issue 
official statements regarding possible radiological events. 
Admiral Krol responded that the DOE is a "response" 
organization but before responding to public concerns careful 
analysis of the situation is conducted to alleviate public 
fears. 
 
Concerns Over Cost 
------------------ 
 
¶15. (SBU) The Beijing Municipal Counter terrorism Office 
Division Chief Jin Yujie asked directly how much DOE provided 
radilogical equipment would cost and whether the DOE was 
willing to provide any equipment without charge.  Jin noted 
that recently Beijing has bcome concerned over the rapidly 
escalating costs of hosting the Games.  Admiral Krol said 
that Beijing has two options: DOE could provide comprehensive 
training and equipment but at a significant expense, or based 
on the joint assessment, DOE could provide basic training, 
planning and some equipment that would then be supported by a 
FEST. At no expense to China, a FEST would deploy 
highly-trained and experienced people as well as sensitive 
detection equipment for the duration of the Games.  The FEST 
members and the equipment would return to the United States 
upon the conclusion of the Games.  Furthermore, during the 
Greece Games, under the Second Line of Defense program the 
United States installed in several ports and border crossings 
radiological detection equipment and trained personnel how to 
use them at no charge to the GOG. 
 
First Line and Second Line of Defense 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) Beijing Municipal Counterterrorist Office Division 
 
BEIJING 00005618  004 OF 006 
 
 
Chief Jin Yujie requested an explanation of the different 
roles of the DOE's First Line of Defense and Second Line of 
Defense programs.  Dr. Charles Massey explained that the DOE 
provides assistance to countries that need help protecting 
their nuclear materials and weapons to prevent them from 
illegally crossing borders.  The Second Line of Defense is 
then used to monitor international borders throughout the 
world to prevent the illegal spread of radiological 
materials.  Currently there are thirty countries 
participating in the program.  The program concentrates on 
air, land and sea crossings.  The portals monitor the 
crossing points 24 hours a day and the host country responds 
to any suspect readings. 
 
Loopholes in Megaports 
---------------------- 
 
¶17.  (SBU) CICIR researcher Xu Feibao assessed that the 
Megaports program is a passive prevention technique because 
it only targets large ports while leaving smaller or less 
traveled crossing points unscreened.  Dr. Charles Massey 
responded that DOE uses a prioritization methodology for 
determining which ports should participate in the Megaports 
program.  This includes analyzing maritime trade routes.  The 
goal is to take away convenient large routes that offer some 
protection for illegally transporting radiological materials 
because of the large volume to containers that pass through 
them.  This forces terrorists to use less obvious paths 
through smaller ports making it easier for intelligence and 
security services to detect. 
 
Effective Cooperation? 
---------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) Mr. Zhang Jian was also interested in what was more 
effective and efficient at the Greece Games, bilateral 
cooperation or multilateral cooperation?  Admiral Krol 
responded that both types of cooperation are necessary. 
China must work with international organizations such as the 
IAEA while at the same time working with individual countries 
to guarantee the safety of their citizens, athletes and 
dignitaries.  During the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games, the 
United States reached out to the IAEA and other countries for 
support.  China should look for assistance not because it 
needs it but because the world wants a successful event and 
all countries and international organizations have a stake in 
making sure the Games are safe.  Mr. Zhang raised the 
security brief the United States provides to its Olympic 
athletes and was interested in what role the DOE plays in 
composing the report.  DOE stated that it does not write the 
report or contribute directly to it.  The State Department 
authors this report based on all-source intelligence analysis. 
 
DOE and Intelligence Sharing 
---------------------------- 
 
¶19. (SBU) CICIR Deputy Director Ouyang Liping noted that 
intelligence sharing can be very complicated between 
different agencies and governments and wondered how 
intelligence derived from the radiological screening process 
is shared.  Admiral Krol stated that once the detection 
equipment is installed it is turned over to the host 
government.  The host government has to decide how it will 
introduce the intelligence component into the screening 
program.  The equipment package is a confidence building 
measure that naturally leads to more intelligence sharing. 
Admiral Krol pointed out that after all we share the same 
goal, to stop the illegal transportation of nuclear material. 
 
Seminar Participants 
-------------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) U.S. Participants: 
 
Head of Delegation 
Admiral Joseph Krol     Associate Administrator for Emergency 
Operations, National Nuclear Security Administration, DOE 
 
Dr. Charles Massey      Principal, Marsec Government Services 
LLC 
 
 
BEIJING 00005618  005 OF 006 
 
 
Daniel Hartnett   Second Line of Defense Program, National 
Nuclear Security Administration, DOE 
 
Steven Buntman    Response and Exercise Program Manager, 
National Nuclear Security Administration, DOE 
 
Rob York    Technical Working Lead Group, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, DOE 
 
Wendy Bashnan     Deputy Olympic Security Coordinator, U.S. 
Embassy Beijing 
 
Melissa J. Lan    Olympics Coordinator, U.S. Embassy Beijing 
 
Don Rogers              U.S. Embassy Beijing 
 
Brian C. Chang    Transportation Administration, U.S. Embassy 
Beijing 
 
Note taker 
Interpreters 
 
¶21. (SBU) Chinese Participants: 
 
Institute of Strategic and Security Studies, CICIR 
Mr. Yang Mingjie        Assistant President 
Ms. Ouyang Liping       Deputy Director 
Ms. Gao Ying 
Mr. Sun Bo 
Mr. Xu Feibao 
 
Department of International Exchanges, CICIR 
 
Ms. Du Yanjun                 Director 
Mr. Liu Bo              Deputy Director 
 
Coordinating Office for Olympic Security, Beijing Olympic 
Games Organizing Committee 
 
Mr. Zhang Jian                Division Chief 
Mr. Liu Wei                   Deputy Division Chief 
Mr. Hu Xueshan                Deputy Division Chief 
Mr. Wang Guiqing        Deputy Division Chief 
Mr. Li Jianhua                Staff Member 
Mr. Zhao Haifei         Staff Member 
Mr. Cheng Yongwei       Staff Member 
Mr. Yuan Jinghui        Staff Member 
Mr. Han Dong                  Staff Member 
 
Public Security Bureau, Beijing Capital International Airport 
 
Mr. Li Xuhua                  Director of General Office 
Mr. Wang Ming                 Staff Member, General Office 
Mr. Jiang Huawei        Staff Member, General Office 
Mr. Wan Changming       Guardhouse 
Mr. Pan Jianqiang       Security Office 
 
China National Nuclear Industrial Group 
 
Mr. Duan Jiaqing        Department of Security 
 
Beijing People's Police College 
 
Mr. Zheng Weiping       Vice President 
 
Security Coordination Group for Sailing Competitions 
 
Mr. Ye Jianwen                Division Chief 
Mr. Teng Xuyou                Division Chief 
 
SWAT College of China People's Armed Police Forces 
Mr. Qin Yumin                 Editor, Special Police of China 
Mr. Chang Ping 
 
National Counterterrorism Office 
 
Ms. Jiang Liyun 
 
Beijing Municipal Counter-Terrorism Office 
 
Mr. Jin Yujie                 Division Chief 
 
BEIJING 00005618  006 OF 006 
 
 
 
Intelligence Center for Olympic Security, Beijing Olympic 
Games Organizing Committee 
 
Mr. Zhao Hongqing 
Mr. Zhang Hongtian 
Mr. Zang Xiangjun 
Mr. Zhang Shaoning 
Mr. Liang Zhiwei 
Ms. Liu Rufang 
 
Command Center of Beijing Subway 
 
Mr. Wang Haiying        Deputy Director 
RANDT