06DAKAR528
SENEGAL: ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Thu Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO4695
RR RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #0528/01 0610747
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020747Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4422
INFO RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 0088
RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 13 DAKAR 000528 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, AF/RSA, AF/W, G, INL, DRL, PRM, AND G/IWI 
BAMAKO FOR TIP OFFICER 
BANJUL FOR TIP OFFICER 
CONAKRY FOR TIP OFFICER 
MADRID FOR TIP OFFICER 
PRAIA FOR TIP OFFICER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KCRM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF SG
SUBJECT: SENEGAL: ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 003836 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: After being upgraded last year from Tier 
2 Watch List to Tier 2 status, Senegal has continued to 
devote significant time and attention to the issue of 
trafficking in persons.  The most important achievement of 
the past year was passage of its first trafficking-in- 
persons (TIP) law.  Police now maintain a computerized 
database meant to record trafficking-related crime 
statistics.  At least three trafficking schemes have been 
investigated, and the GOS prosecuted individuals 
responsible for rape, pedophilia, prostitution and abuse 
of "talibe" children.  The Government has continued to 
provide assistance to victims and to repatriate children 
found to have been trafficked from surrounding countries. 
54 were repatriated to Mali in 2005.  In November 2005, 
G/TIP Ambassador Miller and members of his staff visited 
Senegal, meeting key GOS officials, international 
organizations and NGOs to discuss the trafficking issue. 
The meetings revealed that Senegal has made some progress. 
Nevertheless, certain areas still need improvement, such 
as inter-ministerial cooperation, prosecution and the 
collection of data regarding the trafficking of women for 
sexual exploitation.  In addition to 2005 TIP Hero and 
Family Minister Aida Mbodj, Director of "Avenir de 
l'Enfant" Moussa Sow is a TIP hero in every sense of the 
word.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Responses are keyed to questions in reftel. 
 
Begin TIP report: 
 
¶21.  Overview of a country's activities to eliminate 
trafficking in persons: 
 
-- A.  Is the country a country of origin, transit or 
destination for international trafficked men, women or 
children?  Specify numbers for each group; how were they 
trafficked, to where and for what purpose?  Does the 
trafficking occur within the country's borders?  Does it 
occur in territory outside of the government's control 
(e.g. in a civil war situation)?  Are any estimates or 
reliable numbers available as to the extent or magnitude 
of the problem?  Please include any numbers of victims. 
What is/are the source(s) of available information on 
trafficking in persons or what plans are in place (if any) 
to undertake documentation of trafficking?  How reliable 
are the numbers and these sources?  Are certain groups of 
persons more at risk of being trafficked (e.g. women and 
children, boys versus girls, certain ethnic groups, 
refugees, etc.)? 
 
Senegal is a country of origin, transit and destination 
for human trafficking of women and children.  There are no 
reliable statistics on the extent of human trafficking in 
Senegal.  While some NGOs and international organizations, 
such as UNICEF, have estimates on the number of child 
beggars or at-risk children, there has never been a 
quantitative study on trafficking victims in Senegal. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests young boys constitute the 
highest risk group for trafficking. 
 
Senegal's trafficking problems are both internal and 
transnational. 
 
Young Senegalese boys are trafficked from rural villages 
to urban centers for exploitive begging at some Koranic 
schools ("daaras").  Young boys are trafficked to Senegal 
from The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and Guinea for the 
same purpose.  Although there were reports in the past of 
Senegalese children being trafficked to other West African 
countries, Cote d'Ivoire for example, for labor purposes, 
there were no such reports in 2005. 
 
Young girls are trafficked from villages in the Diourbel, 
Fatick, Kaolack, Thies and Ziguinchor regions to urban 
centers for work as underage domestics.  NGOs report 
Malian girls are trafficked to Senegal to help blind -- 
and people posing as blind -- beggars.  Young girls from 
 
DAKAR 00000528  002 OF 013 
 
 
both urban and rural areas are involved in illegal 
prostitution, which NGOs claim always involves an adult 
pimp who facilitates their commercial sex transactions or 
houses them. 
 
The issue of trafficking of adult women remains a hazy 
one.  Police officials, international organizations and 
NGOs have indicated that trafficking of women for use in 
prostitution occurs in Senegal, but there is little 
concrete data to support this.  NGOs working with illegal 
prostitutes have provided anecdotal evidence.  ENDA Sante, 
a Senegalese NGO, treats illegal prostitutes for STIs 
through a mobile clinic program.  According to ENDA 
Sante's staff, they see many women from nearby African 
countries -- Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea- 
Bissau and Guinea -- practicing illegal prostitution in 
Senegal.  Association AWA, an NGO providing health care 
and vocational training to women in prostitution, reported 
that physically abused women occasionally come in to be 
treated.  They are sometimes accompanied by another person 
to get tested for HIV/AIDS.  AWA believes some of these 
women may be trafficking victims, and the persons 
accompanying them may be traffickers.  AWA also said they 
see many female prostitutes from Liberia and Nigeria. 
Last year's TIP Report discussed the organized nature of 
foreign prostitutes' entry into Senegal. 
 
-- B.  Please provide a general overview of the 
trafficking situation in the country and any changes since 
the last TIP Report (e.g. changes in direction).  Also 
briefly explain the political will to address trafficking 
in persons.  Other items to address may include: What kind 
of conditions are the victims trafficked into?  Which 
populations are targeted by the traffickers?  Who are the 
traffickers?  What methods are used to approach victims? 
(Are they offered lucrative jobs, sold by their families, 
approached by friends of friends, etc.?)  What methods are 
used to move the victims (e.g., are false documents being 
used)? 
 
The lack of reliable trafficking data impedes clear 
understanding of trafficking trends.  Young boys continue 
to be trafficked from neighboring countries and Senegalese 
villages, and young girls continue to be trafficked 
internally.  Foreign and Senegalese women continue to work 
in the sex industry.  NGOs working with children and 
prostitutes, and a GOS health professional working at a 
government-funded health clinic that offers health checks 
for prostitutes complying with Senegal's legal 
prostitution regime, claim they see more and increasingly 
younger underage prostitutes on Senegal's streets. 
 
Children trafficked to Senegal are forced into exploitive 
begging.  Separated from their families and support 
systems, children must choose between staying with their 
trafficker or life on the street as runaways.  Many 
children are too young to remember with any detail the 
village from which they came and, sadly, forget their 
families.  Newspapers have reported on cases of physical 
abuse committed by Koranic teachers ("marabouts") against 
their students ("talibes").  Koranic teachers who abuse 
their students have been prosecuted under non-TIP laws. 
 
There is not enough evidence on underage or adult 
prostitution to know how traffickers ensure compliance. 
There are no reports children are trafficked from other 
countries to Senegal for sexual purposes, or to become 
underage domestics. 
 
For child victims, parents who entrust young boys into the 
care of a Koranic teacher, or send a female child to work 
as a domestic, oftentimes know the trafficker. 
 
Koranic teachers frequently return to their original 
villages and receive children from parents hoping to 
provide a Koranic education, which many Senegalese value 
more highly than a secular education.  Generally, parents 
are not offered money to turn young boys over to Koranic 
teachers, and young boys are never sold.  An NGO working 
 
DAKAR 00000528  003 OF 013 
 
 
in the northern Senegalese town of St. Louis explained 
young boys are sometimes passed from one Koranic teacher 
to another, but never for recompense. 
 
Girls sent away to work as domestics often work in family 
members' or family friends' homes.  In such cases, poor 
rural families expect money will be sent back to the home 
to help provide badly needed income.  These relationships 
and families' expectations of income make leaving 
exploitive labor conditions, which sometimes include 
sexual abuse, difficult for young girls. 
 
Young prostitutes are either sent by their rural parents 
to urban areas to find work, or leave their urban homes to 
work on the streets.  While parents do not send their 
daughters to become prostitutes, with rare exceptions, 
NGOs working with underage prostitutes claim parents are 
aware of the fact their daughters prostitute themselves 
because they leave the house at night, and they have an 
otherwise unexplainable source of income.  Almost all 
underage prostitutes have Senegalese pimps who entice 
their desperate victims with promises of money and work. 
 
Weak civil administration and the ease of obtaining fake 
identity documents, the abundance of foreign tourists and 
potential visa sponsors, freedom of movement between 
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) member 
states without the need to present a passport, direct 
flights from Senegal to Europe and national stability 
entice adult women from other African countries to come to 
Senegal for sexual purposes.  If these women are 
trafficked, it is unclear who their traffickers are, or 
what methods they use to approach victims.  NGOs explain 
while some Senegalese women could be trafficked to North 
Africa, Europe and the Middle East for sexual purposes, as 
has been reported in the past, most Senegalese prostitutes 
tend to remain in Senegal. 
 
The GOS has continued to show significant political will 
to combat human trafficking. 
 
The GOS-established Ginddi Center has maintained its 
intake of at-risk children and has plans to expand its 
operations.  Minister of Women, Family and Social 
Development Aida Mbodj, one of the 2005 TIP Heroes, whose 
Ministry directs Ginddi Center, continued her efforts to 
bring public awareness to this problem and to work closely 
with international organizations and her counterparts in 
other African countries.  Her Ministry runs a program for 
daaras, in which they provide teaching aids, submit 
language components, train Koranic teachers, offer school 
supplies and run awareness campaigns.  She has publicly 
called for an end to begging and has mobilized her 
Ministry to educate the public about the importance of 
birth registration. 
 
Human Rights Commissioner Mame Bassine Niang helped push 
through the new anti-TIP law.  She was also tasked with 
creating an inter-ministerial task force, though it has 
not met for some time.  Moreover, there appears to be a 
disjointed approach to TIP.  While the Family Minister, 
the Human Rights Commissioner and the Chief Prosecutor all 
have agreed there is a trafficking problem that must be 
addressed, the Minister of Justice and some Ministry of 
Interior officials have said they believed human 
trafficking was NOT a problem in Senegal. 
 
The relatively new Criminal Analysis Unit continues to add 
trafficking-related offenses into its electronic database. 
Unfortunately, though human trafficking is now an offense 
under domestic law, few, if any, such cases have been 
included in the database.  The unit is associated with 
INTERPOL but lacks financial and human resources to fully 
devote to trafficking issues.  The Commissioner of Police 
noted that police lack the financial incentive and time to 
actively pursue trafficking cases and input data into the 
database. 
 
The Interior Ministry established a new Special 
 
DAKAR 00000528  004 OF 013 
 
 
Commissariat to help fight sex tourism in Dakar and Mbour, 
two of Senegal's principal tourist destinations and target 
areas for underage and illegal prostitution.  However, the 
Commissariat has taken no definitive actions. 
 
The Ministry of Tourism created a special tourism police 
unit and appointed someone to head it.  It is charged with 
fighting sexual tourism in the popular tourist 
destinations of Dakar, Saint-Louis, Mbour, Fatick and 
Ziguinchor.  It is not yet operational. 
 
Former Labor Minister Yaro Deh signed a Time-Bound Program 
with the ILO in 2004 to fight the worst forms of child 
labor in Senegal.  In cooperation with the ILO, Senegal 
targets for eradication child begging, underage domestic 
work and underage prostitution as three of Senegal's worst 
forms of child labor. 
 
-- C.  What are the limitations on the government's 
ability to address this problem in practice?  For example, 
is funding for police or other institutions inadequate? 
Is overall corruption a problem?  Does the government lack 
the resources to aid victims? 
 
Senegal is one of the poorest countries in the world, 
ranking 157th on the UN's Human Development Index and 
limiting its ability to effectively prosecute traffickers, 
prevent trafficking or protect trafficking victims. 
Police are underpaid and lack adequate equipment and 
resources to effectively do their jobs.  In addition to 
its public revenue problems, the government's bureaucratic 
structure and reliance on highly centralized decision- 
making stand in the way of reform.  Corruption exists 
throughout government, including law enforcement. 
Trafficking represents only one of many vexing social and 
economic problems with which the Government must contend. 
The fact that recruiters of young boys exploit parents' 
legitimate, socially prevalent desire for a religious 
education provides "cover" within local communities, and 
decreases the possibility of government intervention. 
 
-- D.  To what extent does the Government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- 
prosecution, prevention and victim protection) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, 
its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The GOS does not have a systematic means in place to 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts and does not submit 
reports.  However, the Ministry of Family and the Human 
Rights Commissioner in an unprecedented move led a 
sustained and well-organized effort to fight trafficking 
and child begging throughout 2005 and early 2006.  This 
effort was cited and lauded by President Abdoulaye Wade in 
April 2005. 
 
¶22.  PREVENTION: 
 
-- A.  Does the Government acknowledge that trafficking is 
a problem in that country?  If no, why not? 
 
President Wade spoke publicly against human trafficking as 
recently as April 2005.  As the leading minister on 
children's issues, Family Minister Mbodj condemned child 
trafficking during her public statements numerous times 
during this TIP reporting cycle. 
 
Privately, most GOS officials admit child trafficking 
exists and the Government needs to act.  Fewer Senegalese 
see adult prostitutes as trafficking victims. 
 
Some GOS officials continue to see trafficking as a 
foreign problem and Senegal victimized as a transit 
country rather than a destination or source country.  When 
confronted with the realities of today's exploitive 
begging relationships, for example, many remain 
unconvinced Senegal's cultural and religious practices 
constitute human trafficking when Senegalese children are 
 
DAKAR 00000528  005 OF 013 
 
 
involved.  People are more apt to criticize these 
practices, however, when foreign children are involved. 
 
-- B.  Which government agencies are involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the 
lead? 
 
The Family Ministry is the ministry most actively involved 
in prevention and protection efforts.  As part of its anti- 
child labor program with UNICEF, the GOS created 
observatories in Mbour and St. Louis to fight prostitution 
and pedophilia, and in Fatick to keep girls from leaving 
school to become underage domestics. 
 
The High Commission for Human Rights, due to its lack of a 
budget, is unable to undertake anti-trafficking programs 
absent external assistance.  However, the High 
Commissioner played a critical role in getting the anti- 
TIP law passed and is expected to receive G/TIP funding. 
This should help her to staff and operate her office. 
 
Various courts under the Justice Ministry collect 
statistics on arrests and imprisonment for all criminal 
offenses, including arrests of pimps and Koranic teachers 
who abuse their students.  However, there is no 
centralized system in place for collecting data.  The 
governmental body put in place to coordinate such data 
collection is not yet functional. 
 
In charge of law enforcement, the Interior Ministry 
created a Criminal Analysis Unit, sent students to ICITAP 
anti-trafficking training and created a new Special 
Commissariat to crack down on sex tourism and illegal 
prostitution.  The Judicial Police, falling under the 
authority of the Interior Ministry, assigned four police 
officers to a new anti-trafficking police unit upon the 
signature of the anti-trafficking law.  The four officers, 
while assigned to the anti-trafficking unit, actually 
spend the majority of their time on other routine cases. 
Senior Judicial Police officials have openly expressed 
that there is no financial motivation for police officers 
to pursue trafficking cases. 
 
The Minor's Brigade monitors legal protection for minors 
and assists legal proceedings against perpetrators. 
 
-- C.  Are there or have there been government-run anti- 
trafficking information or education campaigns?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their 
objectives and effectiveness.  Do these campaigns target 
potential trafficking victims and/or the demand for 
trafficking (e.g. "clients" of prostitutes or 
beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
 
As part of its program against the worst forms of child 
labor, the Family Ministry has held workshops and 
roundtables in Mbour, Dakar and other areas to fight child 
begging, underage domestic work and underage prostitution. 
 
-- D.  Does the Government support other programs to 
prevent trafficking (e.g., to promote women's 
participation in economic decision-making or efforts to 
keep children in school)?  Please explain. 
 
The GOS has a comprehensive poverty reduction program 
(DSRP) to help improve national economic conditions and 
ameliorate social problems like trafficking that poverty 
exacerbates.  Economic growth at the local level could 
help reduce pressure on parents to send their children 
away, keep children in schools and create job alternatives 
to prostitution. 
 
The Wade Administration champions education as a top 
priority.  Since 2000, when Wade became President, the GOS 
has constructed numerous new school facilities, including 
the approximately 150 newly created centers specifically 
designed for young children ("les cases des tous petits") 
and school attendance for girls, historically 
disadvantaged in terms of access to education, continues 
 
DAKAR 00000528  006 OF 013 
 
 
to rise.  The GOS implemented an UN-approved plan for 
assuring universal education by 2015, and committed 40 
percent of the national budget to education, the highest 
percentage in Africa.  Gross enrollment is now 82.5 
percent.  Enrollment of girls is now 80.6 percent, 
compared to boys enrollment of 84.4 percent, a big 
improvement over previous years.  The Government has also 
taken initiatives to combat child begging by creating 
Franco-Arab schools.  These offer religious education, as 
well as scholastic learning.  In 2005, rural areas had a 
total of 1,556, versus 349 in urban areas. 
 
(There is no Question E.) 
 
-- F.  What is the relationship between government 
officials, NGOs, other relevant organizations and other 
elements of civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
The Family Ministry works closely with UNICEF and 
Senegalese NGOs to implement its program against the worst 
forms of child labor.  In Mbour, for example, the GOS 
holds workshops and seminars with UNICEF and NGO 
assistance to prevent young girls from turning to 
prostitution.  In 2004, this program helped sensitize 
8,140 participants, 5,440 of them children, to the dangers 
of underage prostitution.  In a separate program, the 
Family Ministry collaborates with local religious leaders 
to improve conditions in 48 Koranic schools.  The GOS 
cooperates with international organizations at Ginddi 
Center, and with the IOM to help repatriate trafficked 
Malian children. 
 
Despite previous work with civil society and international 
organizations on human trafficking in 2002-03, the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights does not appear to be 
working actively with civil society on human trafficking 
at this time. 
 
The Interior and Justice Ministries have a program with 
IOM to monitor migration flows across Senegal's borders. 
Justice Ministry officials worked with IOM staff in the 
past to organize and analyze criminal statistics. 
 
A number of NGOs, such as ENDA Ecopole, which works 
primarily with women and children, and Avenir de l'Enfant 
report cooperative relations with some Senegalese 
officials, such as the Minister of Family, and the police, 
who often refer individual cases to such NGOs. 
 
-- G.  Does it monitor immigration and emigration patterns 
for evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement agencies 
screen for potential trafficking victims along borders? 
 
Due to the Casamance conflict in southern Senegal, vast 
borders with Mali and Guinea, its largely uncontrollable 
riverine border with Mauritania, a large seaport in Dakar 
and heavy international flight traffic, the GOS is unable 
to effectively monitor all frontiers.  The Government has 
made progress, though, improving security at Dakar's port 
and international airport.  The Government recently 
detained a vessel suspected of trafficking in persons, 
worked with the Governments of Spain and Cape Verde to end 
the activities of traffickers bringing children and adults 
from Cape Verde through Senegal to The Gambia and 
ultimately to Spain, and stopped an orphanage from 
advertising children to pedophiles via the Internet. 
 
-- H.  Is there a mechanism for coordination and 
communication between various agencies, internal, 
international, and multilateral on trafficking-related 
matters, such as a multi-agency working group or a task 
force?  Does the Government have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact?  Does the 
Government have a public corruption task force? 
 
As part of the Labor Ministry's Time Bound Program against 
the worst forms of child labor, an inter-ministerial 
committee was formed between 14 government ministries and 
several other non-ministerial entities.  This mechanism 
 
DAKAR 00000528  007 OF 013 
 
 
for coordinating and communicating on children's issues is 
the first of its kind.  The GOS does not have a TIP task 
force, but the High Commissioner for Human Rights created 
a National Committee Against Human Trafficking that 
includes various ministries and NGOs.  The Commissioner is 
in the process of reactivating this Committee.  The 
Government has established and staffed an office to fight 
public corruption, but little has been done thus far. 
 
The GOS participated in multinational working groups 
leading up to conclusion of the Senegal-Mali accord 
against child trafficking.  Senegal has now signed a TIP 
cooperation agreement with nine ECOWAS countries. 
 
The High Commissioner for Human Rights is Senegal's focal 
point on trafficking and is responsible for coordinating 
anti-TIP policy.  Family Minister Mbodj actively fights 
human trafficking through her ministry's programs and her 
efforts to lobby other government ministries to reform. 
 
(There is no Question I.) 
 
-- J.  Does the Government have a national plan of action 
to address trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies 
were involved in developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in 
the process?  What steps has the Government taken to 
disseminate the action plan? 
 
The GOS drafted a national action plan against trafficking 
in 2002-03 that included input from the Family, Justice 
and Interior Ministries as well as from several NGOs, 
international organizations and the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights.  The GOS adopted the plan in 2004. 
 
¶23.  INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
 
For questions A-D, posts should highlight in particular 
whether or not the country has enacted any new legislation 
since the last TIP report. 
 
-- A.  Does the country have a law specifically 
prohibiting trafficking in persons -- both trafficking for 
sexual exploitation and trafficking for non-sexual 
purposes (e.g. forced labor)?  If so, what is the law? 
Does the law(s) cover both internal and external 
(transnational) forms of trafficking?  If not, under what 
other laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, 
are there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of coercion or fraud?  Are these 
other laws being used in trafficking cases?  Are these 
laws, taken together, adequate to cover the full scope of 
trafficking in persons?  Please provide a full inventory 
of trafficking laws, including civil penalties (e.g., 
civil forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt). 
 
On April 29, 2005, the National Assembly unanimously 
adopted a comprehensive anti-TIP law.  Under the new law, 
those who recruit, transport, transfer or harbor persons, 
whether by means of violence, fraud, abuse of authority or 
otherwise for the purposes of sexual exploitation, labor, 
forced servitude or slavery are subject to punishment of 5 
to 10 years' imprisonment and a fine of between USD 10,000 
and 40,000 (5 to 20 million CFA francs (CFAF)).  When the 
violation involves torture, barbarism, the removal of 
human organs or exposing the victim to a risk of death or 
injury, jail time can range from 10 to 30 years' 
imprisonment. 
 
Though Senegal now has an effective legal tool for 
fighting human trafficking, there have been no 
prosecutions under the new law.  Other statutes have been 
used to prosecute and convict traffickers.  For instance, 
Senegal's constitution forbids slavery, the labor code 
prohibits forced labor and begging is illegal under the 
penal code.  Senegalese have not historically viewed 
exploitive begging as slavery or forced labor, and the 
anti-begging law is not enforced against any beggars, 
trafficking victims or not. 
 
 
DAKAR 00000528  008 OF 013 
 
 
A legal regime regulates prostitution.  Pimping and 
soliciting customers are illegal.  Current laws regulating 
prostitution yield arrests, including arrests of foreign 
illegal prostitutes, underage prostitutes and pimps.  NGOs 
working with prostitutes, however, claim the problem is 
bigger than official statistics suggest. 
 
A few Koranic teachers who physically abuse their students 
are arrested and prosecuted each year, including two 
arrests this past year.  In most cases, students were 
beaten for failing to meet their daily begging 
requirements.  NGOs assisting Koranic school students 
explain that Koranic teachers who violently enforce daily 
begging requirements are usually the most exploitive, and 
most likely to be traffickers rather than bona fide 
Koranic teachers.  Two Koranic teachers were arrested and 
prosecuted in 2005 for beating students.  Family Ministry 
received students at the Ginddi Center who had been beaten 
by their Koranic teachers. 
 
-- B.  What are the penalties for traffickers of people 
for sexual exploitation?  For traffickers of people for 
labor exploitation? 
 
Please see above. 
 
-- C.  What are the penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault?  How do they compare to the penalty for sex 
trafficking? 
 
The law provides for 5 to 10 years' imprisonment for rape. 
Rapes resulting in death qualify for life imprisonment. 
If a rape victim is a minor, the penalty is 10 years' 
imprisonment.  The law punishes sexual abuse of children 
(pedophilia) with 5 to 10 years' imprisonment.  If the 
offender is a family member, the punishment is 10 years. 
Any offense against the decency of a child is punishable 
by imprisonment for 2 to 5 years and in some aggravated 
cases up to 10 years' imprisonment.  Procuring a minor for 
prostitution is punishable by imprisonment for 2 to 5 
years and a fine between 300,000 and 4,000,000 CFAF (USD 
575 and 7,600).  The penalties for sex trafficking 
(whether for a minor or an adult) are more severe. 
 
-- D.  Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers 
criminalized?  Are these laws enforced?  If prostitution 
is legal and regulated, what is the legal minimum age for 
this activity?  Note that in many countries with 
federalist systems, prostitution laws may be covered by 
state, local and provincial authorities. 
 
Prostitution is legal in Senegal.  To legally practice 
prostitution, a woman must be at least 21 years old, 
register with the police, carry a valid sanitary card and 
test negative for STIs.  Searching for clients and pimping 
are illegal. 
 
-- E.  Has the Government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences, including 
details on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and 
available.  Are the traffickers serving the time 
sentenced:  If no, why not?  Please indicate whether the 
government can provide this information, and if not, why 
not? (Note: Complete answers to this section are 
essential.  End Note.) 
 
The GOS prosecuted individuals responsible for rape, 
pedophilia, prostitution and abuse of "talibe" children. 
In fact, in the past year, two Koranic teachers were 
convicted and sentenced (though not under the new TIP law) 
for such abuse. 
 
-- F.  Is there any information or reports of who is 
behind the trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers 
freelance operators, small crime groups, and/or large 
 
DAKAR 00000528  009 OF 013 
 
 
international organized crime syndicates?  Are employment, 
travel and tourism agencies or marriage brokers fronting 
for traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals? 
Are government officials involved?  Are there any reports 
on where profits from trafficking in persons are being 
channeled?  (e.g. armed groups, terrorist organizations, 
judges, banks, etc.) 
 
Child traffickers appear to be freelance operators.  GOS 
officials who feel Senegal is a transit country for human 
trafficking of adult women believe European-based networks 
regulate these flows.  NGOs working with prostitutes claim 
networks, even if not highly organized or part of a larger 
criminal syndicate, exist in Senegal. 
 
-- G.  Does the Government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking?  (Again, the focus should be on trafficking 
cases versus migrant smuggling cases.)  Does the 
Government use active investigative techniques in 
trafficking-in-persons investigations?  To the extent 
possible under domestic law, are techniques such as 
electronic surveillance, undercover operations, and 
mitigated punishment or immunity for cooperating suspects 
used by the government?  Does the criminal procedure code 
or other laws prohibit the police from engaging in covert 
operations? 
 
The GOS has actively investigated trafficking cases.  As 
noted above, a trafficking ring bringing Cape Verdeans 
through Senegal and The Gambia to Spain has been 
investigated and broken up; a vessel suspected of 
trafficking has been detained; an orphanage advertising 
children to pedophiles over the Internet has been 
investigated; and marabouts have been arrested and 
prosecuted after investigation.  The police and gendarmes 
use electronic surveillance, undercover operations, and 
other techniques in their investigations 
 
-- H.  Does the Government provide any specialized 
training for government officials in how to recognize, 
investigate, and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
In 2004, 32 police officials participated in two 
iterations of ICITAP-sponsored anti-TIP training in Dakar. 
Some of these officers who were trained in criminal 
analysis participated in additional criminal analysis 
training at an Interpol seminar.  One of the ICITAP- 
sponsored TIP course attendees now heads the newly formed 
anti-trafficking unit, located in the Judicial Police 
headquarters, in the room adjacent to the Interpol office. 
 
-- I.  Does the Government cooperate with other 
governments in the investigation and prosecution of 
trafficking cases?  If possible, can post provide the 
number of cooperative international investigations on 
trafficking? 
 
Senegalese and Malian authorities continued its 
cooperation to repatriate Malian children.  Two Senegalese 
marabouts were arrested in Guinea in February 2006 for 
trafficking in children.  The GOS is working with the 
Government of Guinea in the prosecution of these two 
individuals.  The GOS works regularly with foreign 
security services on clandestine immigration and human 
smuggling cases. 
 
-- J.  Does the Government extradite persons who are 
charged with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can 
post provide the number of traffickers extradited?  Does 
the government extradite its own nationals charged with 
such offenses?  If not, is the government prohibited by 
law form extraditing its own nationals?  If so, what is 
the government doing to modify its laws to permit the 
extradition of its own nationals? 
 
The GOS can extradite individuals but has not done so for 
trafficking purposes. 
 
-- K.  Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
 
DAKAR 00000528  010 OF 013 
 
 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional 
level?  If so, please explain in detail. 
 
No. 
 
-- L.  If government officials are involved in 
trafficking, what steps has the government taken toend 
such participation?  Have any government offcials been 
prosecuted for involvement in trafficing or trafficking- 
related corruption?  Have an been convicted?  What actual 
sentence was imposd?  Please provide specific numbers, if 
available 
 
No GOS officials are known to have been involvd in 
trafficking. 
 
-- M.  If the country has a identified child sex tourism 
problem (as sourceor destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles hasthe government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited o their country of origin?  Does the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial 
coverage (like the U.S. PROTECT Act)? 
 
French newspaper articles and tour guides have described 
Senegal as a destination for sex tourism.  Senegal's 
Tourism Minister claims, however, Senegal is not and will 
not become a destination for sex tourism.  Police have 
arrested foreign tourists for illegal sex acts.  One 
foreign national was arrested March 23 after being caught 
in the act of molesting a 15-year-old boy he had picked up 
from an orphanage/school for children in difficult living 
situations.  At his initial trial, he was convicted of a 
"flagrant delit" (as he was apprehended in the act) and 
sentenced to five years in prison.  He was also ordered to 
pay 1 million CFAF (approximately USD 1,900) to the 
victim.  Upon appeal, his conviction was upheld, but his 
sentence was reduced to three months in prison based in 
part upon alleged poor health.  At that point, he was 
released with time served.  One of the country's leading 
prosecutors indicated that his sentence was reduced for 
"insufficient evidence." 
 
-- N.  Has the Government signed, ratified and/or taken 
steps to implement the following international 
instruments?  Please provide the date of 
signature/ratification if appropriate. 
 
-- ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of 
child labor. 
 
Ratified June 1, 2000. 
 
-- ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory 
labor. 
 
Ratified November 4, 1960 and July 28, 1961 respectively. 
 
-- The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child 
prostitution and child pornography. 
 
Signed September 8, 2000, and ratified November 5, 2003. 
 
-- The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime. 
 
Ratified October 27, 2003. 
 
¶24.  PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
-- A.  Does the Government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If so, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care 
facilities?  If so, can post provide the number of victims 
 
DAKAR 00000528  011 OF 013 
 
 
placed in these care facilities? 
 
The GOS' Ginddi Center provides various services to assist 
trafficking victims.  These services include medical 
treatment, family mediation and reconciliation, education, 
shelter and meals.  According to Family Ministry 
statistics, Ginddi Center received 4,137 children between 
June 2003 and May 2005.  Among these children, 2,571 were 
reunited with their families; 184 were placed in different 
homes.  The Ginddi Center's child protection hotline 
received 150,417 calls during the same period, including 
calls from parents, Koranic teachers and various enquiries 
about children. 
 
-- B.  Does the Government provide funding or other forms 
of support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to 
victims?  Please explain. 
 
GOS representatives attend NGO events on trafficking- 
related and child protection themes, which helps generate 
greater turnout to these events and greater public 
awareness of Senegal's trafficking problems.  The Ministry 
of Family works closely with many Senegalese NGOs, such as 
RADDHO, Avenir de l'Enfant and La Lumiere. 
 
-- C.  Is there a screening and referral process in place, 
when appropriate, to transfer victims detained, arrested 
or placed in protective custody by law enforcement 
authorities to NGO's that provide short- or long-term 
care? 
 
The GOS provides these services through its Ginddi Center. 
While there is no formal referral process between the GOS 
and NGOs, close working relationships between local 
government officials and NGOs active in their districts 
allow for information exchange and intervention in 
particular cases. 
 
-- D.  Are the rights of victims respected, or are victims 
also treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, 
or deported?   If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are 
victims fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of 
other laws, such as those governing immigration or 
prostitution? 
 
The rights of young boys trafficked by religious teachers 
are generally respected, and they are usually provided 
with victim assistance. 
 
Underage and foreign prostitutes are considered criminals. 
On average, 16 prostitutes are checked/questioned every 
day.  Of those 16, approximately three are found in 
violation of the law, arrested and prosecuted every day. 
During the year, 90 foreigners were arrested/prosecuted 
for prostitution - 50 Nigerians and 40 Guineans. 
 
-- E.  Does the Government encourage victims to assist in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May 
victims file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access to 
such legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in 
a court case against the former employer, is the victim 
permitted to obtain other employment or to leave the 
country?  Is there a victim restitution program? 
 
Under the 2005 TIP law, trafficking victims cannot be 
prosecuted for acts taken as a result of their being 
trafficked.  The law also protects the identity of victims 
and permits "closed door" testimony to encourage them to 
serve as witnesses.  They also are permitted to remain 
temporarily or permanently on national territory under the 
status of resident or refugee.  Victims have a right to an 
attorney.  If they cannot afford one, one will be provided 
to them.  Young boys beaten by their Koranic teachers are 
encouraged to assist authorities investigate and prosecute 
cases.  Similarly, illegal prostitutes are questioned 
about their pimps. 
 
-- F.  What kind of protection is the Government able to 
 
DAKAR 00000528  012 OF 013 
 
 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services 
does the government provide?  Does it provide shelter or 
any other benefits to victims for housing or other 
resources in order to aid the victims in rebuilding their 
lives?  Where are child victims placed (e.g. in shelters, 
foster-care type systems or juvenile detention centers)? 
 
The GOS operates the Ginddi Center in Dakar for trafficked 
and at-risk children.  While the Government funds most 
operations, international partners provide some 
assistance. 
 
-- G.  Does the Government provide any specialized 
training for government officials in recognizing 
trafficking and in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, including the special needs of 
trafficked children?  Does the Government provide training 
on protection and assistance to its embassies and 
consulates in foreign countries that are destination or 
transit countries?  Does it urge those embassies and 
consulates to develop ongoing relationships with NGOs that 
serve trafficked victims? 
 
To our knowledge, other than training Ginddi Center 
personnel, the GOS provided no training in 2005. 
 
-- H.  Does the Government provide assistance, such as 
medical aid, shelter, or financial help to its repatriated 
nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
In 2005, almost 1,000 Senegalese were repatriated from 
Morocco, and the GOS is designing a farming project to 
assist them. 
 
-- I.  Which internationals organizations or NGOs, if any, 
work with trafficking victims?  What type of services do 
they provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive 
from local authorities?  NOTE:  If post reports that a 
government is incapable of assisting and protecting TIP 
victims, then post should explain thoroughly.  Funding, 
personnel, and training constraints should be noted, if 
applicable.  Conversely, a lack of political will to 
address the problem should be noted as well. 
 
The following is a non-exhaustive list of NGOs working 
with trafficking victims, their primary target group(s) 
and services: TOSTAN, Koranic students, health, education 
and nutrition; l'Avenir d'Enfant, trafficked boys and 
underage prostitutes, shelter, nutrition, education and 
reconciliation; ATT, Koranic students, health and 
education; and ENDA Sante, illegal prostitutes, health; 
and AWA, prostitutes, job training and health.  RADDHO, 
which works with Koranic students, underage prostitutes, 
and domestics, has a program for the "Socio-Professional 
Integration of Young Migrant Victims of Trafficking," 
which is being funded by the Swiss Foundation for 
International Social Service (SSI).  Local authorities 
support NGO programs through their attendance at public 
events, collaboration on program strategies and activities 
and use of public spaces for activities. 
 
International organizations include: UNICEF, underage 
domestics, underage prostitutes and Koranic students, 
education, and job alternatives; IOM, trafficked children, 
coordinates repatriation of Malian children; Save the 
Children Sweden, Koranic students, education; and ILO, 
underage domestics, underage prostitutes and Koranic 
students, education, and job alternatives. 
 
¶22.  HEROES: Moussa Sow, Director of Avenir de l'Enfant, 
is a TIP hero in every sense of the word.  Last year, his 
organization was cited for best practices in dealing with 
child trafficking victims.  As stated then, Moussa works 
with breathless devotion to keep young girls from 
prostitution and help young boys deal with the trauma many 
of them suffer at Koranic schools.  A former victim of 
abuse, he used his own difficult beginnings as inspiration 
to go out on nearly a daily basis to comb the roughest 
 
DAKAR 00000528  013 OF 013 
 
 
streets of Dakar, Rufisque and other areas for children in 
distress.  Each time he does so, he puts his life and well 
being on the line.  He also visits children in prison, 
reunites countless run-aways with their families -- even 
taking them to their homes in other countries -- and 
follows up with those he has helped into their adulthood. 
He successfully campaigned for a larger center to shelter 
even more children and educate them.  In addition, he has 
served as a witness in international pedophilia cases.  He 
has a family of his own and gets little financial 
remuneration for his work.  Yet, he pursues his mission 
with an unparalleled passion and is able to establish an 
emotional connection with every child he meets.  Because 
of the respect, love and patience that Moussa shows for 
children, they look to him as a true hero.  He is, indeed, 
an extraordinary TIP hero. 
 
¶23.  BEST PRACTICES: AWA is a Senegalese NGO that works 
with former and current prostitutes to provide with 
medical care, vocational training and other services to 
encourage them to find an alternative profession.  AWA has 
launched a new project to train large numbers of women in 
cooking, sewing, tie-dye, and other skills to generate 
income.  It will also combine advocacy and awareness 
programs to teach women about the dangers of prostitution. 
We are recommending this project as a "best practice," 
because it is unique in its attempt to not only pull large 
numbers of vulnerable and probably trafficked women out of 
the perilous field of prostitution but also provide them 
with another way to earn an income and contribute not only 
to their families but also to Senegalese society and 
economy. 
 
¶3.  (U) The Embassy's TIP officer, Rachel Wallace, can be 
reached by phone at 221-823-4296, ext. 2420, and by e-mail 
at WallaceRA@state.gov.  Embassy TIP officer spent over 50 
hours preparing this year's TIP report.  Pol FSN spent 15 
hours, and Econ FSN spent eight. 
 
JACKSON