06KINGSTON542
AMBASSADOR'S MARCH 15 MEETING WITH PRIME
Fri Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKG #0542/01 0762022
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 172022Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2447
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 2338
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM J6 MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM J7 MIAMI FLC O N F I D E N T I A L KINGSTON 000542 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (BENT) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/15/2016 
TAGS: PGOV KCOR PINR JM
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MARCH 15 MEETING WITH PRIME 
MINISTER-ELECT PORTIA SIMPSON MILLER 
 
REF: A. KINGSTON 0402 
     ¶B. POWELL/BENT 3/14/06 E-MAIL 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Thomas C. Tighe.  Reasons 1.4(b) 
 and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) On March 15, the Ambassador called on a visibly weary 
Portia Simpson Miller (PSM), at Jamaica House.  Minister of 
Commerce, Science, Technology, and Energy Phillip Paulwell 
and former Foreign Trade Minister Tony Hylton were also 
present.  In their first formal meeting since the latter's 
triumph in the February 25 PNP election to determine a 
successor to outgoing Prime Minister P.J. Patterson, they 
discussed the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA), the 
importance of education and the success in Jamaica of the 
President's Centers for Excellence in Teacher Training (CETT) 
program.  The Ambassador encouraged Simpson Miller to select 
the best individuals possible for her Cabinet, but was 
constrained in how candid she could be about our concerns 
about corruption by the presence of the highly suspect 
Paulwell.  (We are nevertheless confident that the message 
registered, as Hylton subsequently asked the Canadians, 
disingenuously in our view, whether the Ambassador was trying 
to signal concern.)  Simpson extended a verbal invitation to 
the Secretary to attend the March 30 ceremony marking her 
assumption of the premiership. End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Meeting the Prime Minister-designate 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) On March 15, the Ambassador called on a 
tired-looking Portia Simpson Miller, at Jamaica House.  In 
their first formal meeting since the latter's triumph in the 
February 25 Peoples National Party (PNP) election to 
determine a successor to outgoing Prime Minister P.J. 
Patterson (Ref A), Simpson Miller was joined by Phillip 
Paulwell, Minister of Commerce, Science, Technology, and 
Energy, and Ambassador Tony Hylton, a former Minister of 
Trade;  DCM and Pol/EconCouns (notetaker) accompanied the 
Ambassador. 
 
------------------------ 
Interest in MCA and CETT 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador began by reiterating her 
congratulations on Simpson Miller's victory, and expressed a 
desire to work closely with the GOJ on issues of mutual 
concern, including counternarcotics efforts, and cooperating 
where possible to ensure proper security for the 2007 Cricket 
World Cup.  Noting the budget constraints imposed by U.S. 
commitments in the Middle East and elsewhere, the Ambassador 
nevertheless outlined the potential benefits to Jamaica of 
participation in the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA).  She 
also briefly described the Centers for Excellence in Teacher 
Training (CETT) Program, having recently visited two 
participating CETT schools, and encouraged the PM-elect to 
identify an appropriate member of her team for follow-up on 
both MCA and CETT.  Simpson Miller expressed keen interest in 
both programs, explaining that she intended to "hit the 
ground running" upon taking office.  On the spot, she 
directed Paulwell, Hylton, and Rosalee Hammond (whom she 
described as a policy advisor) to follow up with the Embassy 
for more information. 
 
----------------- 
Cabinet Selection 
----------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The Ambassador also encouraged Simpson Miller to 
select the best individuals available to serve in her 
Cabinet, and noted that her selections were eagerly 
anticipated - and would be closely watched - domestically and 
abroad.  As if anticipating the Ambassador's unspecified 
concerns about Paulwell (and with Paulwell seated next to the 
Ambassador), Simpson Miller specifically stated that she had 
not yet decided who would be her Minister of National 
Security.  (Note:  Per Ref B, on March 13, the Ambassador and 
British High Commissioner Jeremy Cresswell met to discuss 
mutual concerns over the possible inclusion of Paulwell in 
the new Cabinet, and how best to raise the issue with Simpson 
 
Miller in their respective meetings.  Cresswell, who met with 
Simpson Miller later on March 14, subsequently briefed the 
Ambassador.  Paulwell and Hylton also sat in on that meeting, 
he said, which similarly limited what he could say with 
Paulwell present.  End note.) 
 
---------------- 
Early Elections? 
---------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Simpson Miller indicated that she would not make 
wholesale changes until winning a popular mandate in a 
general election.  She implied but did not specifically state 
that she would call early elections, noting that she did not 
want "campaigning" to mar the March-April 2007 Cricket World 
Cup, and that she could not effect a number of Cabinet 
changes she hoped to make without an electoral mandate. 
Simpson Miller implied on several occasions that she would 
like to replace more ministers than was politically 
expedient, or possible.  (Note:  Unlike in the U.S. system, 
where a president can draw Cabinet officers from politics, 
the private sector, academia, or almost anywhere else, in 
Jamaica members of Cabinet must be sitting members of the 
legislature, either as elected MPs or as appointed senators. 
End note.)  Whereas her campaign slogan was "Team Portia", 
Simpson Miller emphasized that she intends to govern 
inclusively as "Team Jamaica," and to continue her campaign 
practice of not answering some critics' vitriolic political 
attacks in kind. Clearly with an eye on the general 
elections, she said she planned to spend as much time as her 
governing responsibilities allowed reaching out to Jamaicans 
on "street corners and rural areas," and that she would 
require her ministers to maintain a more visible public 
presence in the exercise of their portfolios. 
 
--------------------------- 
Invitation to the Secretary 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Noting that the Secretary recently attended 
presidential inaugurations in Liberia and Chile, Simpson 
Miller specifically extended a verbal invitation to the 
Secretary to attend her swearing-in ceremony in Kingston on 
 
SIPDIS 
March 30.  (Paulwell added that specifics on the ceremony 
would soon be forthcoming from the Foreign Ministry.  As of 
March 17, however, we have heard nothing further.  In 
response to a call from the DCM, MFA Permanent Secretary said 
that he, too, was awaiting guidance on the nature and scope 
of the ceremony.)  The Ambassador replied that she would 
convey word of the invitation to the Department. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
A Simpson Miller Rival Awaits His Fate 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Meanwhile, current Minister of National Security Peter 
Phillips, who lost to Simpson Miller on February 25 and whose 
campaign had been sharply critical of the eventual victor, 
requested to meet with a member of the Embassy Country Team 
on March 16.  Apparently wishing to convey a message, he told 
the officer that he has had no contact with Simpson Miller or 
her team about whether or not he will be asked to serve in 
her Cabinet.  Phillips was the second-largest vote-getter on 
February 25, and still commands considerable support and 
respect within the party.  If asked, Phillips continued, he 
would agree to remain in his current post, or assume either 
the Finance Ministry or Foreign Affairs/Foreign Trade 
portfolio.  None of the other ministries interested him, he 
said, and if none is offered, he will simply become a 
back-bencher in Parliament. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Having sewn up the contest to succeed Patterson, 
Simpson Miller is now well along in that hectic transitional 
phase from second-tier minister to the top job.  Paulwell's 
presence at the meeting signaled his importance to Simpson 
Miller and, potentially, his influence in her government. 
Unfortunately, it also limited the candor with which the 
Ambassador could address the corruption issue during the 
meeting.  That said, though her message was couched in terms 
of the importance of selecting the "best" individuals for 
Cabinet, we believe that Simpson Miller, Paulwell, and Hylton 
clearly understood it.  Canadian DCM Brian Burton told DCM 
 
March 16 that Hylton had visited his boss, Canadian High 
Commissioner Claudio Valle, earlier that day to ask Valle 
whether the U.S. Ambassador and the British High Commissioner 
had intended to convey a message to Simpson Miller. 
According to Burton, Valle, who knows Simpson Miller well 
from two previous tours in Jamaica and who planned to have a 
one-on-one conversation with her about corruption concerns, 
responded frankly to Hylton's inquiry.  Valle bluntly 
confirmed to Hylton that the Canadian, U.S. and U.K. missions 
are indeed concerned about Paulwell's reputed illicit 
activities and associations, and by the possibility that he 
(or others like him who supported Simpson Miller's campaign) 
could hold sensitive positions, or wield influence, in her 
government. Burton added that Hylton did not seem surprised 
by Valle's remarks. 
JOHNSON