06KIEV1084
UKRAINE: PRESIDENT SIGNS TWO OF THREE AMENDMENTS
Tue Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kyiv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KIEV 001084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM UP OSCE
SUBJECT: UKRAINE: PRESIDENT SIGNS TWO OF THREE AMENDMENTS 
TO ELECTION LAW 
 
 
(U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for Internet 
distribution.  Please handle accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko signed into 
law March 17 two of the three bills passed by the Rada March 
14, amending parliamentary and local election laws (reftel). 
The bills Yushchenko signed (now known as law No. 3519-IV) 
included provisions allowing District Election Commissions 
(DECs) to recruit more staff members to operate polling 
station commissions (PSCs), allows PSC commissioners to vote 
at the polling station they are working at, and calls on the 
CEC to increase voter education efforts and to encourage 
voters to check their names on the voter list.  The law also 
amended the State Budget of Ukraine to increase funding for 
the election by 137 million UAH ($27 million), primarily to 
increase PSC workers' salaries. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Yushchenko did not sign, and is not expected to 
sign, the third bill passed by the Rada on March 14, amending 
the parliamentary election law to allow citizens to be added 
to the voter list by court order on election day.  The 
current cut-off for inclusion on the voter list by court 
order is three days before election day. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Note:  As reported reftel, Yushchenko and Our 
Ukraine bloc representatives argued that allowing this 
provision to become law would create possibilities for abuse 
by courts in cahoots with local authorities -- whatever the 
party affiliation.  Plus, they added, the Rada decision was 
made contrary to procedure.  Opposition representatives 
argued that inoperational PSCs made the provision necessary, 
if voters were to be able to get their names added to or 
fixed on inaccurate voter lists.  As of March 20, according 
to the Central Election Commission, 96 out of some 33,000 
PSCs still had not been formed, 86 of them in one Kirovohrad 
oblast electoral district. 
 
¶4. (U) Visit Embassy Kiev's classified website: 
www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/kiev. 
Herbst