06MANAGUA609
NICARAGUAN REGIONAL REPORTING--SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
Thu Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0609/01 0751951
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161951Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5622
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 000609 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI ELAB ECON EFIN KIRF SMIG NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN REGIONAL REPORTING--SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
ISSUES: ESTELI AND MADRIZ 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 568 
 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 578 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  During an elections reporting trip to 
the northwestern departments of Esteli and Madriz March 8-10 
(reported in reftels), emboffs discussed a variety of 
economic and social issues with local leaders, including 
representatives of most major political parties, the Catholic 
Church, several non-governmental organizations, and local 
chambers of commerce and other business organizations.  These 
conversations paint a picture of neighboring departments that 
share some common challenges, but that otherwise are heading 
in opposite directions.  Both suffer from poverty and 
unemployment, but Esteli has experienced significant growth 
and economic diversification in recent years, while Madriz 
remains among the poorest parts of the country, survival a 
daily struggle.  END SUMMARY. 
 
RELATIVELY PROSPEROUS ESTELI STILL HAS A LONG WAY TO GO
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (U) Although Esteli suffers from high unemployment 
(estimated at approximately 25 percent by most interlocutors) 
and poverty levels like every other department in Nicaragua, 
the local economy is stronger and more varied than that in 
many other regions, including that of neighboring Madriz. 
The city of Esteli, the departmental capital, is only a 
two-hour drive from Managua on a good road.  Foreign 
investors, mainly from the U.S., have developed a strong 
tobacco cultivation/cigar production sector, much of which 
operates under free trade zone status, and produces 17,000 
cigars per day. 
 
¶3.  (U) Esteli also boasts a strong ranching sector 
(employing 50,000 people) consisting of small and medium 
producers seeking to move beyond production for regional 
consumption and exploit national and international markets 
for meat and dairy products.  The department has a solid 
commercial sector, concentrated in the capital, with over 
7000 different businesses operating.  Good roads, decent 
infrastructure and hotels in the capital, and the 
accessibility of a variety of nature reserves are also 
attracting increasing amounts of visitors and tourism 
investment.  Small scale production of coffee, vegetables and 
basic grains (the latter mostly for subsistence) rounds out 
the departmental economy. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Perfecto Rodriguez, head of the Esteli Rancher's 
Association, told emboffs that the positive economic trends 
are bounded by several factors.  The fear of a Sandinista 
victory in the November national elections limits investment, 
and sows fears of new land and property seizures.  According 
to Rodriguez, some of the rural poor are so certain that the 
Sandinistas will return to power that they have already 
stopped working and are waiting for the FSLN to take office 
and begin handing out seized property and businesses once 
again.  Rodriguez and other local leaders also reported that 
delinquency and thievery have grown significantly in the 
department in recent years, forcing ranchers and others to 
spend resources on security that might otherwise be used to 
increase production.  In both Esteli and Madriz, the illegal 
cutting of trees is also common, and is increasingly carried 
out by organized criminal networks with political connections. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Both Rodriguez and Sergio Padilla, the head of the 
Esteli Chamber of Commerce, reported that the lack of low 
interest agricultural development loans or micro-credits for 
small businesses significantly dampens economic growth in 
Esteli.  However, even with the limited growth that is 
occurring, both stated that Esteli is gradually becoming a 
major economic center for northern Nicaragua, having 
overtaken Matagalpa and closing on Leon.  Even in relatively 
prosperous Esteli, feelings of neglect by the GON are 
widespread, and most interlocutors believe that the 
department has progressed despite the government, not because 
of it. 
 
¶6. (U) The continuing lack of jobs leads many in Esteli to 
seek better opportunities abroad.  Local leaders stated that 
Costa Rica, rather than the U.S., is increasingly the 
destination of choice because it is closer, the trip is safer 
and less costly, and migrants are more likely to successfully 
reach their destination.  Such emigration is reportedly most 
significant in rural areas and the smaller towns that lack 
the relative opportunities of the departmental capital. 
 
MADRIZ AMONG NICARAGUA'S POOREST DEPARTMENTS AND FOCUS IS OFTEN SIMPLY SURVIVAL
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (U) Although Madriz is Esteli's neighbor immediately to 
the north, it is one of the poorest departments in Nicaragua. 
 Most interlocutors described the region as either the 
poorest or the second poorest in the country.  There are no 
accurate official statistics, but local leaders estimated at 
least 60 percent unemployment in the department; some offered 
unemployment numbers significantly higher.  What jobs exist 
are primarily provided by the government (including teachers 
and health care workers), small-scale ranching, and 
subsistence agriculture (mainly rice and corn).  A few 
artisans scrape by and others find seasonal work cutting 
coffee.  The viability of the subsistence agriculture varies 
year by year depending largely on the amount of precipitation 
during the rainy season (roughly May through October). 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The private sector in Madriz is small, barely 
profitable, and provides few jobs.  The free trade zones that 
have lowered unemployment rates somewhat in other departments 
in recent years are entirely absent in Madriz.  With the 
exception of incipient efforts to develop the scenic Somoto 
canyon for visitors, tourism is similarly nonexistent. 
Poverty in some parts of the department is so extreme that 
malnutrition is not uncommon, and illiteracy is widespread. 
A 2004 study by the Ministry of Education found that 47.16 
percent of elementary school children in Madriz suffered 
stunted growth due to malnutrition, the highest rate in the 
entire country.  A significant portion of the population has 
gone abroad in search of employment, and many of those who 
remain depend on remittances and the international donor 
community for survival.  Local (non-Sandinista) leaders 
allege that much of the international aid is channeled 
through NGOs sympathetic to the Sandinista party, and 
Sandinista mayors reportedly distribute such aid only to 
their voters. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Although the GON has maintained one good road 
through the center of Madriz, with this one exception, 
feelings of abandonment by "Managua" (including both the GON 
and the two major opposition parties--the FSLN and the 
Liberal Constitutional Party) are widespread.  Many people 
rightly regard the Managua leadership of both the major 
opposition parties as utterly corrupt and doubt whether any 
future government will actually do anything to improve local 
economic and living conditions. 
TRIVELLI