06PHNOMPENH396
PARLIAMENTARY IMMUNITY RESTORED TO THREE
Wed Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO4416
OO RUEHWEB
DE RUEHPF #0396/01 0601048
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011048Z MAR 06 ZDK CTG UR SVC RUEHZC 8711 0601124
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6137
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1329UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PHNOM PENH 000396 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS; GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KDEM CB
SUBJECT:  PARLIAMENTARY IMMUNITY RESTORED TO THREE 
CAMBODIAN OPPOSITION MPS 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary:  On February 28, the National 
Assembly reinstated parliamentary immunity for three 
opposition MPs, including opposition leader Sam Rainsy 
and approved replacement of a former opposition MP. 
Two nominees from FUNCINPEC were elected to be 
Senators.  PM Hun Sen called on political parties to 
continue their work for the national interest and 
hailed the day as historic for the democratic process 
in Cambodia.  Opposition leader Sam Rainsy and the PM 
spoke with journalists and posed for photos together; 
FUNCINPEC's Prince Norodom Ranariddh hastily departed 
the NA following the vote to avoid journalists' 
questions regarding his rumored mistresses.  End 
Summary. 
 
Opposition Leader Rainsy Returns to the NA 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U)  On February 28, Cambodia's National Assembly, 
presided over by FUNCINPEC leader and NA President 
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, approved reinstatement of 
parliamentary immunity for opposition party leader Sam 
Rainsy and two SRP MPs, Cheam Channy and Chea Poch. 
Sam Rainsy extended his thanks to King Sihamoni for 
granting him a pardon and to the National Assembly for 
reinstating parliamentary immunity to himself and his 
two colleagues.  The session approved SRP choice Mrs. 
Men Monirothana to replace  Khem Veasna, who had 
earlier been dismissed from the party in 2005.  The 
National Assembly's move received praise from PM Hun 
Sen as "the best time of Cambodia's democracy since 
1993."  Speaking to journalists following the 
reinstatement of immunity to Rainsy and the others, the 
PM said that he applauded national reconciliation among 
the three political parties, which was for the 
Cambodian national interest.  Charge lauded the move 
the National Assembly as "a good day for Cambodia's 
democracy." 
 
¶3.  (U)  The National Assembly removed the immunity of 
Sam Rainsy, Cheam Channy and Chea Poch in early 
February 2005.  Subsequently, Cheam Channy was arrested 
and later sentenced in a widely criticized trial to 
seven years in prison for allegedly raising an illegal 
army; Sam Rainsy, who had fled Cambodia following the 
lifting of immunity, was convicted on charges of 
criminal defamation and sentenced in absentia to 18 
months in prison and fined.  Chea Poch also fled 
Cambodia in February 2005 but returned in August 2005; 
he was never convicted of any crime, although criminal 
defamation charges are still pending.  King Sihamoni's 
recent royal pardons to Cheam Channy and Sam Rainsy 
paved the way for the NA to restore the immunity of the 
three MPs. 
 
NA Votes Two FUNCINPEC Nominees to the Senate 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  Also on February 28, Princess Norodom Bopha 
Devi and H.E. Sabou Bacha, nominees from FUNCINPEC, 
were elected to the Senate in a secret ballot at the 
National Assembly.  Princess Norodom Bopha Devi, a 
sister of Prince Norodom Ranariddh, and H.E. Sabou 
Bacha, a former Senator, were among 10 nominees to the 
Senate that included two nominees from the SRP (Thach 
Setha and Ly Nary), as well as six names from other 
parties and civil society.  According to the procedure 
of the secret ballot, each of 118 MPs attending the 
session are eligible to select two of the ten 
candidates nominated from the parties and civil 
society.  Princess Norodom Bopha Devi received the most 
votes at 91, Sabou Bacha 84 votes, Thach Setha 24 
votes, and Ly Nary received 23 votes.  MPs from 
FUNCINPEC and the CPP cast their votes in favor of the 
two candidates from FUNCINPEC, as Hun Sen had said 
earlier that the CPP would not challenge FUNCINPEC for 
the two Senate seats. 
 
Hun Sen and Sam Rainsy:  First Photo Op 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U)  Hun Sen, Sam Rainsy and Tioulong Samaura 
(Rainsy's wife and an SRP parliamentarian) had a 20- 
minute informal conversation in front of the National 
Assembly before the session started.  Reporters 
gathered to listen to the remarks and take photos of 
the political leaders.  Hun Sen reportedly reiterated 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000396  002 OF 003 
 
 
the government's intent to form an authority aimed at 
resolving land disputes.  Concerning actions against 
corrupt government officials and their mistresses, 
Tioulong Samaura told Hun Sen that the SRP fully 
supported the PM's recent remarks signaling his 
intention to penalize such people.  Hun Sen said the 
CPP was good at politics while Sam Rainsy responded 
that his party's strength was in economics.  Hun Sen 
told Sam Rainsy that the CPP needed economic expertise 
while Sam Rainsy responded that the SRP required 
political acumen. 
 
Prince Ranariddh Dogged by PM's Accusations 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U)  The press corps noted that NA Leader Prince 
Norodom Ranariddh has never avoided reporters during 
his two terms as President of the National Assembly. 
Following the NA session on February 28, however, the 
Prince exited the National Assembly via a back door, as 
local and foreign reporters congregated at the front of 
the NA hoping to interview Ranariddh as he departed. 
Observers speculated that Ranariddh wanted to avoid any 
questioning of his rumored affairs and the PM's recent 
criticism of government officials and their mistresses. 
 
¶7. (U)  In his remarks in Kompong Cham on February 26, Hun 
Sen ordered CPP lawmakers to draft a law aimed at corrupt 
officials using government resources to support mistresses, 
who in turn use their illicit relationships with government 
officials to receive bribes and gain positions for relatives 
and friends.  Most observers agree that Hun Sen's remarks 
were aimed at Prince Norodom Ranariddh and his relationships 
with Mrs. Ok Phalla, former wife of former Minister for 
Tourism Veng Sereivuth, and Ms. Duch Sophear, a young 
Cambodian actress. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The PM said he planned to seek assistance from 
France, Australia, Canada and the United States to 
investigate real estate purchased by RGC officials.  He 
accused one official of having purchased two residences for 
a mistress.  (Note:  It is general knowledge that Ranariddh 
bought two large residences for Ok Phalla, who became 
Ranariddh's unofficial wife shortly after she and Veng 
Sereivudh divorced.  In September 2005, Hun Sen refused 
Ranariddh's request to appoint Ok Phalla as Minister of 
Tourism, a position formerly held by her ex-husband.  End 
note.)  Hun Sen also said he would dismiss a number of 
unqualified government officials who had been appointed at 
the behest of mistresses and relatives.  Hun Sen also 
criticized an unidentified official for escorting his 
mistress to an official government function.  (Note:  The 
remark again appears to have been dircted at Ranariddh, who 
took Ok Phalla to an official ceremony in Manila some time 
ago.  A Filipino newspaper reportedly published an article 
about the ceremony and referred to Ok Phalla as Princess. 
The ceremony also was aired on Cambodian television.  End 
Note.) 
 
NA's Next Action:  Constitutional Amendment 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U)  The National Assembly is expected to take up 
the SRP-proposed Constitutional amendment changing the 
votes needed to form a government from a two-thirds 
majority of the NA to a 50 percent plus one formula. 
The new formula will be submitted to the National 
Assembly on March 2.  Hun Sen said DPM Sok An would 
represent the government to consult on the proposed 
Constitutional amendment.  The PM expects there to be 
minimal debate as the three political parties already 
agree that the proposal is a good one, and will prevent 
political impasses in the future. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  The National Assembly vote on February 28 
was another positive step towards returning Cambodia to 
a more democratic playing field and restoring the 
political opposition's parliamentary immunity.  Hun Sen 
and Rainsy's amicable conversation in front of the NA 
was in marked contrast to Ranariddh's hasty retreat out 
the back door, and symbolic of the current relations 
among the three parties.  Despite the PM's public 
remarks, we do not anticipate a draft law targeting 
mistresses in the near future.  Extramarital affairs 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000396  003 OF 003 
 
 
are not confined to a single political party and while 
Ranariddh's well-publicized affairs are an 
embarrassment to FUNCINPEC, other public figures - 
including the PM - have been rumored to stray on 
occasion.  We doubt CPP lawmakers will be pushing for 
legislation anytime soon.  End Comment. 
 
MUSSOMELI