06SANJOSE571
COSTA RICA MEDIA REACTION TO 2005 HUMAN RIGHTS
Fri Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000571 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN JASON MACK, AND DRL/CRA GREG MAGGIO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA MEDIA REACTION TO 2005 HUMAN RIGHTS 
REPORT 
 
 
¶1.  As anticipated, most local news organizations reported on 
this week's release of the annual Human Rights Report (HRR). 
Several news dailies published brief synopses of the reports 
for all Central American countries, and several noted the 
HRR's overall positive tone.  Accounts of the report 
generally reflected the relatively good review given to Costa 
Rica, especially when viewed in a regional context.  Of the 
various areas for improvement noted in the HRR, prison 
overpopulation and child sexual exploitation were most 
frequently cited by the press.  All news outlets appeared to 
accept the results equably. 
 
¶2.  Guillermo Arroyo, director of the prison system, and 
Rosalia Gil, head of PANI, the national child welfare agency, 
gave separate radio interviews for their respective takes on 
the HRR.  While Arroyo reacted defensively to the mildly 
critical review of the prison system, Ms. Gil took the 
opportunity to identify programs already underway to combat 
child sexual exploitation and child labor. 
 
¶3.  In the only editorial piece related to the HRR, daily 
newspaper La Prensa Libre voiced its support for continued 
annual human rights reports, and lauded the report's findings 
on Cuba, Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador, specifically 
noting that the human rights practices of all four were 
appropriately and accurately reported.  However, the editors 
went on to question the USG's standing to prepare the report, 
stating that the USG lacks the requisite moral authority to 
prepare an effective criticism.  To back up this statement, 
the editors cited the Guantanamo Bay prison system and 
discussed at length the uncertainty faced by Cuban refugees 
who are convicted of crimes in the U.S.  The article avers 
that the U.S. should take care to abide by the precepts 
outlined in the HRR in order to preserve the credibility of 
the document. 
LANGDALE