06SOFIA394
BULGARIA: PRIME MINISTER ON BASING
Thu Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2006
SECRET
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO1066
PP RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV
DE RUEHSF #0394/01 0751356
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 161356Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1611
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITYS E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SOFIA 000394 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR AND PM - AMBASSADOR LOFTIS 
OSD FOR PETE NAJERA AND LESLEY YOUNG 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/16/2016 
TAGS: MARR PGOV PREL KPAO RU BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIA: PRIME MINISTER ON BASING 
 
REF: A. STATE 41169 
     ¶B. 05 SOFIA 02123 
 
Classified By: DCM Jeff Levine for reasons 1.4 (a) and (d). 
 
¶1. (S) SUMMARY.  Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev told 
Ambassador on March 15 that Bulgaria remains committed to a 
successful conclusion of the basing negotiations, although 
additional consultations between the ruling coalition's party 
leaders are necessary.  Following these consultations, 
according to Stanishev, the Council of Ministers on March 23 
will provide Bulgaria's negotiators an updated mandate to 
address the final unresolved issues.  For the first time, the 
Bulgarians explicitly acknowledged that Russia is very 
sensitive about the proposed shared bases, with special 
concerns about a possible U.S. presence in northeast 
Bulgaria.  The Ambassador used points provided reftel A to 
address GOB concerns, and Stanishev expressed appreciation 
for the additional information.  Despite a few recent bright 
spots, negative publicity and misinformation continue to 
surround the basing proposals, and the GOB recognizes the 
major public information/relations challenge it is facing. 
Bulgaria's lead negotiator confirmed from Brussels that he is 
ready to resume negotiations March 22.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (S) During the discussion, Stanishev agreed that the 
Secretary's expected visit in April for the NATO Ministerial 
 
SIPDIS 
would be a prime opportunity to sign the agreement, but 
cautioned "that should not be a goal in itself."  More 
important, according to Stanishev, is an agreement that 
presents the bases in a strategic context and allows the GOB 
to demonstrate that its national interests are 
"well-defended."  There is enough support within the 
three-party coalition, Stanishev said, to overcome negative 
public pressure.  Apologizing for the delay in providing a 
final mandate to the negotiators, Stanishev said coalition 
partner and head of the Simeon Movement Simeon Saxe-Coburg 
was out of the country and unavailable until next week.  He 
and Turkish leader Ahmed Doghan, according to Stanishev, have 
received most of their information regarding the negotiations 
through press coverage and need to be consulted on the final 
issues. 
 
¶3. (S) The Ambassador used reftel A points to explain our 
positions on the troop numbers and proposed facilities that 
had raised concerns, stressing these did not reflect 
substantive changes in our overall basing concept.  PM 
Advisor Valentin Radomirski, who participated in the 
discussion, noted that the inclusion of Shabla Training Area 
in northeast Bulgaria, is a very sensitive point for the 
Russians.  Shabla had been used by Russia for training 
exercises during the Warsaw Pact days, according to 
Radomirski "and there's still a lot of cold war thinking 
going on." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Negative press coverage continues to dominate on the 
issue including a March 11 interview with Russian Col-Gen. 
Mazurkevich.  Mazurkevich not so subtly questioned the 
permissibility of the basing arrangement under NATO-Russia 
agreements, implied the U.S. is after control of the Black 
Sea and concluded "The US bases are your business, but we too 
would like you to sometimes listen to the opinion of your 
neighbors, as thousands of their sons lost their lives for 
Bulgaria's freedom."  His comments joined a regular flow of 
negative reporting/commentary that has focused on lack of 
respect for Bulgaria's sovereignty, the possible presence of 
nuclear weapons and the possibility of U.S. attacks against 
third countries from these bases - specifically Iran. Playing 
on these fears, the ultra-nationalist Ataka party introduced 
a bill in Parliament February 25 calling for a national 
referendum on the basing agreement that was rejected 120 to 
18 with two abstentions. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Unfortunately, Ataka's charges continue to resonate 
with the public.  According to polling commissioned by the 
Embassy in January, roughly two thirds of Bulgarians oppose a 
basing agreement with the U.S., unchanged from earlier 
polling data (reftel B).  As viewed by the public, the main 
concerns are: 
 
- Threat to the country's security, risk of terrorist 
attacks, and danger of military attacks -- from and on the 
bases; 
 
- Violation of Bulgaria's independence/sovereignty, 
interference with the country's policies, opposition to a 
 
SOFIA 00000394  002 OF 002 
 
 
foreign military presence on Bulgarian territory; 
 
- Environmental dangers including pollution and hazards to 
the local population. 
 
¶6. (SBU) More than half of the polling respondents who were 
opposed to the agreement, however, did not give a reason for 
their opposition.  This suggests that a large portion of the 
population remains uninformed on the issue and could be 
positively influenced by a government information effort and 
pro-basing public diplomacy activities.  In a recent 
discussion of the issue with parliamentarians, members of the 
Defense and Foreign Affairs Committees stressed the 
importance to the public of "real political, social, and 
economic activities."  MPs implied that much of the public's 
skepticism comes from a cynical belief that the government 
cannot defend Bulgaria's interests, especially when 
negotiating with a much stronger partner.  Former deputy 
defense minister Ilko Dimitrov said it is vital for the 
public to perceive that "Bulgaria is an equal partner" in the 
negotiations and that "the U.S. is not imposing its views" on 
its smaller ally. 
 
¶7. (SBU) In recent days, several more positive views have 
emerged including a commentary in the Socialist newspaper 
Duma assuring the public that Bulgarian interests are being 
protected in the negotiations; an informative interview with 
Angel Naidenov, head of the Parliamentary Defense Committee 
and supportive statements from Sofia's popular mayor Boiko 
Borrisov.  The Ambassador and Prime Minister agreed both 
sides should continue to stress the strategic relationship 
into which the basing agreement fits, the Bulgarian identity 
of these bases (Bulgarian flag and commanders) and 
transparency regarding the agreement itself. 
 
¶8. (C) COMMENT.  As it did with the Iraq follow-on mission, 
the GOB has been using a "slow release" public affairs 
strategy presenting a successful outcome to the negotiations 
as a fait accompli.  This remains the expected conclusion, 
but continued public resistance and opposition within the 
Prime Minister's own Socialist party make it another 
difficult decision for the Government.  Expeditious 
conclusion of the negotiations is advantageous to both sides. 
 We continue to believe that public attitudes will change 
once the agreement is signed and we are able to demonstrate 
the advantages of hosting U.S. troops. Our most effective 
means of countering criticism will be the trouble-free 
presence of U.S. forces in Bulgaria.  END COMMENT. 
Beyrle