06TELAVIV1105
H5N1 CONFIRMED IN ISRAEL POULTRY DEATHS; ONE
Mon Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TEL AVIV 001105 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/IPA, NEA/RA, OES/IHA, OPS CENTER 
GENEVA FOR WHO REP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KFLU TBIO EAGR AMGT AMED CASC KSCA KWBG IS ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY GOI INTERNAL ISRAELI SOCIETY
SUBJECT: H5N1 CONFIRMED IN ISRAEL POULTRY DEATHS; ONE 
MILLION BIRDS TO BE CULLED 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 1087 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: On March 19, the Kimron Veterinary 
Institute Laboratory at Bet Dagan confirmed the presence of 
the H5N1 strain of avian influenza in turkey flocks from the 
kibbutzim at Ein Hashelosha and Holit, and at Sede Moshe and 
Nahshom.  The outbreak has not spread beyond these areas 
(identified previously in reftel).  There are no confirmed 
human cases of H5N1.  Seven poultry workers from the 
affected region in the Negev, previously hospitalized for 
testing and observation, were discharged over the weekend, 
after their serology was found to be negative for the 
presence of the H5N1 antigens.  The MOA is taking steps to 
prevent the spread of the disease through the culling of 
approximately one million birds in the three-kilometer 
radius of the affected turkey farms.  Assessment of the 
economic impact of the outbreak is just beginning.  The 
Cabinet met March 19 to discuss a compensation package for 
affected poultry farmers.  Cooperative efforts between MOA 
and Israeli Veterinary Services officials, and Veterinary 
Service in Gaza and West Bank PA MOA officials are underway. 
Meetings were scheduled for today at the Erez crossing and 
on March 21 in Beit-Il near Ramallah to discuss coordination 
of epidemiological efforts, disease control and possible 
technical assistance.  The GOI has announced that there is 
no significant public health risk.  End Summary 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
H5N1 CONFIRMED IN FOWL, NO CASES CONFIRMED IN HUMANS 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) There are no confirmed human cases of H5N1 
avian influenza.  Seven poultry workers from the affected 
region in the Negev, who were hospitalized for testing and 
observation, were discharged over the weekend, after their 
serology was found to be negative for the presence of the 
H5N1 antigens. 
 
¶3.  (U) According to the Director of the Ministry of 
Health's Emergency and Disaster Management Division Dr. Laor 
Daniel, the MOH is administering Tamiflu as a prophalactic 
treatment to approximately sixty individuals, comprised 
primarily of poultry workers and MOA/MOD culling team 
members, who may have come in contact with infected birds. 
As a surveillance and monitoring measure, the MOH has sent 
blood samples from several dozen of poultry workers from the 
affected farms for laboratory testing. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Both PCR testing and pathogen isolation by egg 
inoculation conducted at Kimron Veterinary Institute have 
confirmed the presence of the H5N1 in tissue samples from 
dead birds sent from each of the affected turkey farms. 
What is unknown at this time is the source of the outbreak 
of the H5N1 avian influenza outbreak.  MOA Director of 
Veterinary Services Dr. Moshe Haimovich told econoff that 
one possible theory of vector transmission is that cages 
used to transport fowl from one or more or the outbreak 
sites to the slaughtering facility were not properly 
disinfected before reusing the cages to transport fowl from 
other sites. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
ONE MILLION BIRDS EXPECTED TO BE CULLED 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) On March 18 and 19, Ministry of Agriculture teams 
supervised the initial culling of birds at the affected 
turkey farms located at Ein Hashlosha and Holit kibbutzims, 
and at Moshav Sde Moshe, and within a three-kilometer 
radius.  Approximately 10,200 turkeys were destroyed at Ein 
Hashelosha, 21,000 turkeys at Holit, and 6,000 turkeys at 
Sede Moshe.  On March 20, culling of fowl within a three- 
kilometer radius continued at Kibbutz Sufa near Holit and at 
the Kissufim and Nirim kibbutzim near Ein Hasholsha.   MOA 
teams, aided by Defense Ministry contractors, plan to begin 
culling 19,500 turkeys at the affected farm located at 
Nachshon on March 21.  Fowl will also be culled within a 
three-kilometer radius at Kibbutz Harel, and the Tekoa and 
Tzalfon moshavim.  The MOA expects the completion of the 
culling of approximately one million fowl by the end of the 
week. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Ministry of Agriculture anticipates the 
arrival of a shipment of four million doses of avian 
influenza vaccine for poultry from the Netherlands within 
the next day or so.  No decision has been made at this time 
as to whether the vaccine will be used.  The vaccine would 
be used if the measures undertaken in the affected areas 
prove to be ineffective.  Dr. Hamovich expressed to econoff 
March 19 that Ministry of Agriculture is cautiously 
optimistic that they have contained the outbreak in the four 
quarantined areas. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT OF SITUATION JUST BEGINNING 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7.  (U) The impact on the poultry industry in Israel was 
felt immediately following the announcement of the avian 
influenza outbreak in the press on March 17 when the 
European Commission announced that it was placing a 
temporary ban on the import of poultry products from Israel 
following the preliminary confirmation of the H5N1 strain at 
four turkey farms.  According to a report in the Jerusalem 
Post, the EU will convene this week to review the ban. 
 
¶8.  (U) Consumer demand for poultry products has decreased, 
despite public safety assurances made by the MOH and MOA. 
In particular, sales dropped in outdoor markets.  Stall 
owners in Tel Aviv's Carmel outdoor market reported a fifty 
percent drop in poultry sales on Friday. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Israel Farmers Organization is already 
lobbying the GOI for full compensation to poultry farmers 
who have lost livestock in the affected areas.  Poultry 
farmers are entitled to a pro-rated compensation package to 
offset their financial losses under a GOI statute pertaining 
to the destruction of poultry ordered by a governmental 
entity to prevent a disease outbreak.  Under this statute, 
the GOI would reimburse farmers for approximately seventy 
percent of direct costs they incurred.  Compensation is also 
based on the market age of the flock.  Typically, turkey 
farmers earn 55 shekels for each female bird and 110 shekels 
for each male bird that they sell.  In anticipation of a 
potential avian influenza outbreak, the MOA updated the 
Compensation Tables two months ago which will assist poultry 
farmers in receiving a realistic market price for the 
poultry they lost.  A preliminary estimate of the 
compensation package a farmer would receive for a flock of 
200,000 birds is one to seven million NIS.  This amount does 
not include the expenses required to restart production. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
MOA REACHES OUT TO PALESTINIAN VETERINARY SERVICE 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) According to the MOA, cooperative efforts between 
Israeli Veterinary Services officials and PA Veterinary 
Service officials in Gaza and West Bank are underway.   A 
meeting took place today at the Erez crossing; another is 
scheduled for March 21 in Beit-Il near Ramallah to discuss 
coordination of epidemiological efforts, disease control and 
possible technical assistance. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Dr. Haimovich told econoff that instructional 
DVDs on preventing the spread of avian influenza were sent 
to the IDF Office at Erez on March 19 for distribution to 
the Veterinary Service in Gaza. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) One item which is still pending is a decision 
from the MOH on Dr. Hamovich's request to provide personal 
protective equipment (PPEs) to Palestinians.  Dr. Laor 
Daniel, Director of the MOH Emergency and Disaster 
Management Division told ESTH Officer March 20 that the MOH 
was waiting for a formal request from the Palestinian MOH.