06BEIRUT2538
TFLE01: LEBANON,S YOUNG PROFESSIONALS ON
Sat Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO1542
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHLB #2538/01 2171338
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 051338Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4909
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIRUT 002538

SIPDIS

SIPDIS

NSC FOR ABRAMS/DORAN/SINGH/HARDING

E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/03/2016
TAGS: ASEC IS LE PREL PTER SY
SUBJECT: TFLE01: LEBANON,S YOUNG PROFESSIONALS ON
HIZBALLAH, AMERICA, AND THEIR FUTURE

Classified By: Jeffrey Feltman, Ambassador. Reason; Section 1.4 (b) a
nd (d).

¶1. (C) SUMMARY: On August 3 PolOff hosted a dinner at his
residence in the Embassy compound. The guests were young
professionals in the government, media, and private sectors.
They are disappointed that in their view Israel is losing the
war against Hizballah. These educated, Christian
professionals describe Hassan Nasrallah as a man of vision,
commitment, and leadership. They are questioning the U.S.,
commitment to Lebanon and warn that the U.S. is losing ground
among its friends in Lebanon. Among this group, the hope for
a future that does not reflect Lebanon,s bloody past is
diminishing. END SUMMARY

¶2. (C/NF) PolOff hosted a dinner in his residence on the
Embassy compound to maintain contact with young professionals
in the public, private, and media sectors. The guests
included Ms. Mona Saliba, a Lebanese Broadcast Station (LBC)
reporter who covered the first two weeks of the conflict in
southern Lebanon; Ms. Nayla Tueni, the daughter of
assassinated MP and Al Nahar publisher Gebran Tueni; Mr.
Rabih El Chaer, an advisor to the Minister of Transportation;
and Mr. Selim Abu Samra, an entrepreneur in event-planning
and management. The guests car pooled to overcome the
current fuel shortage and ignored threats of strikes in
Beirut to venture to the Embassy compound for the evening.
Amidst the stress of economic, social, and security crises,
this exchange was an opportunity to remain engaged with less
heard voices in Lebanese society.

¶3. (C/NF) The group was from the middle to upper middle
class, Christian community living in the Mount Lebanon
region. For them, Israel is an enemy until it signs a peace
treaty with Lebanon. They want, however, to see Israel
succeed in weakening Hizballah. These democratic-minded
individuals agree that there is no room for armed political
parties and admit that prior to the conflict the Lebanese
government could not disarm Hizballah via political or
military means.

¶4. (C/NF) After over three weeks of fighting, the group is
disappointed with what Abu Samra calls Israel,s &military
unwillingness to fully commit itself to its political
goals.8 Israel wants to disarm Hizballah, but is not ready
to make the massive ground incursion that is needed to do so.
In their view, it is evident that Israel is losing this war
because large numbers of rockets are still being fired into
Israel, no villages in the south have been &really taken8
by IDF, and Hizballah is winning the media battle.

Nasrallah is
&The Man8
------------

¶5. (C/NF) Hassan Nasrallah received high marks among the
group. Although they do not agree with his political
philosophy, he is described as a man of vision, commitment,
and nerve. Tueni exclaimed that Nasrallah is the only
&man8 in the government. They applauded his calm and
confident demeanor in press appearances during the past
weeks. They also cited his detailed planning of underground
tunnels and military strategy as a tribute to his leadership
ability. Abu Samra joked that he would gladly organize a
leadership seminar in which Nasrallah would be the keynote
speaker.

¶6. (C/NF) Tueni remarked that the single worst disaster that
could result from this war is killing Nasrallah. The group
agreed that Nasrallah is moderate in his thinking when
compared to other Shia leaders. Chaer reminded the group
that Nasrallah promised that his weapons weer only to resist
Israeli aggression and not to be used against other Lebanese.
Thus far his words have held true. Chaer also believes that
House Speaker Nabih Berri,s condemnation of the July 30
attack on the United Nations House by Hizballah supporters
came at the request of Nasrallah among others.

¶7. (C/NF) Both Tueni and El Chaer mentioned Hasham Safedine
as the probable successor to Nasrallah if he is killed.
Safedine was described as exponentially more radical than
Nasrallah and would pose a serious threat not only to Israel,
but the Christian, Sunni, and Druze communities in Lebanon.
In his thirties, Safedine is a member of the internal
Hizballah Assembly and head of the political council of
Hizballah.

BEIRUT 00002538 002 OF 002

Questioning U.S.
Commitment
----------------

¶8. (C/NF) The group questioned USG commitment to Lebanon.
They commented that the United States has simply &sat back
and watched8 as their country is being destroyed. PolOff
reminded the group of the USG efforts to help MEA evacuate
its fleet from Beirut and the continued efforts to supply
electricity plants with fuel. Abu Samra commented that these
efforts are appreciated but completely overshadowed by the
popular theory that Israel is acting at the command of the
U.S. (Comment: Nasrallah reinforced this perception during
his August 3 national television appearance. End Comment.)
Saliba, who has gained wide recognition for her in-depth
coverage of the conflict on LBC, stated that the good will
that the U.S. has worked so hard to gain in the past years is
quickly diminishing among all communities in Lebanon. The
"carte blanche8 with which Israel is operating in Lebanon is
seen to be issued by the U.S., she cautioned.

Losing Hope
-----------

¶9. (C/NF) These young, educated, productive citizens are
losing hope for the future of Lebanon. They are unified in
their admiration for &beautiful Lebanon,8 but question
their ability to continue living here if the present fighting
is not the final conflict in Lebanon,s long history of
violence. &A war took my childhood and I am afraid wars
will take my adulthood,8 said Saliba. Only months ago she
was offered a position with Al Hurra in Washington D.C., but
refused the position because of the new opportunities that
were on the horizon in Lebanon. She now regrets that
decision. Tueni, who is still mourning the assassination of
her father in December 2005, feels compelled to remain in
Lebanon. She admits that she thinks about moving to France,
where she has resided in the past, to live in peace. However
she realizes that she is forced to remain in Lebanon to
fulfill her responsibilities with her family,s Al-Nahar
Newspaper. Abou Smara, who also carries British citizenship,
will give Lebanon another chance. This will be the third
time that his business suffers from conflict, but for better
or worst he hopes &this is the last war.8

Comment
--------

¶10. (C/NF) The gathering was held before the Israeli bombing
attacks against bridges along the coastal road in heavily
Christian areas of Mount Lebanon. PolOff called the guests
for their views now that the war has hit closer to home.
They believe that strikes in the Mount Lebanon area will
strengthen Nasrallah,s support among Christians and diminish
already weakening support for the U.S. in traditionally
pro-American areas.
FELTMAN