08BEIRUT693
LEBANON: FACEBOOK - YOUTH GO ONLINE TO OPPOSE
Thu May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO5144
RR RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHLB #0693 1361219
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151219Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1888
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BEIRUT 000693 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR OEXC SCUL AINT KPAO LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: FACEBOOK - YOUTH GO ONLINE TO OPPOSE 
POLITICAL SITUATION 
 
REF: BEIRUT 347 
 
¶1. Summary: Facebook, a social networking site, is one online 
medium Lebanese youth have used to react to the political 
instability and violence plaguing the country since May 7. 
Many have made their opinions public by posting comments on 
their profiles, changing their profile pictures to patriotic 
symbols or joining a burgeoning number of Facebook groups 
dedicated to Lebanese causes. While some Facebook members 
defend the opposition's campaign to bring down the 
government, the majority oppose ongoing "civil disobedience" 
and call for a peaceful, united Lebanon. End summary. 
 
¶2. Young Lebanese have gone online to voice their opinions 
about their country's ongoing political strife. With more 
than 309,000 members in Lebanon, 50% of whom are 22 years or 
younger, Facebook has a membership cutting across the wide 
religious, geographic and political spectrum of this tiny, 
fractured country. Lebanon's youth have aired their 
frustrations in their profiles by posting comments like, "I 
am sick of this pathetic excuse for a country" and "They 
should all burn in hell like they are burning our lovely 
country." Weaving in sarcasm, one "wonders if wars should be 
factored into Lebanese calendars." One Public Diplomacy (PD) 
program alumnus emphatically states, "(expletive) every 
single (expletive) person who is (expletive) following those 
(expletive) politicians in this (expletive) country! Excuse 
me for the word country." Of course, not all voices are in 
unison. One Christian advises the Hizballah leader, "Don't 
believe them, Mr. Hassan; they are liars! Keep the airport 
closed until Israel, the USA, Japan and why not Canada leave 
(Lebanon)." One request, though, sums up the Facebook 
majority sentiment: "We've had enough...khalass (enough)." 
 
¶3. Another way for several people to express solidarity with 
their homeland is through their profile pictures. Members' 
faces disappeared, replaced with patriotic symbols such as 
the Lebanese flag or the revered cedar tree. 
 
¶4. The Embassy's profile (reftel) received invitations to 
join several groups (some in Arabic, most in English) 
dedicated to Lebanese causes. While the vast majority protest 
violence and support a unified Lebanon, a few back the 
opposition, including Hizballah. Admittedly, tracking down 
the sparse number of pro-opposition groups, such as "Amal and 
Hizballah together always" and "Why are you crying (Prime 
Minister) 'FooFoo' Siniora? Because I want Condeleeza," 
required some searching. While these groups have small 
memberships, as little as 14, the largest, "Orange Lebanon" 
in support of opposition MP Michel Aoun's Free Patriotic 
Movement, registers 11,300. 
 
¶5. The overwhelming majority of groups dedicated to the 
current conflict protest violence. Names like "No civil war" 
and "Stop war in Beirut" are attracting thousands of members. 
"Stop war," for example, has 42,000 people registered. 
Another set of groups rally support for Future TV whose 
studios were ransacked and burned by opposition forces on May 
10, forcing them off the air. (Note: Future resumed 
broadcasting on May 13 from temporary studios in Sin El Fil, 
in Christian East Beirut. End note.) One group even supports 
the beleaguered airport, without commercial air service after 
the opposition blocked access roads to the facility. "Rafiq 
Hariri Airport is a beacon for Lebanon and will not become 
Hassan Nasrallah Airport" reads one group with more than 
3,000 supporters. 
 
¶6. Comment: Facebook is the top visited website in Lebanon, 
ahead of Internet giants Google and Yahoo. Aside from being a 
social destination for Lebanese to view each other's pictures 
chronicling wild Beirut nights, beach excursions and school 
graduations, Facebook contains political content, of 
increasing importance to youth in Lebanon. The Embassy 
profile, however, remains apolitical, designed to promote PD 
programs to Lebanese from all backgrounds, especially those 
outside of the Embassy's physical reach. End comment. 
SISON