08BEIRUT540
LEBANON:  SHOOTING IN ZAHLE KILLS TWO PHALANGE MEMBERS
Mon Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO3570
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHLB #0540 1121429
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211429Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1586
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS BEIRUT 000540 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON:  SHOOTING IN ZAHLE KILLS TWO PHALANGE MEMBERS 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) On April 20, two members of former President Amine Gemayel's 
Phalange party ("Kataeb") were killed and two others wounded during 
a shooting incident at a party branch office.  During an 
inauguration ceremony for the new office, two Zahle residents, 
followers of MP Elie Skaff (who is allied with Free Patriotic 
Movement Michel Aoun) became angry when they were purportedly 
stopped by roadblocks from passing through near the office.  They 
returned later in the evening and shot at Phalange party members. 
The security services are pursuing the suspects and the cousin of 
one suspect turned himself in to the Internal Security Force.  This 
intra-Christian incident indicates mounting political tension.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) On April 20, two members of former President Amine Gemayel's 
Phalange party ("Kataeb") were shot dead and two others were injured 
in a shooting that took place at the inauguration of a Phalange 
branch office in Zahle.  While press accounts vary somewhat, it 
appears that road blocks were set up during a ceremony to open the 
office.  Joseph Zouki and his brother, followers of MP Elie Skaff 
(an ally of Free Patriotic Movement Michel Aoun and rival of 
Gemayel), who live on the same street in Zahle, were upset when 
barred from entry by the Internal Security Forces (ISF).  Returning 
after the roadblock was removed, they shot at Phalange party 
members, killing two and wounding two others. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Press reports indicate that the security services have 
launched a massive manhunt for the suspected killers.  Zouki, who 
has a prior criminal record and has served time in jail, is still at 
large, and his cousin has turned himself into the ISF.  It is not 
yet confirmed whether his cousin was at the Phalange office when the 
crime occurred. 
 
¶4.  (U) The Phalange party issued a statement noting that the 
shooting took place shortly after Sami Gemayel, son of Amine, left 
the inauguration.  Amine Gemayel immediately summoned members of the 
party's politburo at his mansion in Bikfaya to discuss the attack. 
Prime Minister Fouad Siniora telephoned Gemayel and offered his 
condolences.  Siniora also made phone calls to ISF DG Ashraf Rifi 
and Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) Commander Michel Suleiman asking 
them to intensify their search efforts and to arrest the culprits. 
 
¶5.  (U) Gemayel called for restraint and calm and urged the 
government as well as the security authorities to bring the culprits 
to justice without delay.  "The criminal is not Shaker al-Absi.  He 
is known.  We demand the government and the security forces put 
their hands on the criminals as soon as possible," Gemayel added. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In a telephone conversation with the Charge, Gemayel said 
he suspected that the culprit had crossed the border into Syria and 
added that this attack was clearly pre-meditated and he expects more 
violence before the issue is resolved.  Gemayel said he has been 
publicly calling for calm, but added that it should be Skaff's 
people calling for calm because "We are the victims." 
 
¶7.  (SBU) For his part, MP Skaff denounced the shooting and 
telephoned Amine Gemayel to offer his condolences.  Skaff, who 
blamed the overall political tension in the country, told us on 
April 21 "the Phalange party as well as the Lebanese Forces have 
been carrying out provocative measures against my supporters for 
more than two years and unfortunately all of my warnings and efforts 
to contain the situation have fallen on deaf ears." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) This is the most violent attack since the January 27 Mar 
Mikhael riots.  This incident occurred between two Christian rival 
parties.  Surprisingly, this attack was carried out by Skaff's 
supporters.  Skaff is not known for harboring trouble-makers and 
thugs.  However, this incident will leave its mark on Skaff's 
popularity in his hometown Zahle.  End comment.