09AITTAIPEI208
MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY CLINTON'S ASIA TRIP
Tue Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0208/01 0550953
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240953Z FEB 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0971
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8946
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0396UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 00208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY CLINTON'S ASIA TRIP 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused February 
24 news coverage on the debate between the ruling and opposition 
parties over whether Taiwan should sign a Comprehensive Economic 
Cooperation Agreement (CECA) with China; on the 81st Academy Awards 
held in Hollywood Sunday; and on the on-going investigation into the 
corruption case against former President Chen Shui-bian and his 
family.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" discussed what it believes to be 
U.S. President Barack Obama's "twofold" diplomatic mechanism.  The 
article said that Obama did not hand his heavy diplomatic 
responsibilities over to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton but has 
appointed special envoys to help to resolve his diplomatic problems. 
 An editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" hailed the United States for having shown refreshing 
changes in its foreign policy, including its China policy.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "Obama's Twofold Diplomatic Mechanism" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 150,000] wrote (2/23): 
 
"U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has concluded her 
diplomatic visit to Asia, and her first diplomatic trip overseas can 
be summed up in just two words: 'nothing remarkable.'  Why so?  It 
is because [what she did] does not represent the entirety of [U.S. 
President Barack] Obama's foreign [policy], and Obama did not hand 
his heavy diplomatic responsibilities over to Clinton.  Perhaps the 
importance of National Security Council will outweigh that of the 
State Department in the future.  Obama will grasp the diplomatic 
decision-making authority tightly in his hands, and he is to divide 
[the United States'] foreign relations into two pillars -- namely, 
one will be general foreign relations and the other will be foreign 
relations done by special envoys.  The State Department will take 
the lead in terms of general foreign relations, and it is the 
responsibility of the Secretary of State to convey the diplomatic 
ideas of the Obama Administration to other countries in the world. 
Coordinating with other countries to work with the United States is 
a task for which Hillary is quite competent, and her background 
weighs significantly in the political arenas in most countries in 
the world. ... 
 
"The special-envoy type of foreign relations refers to those who are 
designated to resolve [diplomatic] disputes.  Vice President Joseph 
Biden went to Europe to resolve problems; ... U.S. Mideast envoy 
George Mitchell has completed the first round of his mediation job, 
whereas Richard Holbrooke's mission in South Asia is to strive for 
breakthroughs in Afghanistan and Pakistan. ...  There are quite a 
few candidates in the Democratic Party capable of doing the job of 
Secretary of State, and they are surely more outstanding than 
Clinton.  It appears that Obama appointed Clinton because he wants 
her to do the first kind of diplomatic job, and he himself will be 
in charge of the second type of [diplomatic] tasks.  The Secretary 
of State will use soft [power] to promote the diplomatic ideas of 
the Obama Administration, while the appointed envoys will push 
forward Obama's diplomatic tasks more powerfully.  Judging from the 
current situation, Vice President Biden's influence will likely 
prevail over that of Clinton in terms of foreign decision-making. 
If Clinton wants to be a Secretary of State who gets the ascendancy, 
the chances are zero, or she will definitely clash with the White 
House, and the seeds of a breakup will be sowed between the two." 
 
 
B)   "U.S. Changing Tone on China" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (2/24): 
 
"Barely in office for a month, President Barack Obama has redefined 
the United States' China policy - no longer placing human rights 
concerns above pressing strategic issues. ...  To re-establish 
America as a trusted great power, Washington needs to listen, learn 
and lead.  Thus far, the report card shows that the Obama 
administration has underscored the importance of one America's 
closest allies, Canada, with the president's first international 
trip last week.  Obama has also acknowledged the growing role of 
Asia in global affairs with his Secretary of State's visit to Japan, 
Indonesia, Korea and China, also last week.  All of these moves are 
refreshing.  Still, the most effective element so far of Obama's 
foreign policy is that he has not made any rash foreign policy 
decisions and has focused instead on pressing economic problems - 
which, of course, will have a global impact.  Obama understands what 
needs attention and is moving the United States in a constructive 
direction. 
 
"Beijing wants to size up the Obama administration's China policy - 
and Clinton herself, whom they view somewhat suspiciously from her 
presidential campaign rhetoric.  Does Washington view Beijing as a 
genuine global collaborator - in a 'comprehensive partnership,' as 
 
Clinton has indicated - or will it continue the 'strategic hedging' 
policy of the Bush administration?  Beijing naturally believes that 
it is easier to work on specific issues if common trust and mutual 
understanding are established first.  If Clinton succeeded in 
assuring Beijing that the U.S. truly sees China as a global partner, 
and not as a rival, she will find far greater cooperation on the 
issues that really matter.  The Obama administration hopes to make 
climate change the centerpiece of a broader, more vigorous 
engagement with China.  For Mrs. Clinton, the Beijing stop at the 
end of a weeklong Asian tour represented an effort to put her own 
stamp on a relationship that was once dominated by the Treasury 
Department in the latter years of the Bush administration. ...  The 
big rhetoric about good, evil and the war on terror is gone.  Times 
are changing.  So is Washington's agenda." 
 
WANG