09ANKARA286
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9925
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0286/01 0541441
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231441Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8873
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9492
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5419
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3625
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7137
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7001
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3588
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000286 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The Road to Local Elections Passes through the Southeast 
Media outlets reported over the weekend and today that on Saturday, 
Prime Minister Erdogan addressed supporters in the mainly Kurdish 
southeastern provinces of Adiyaman and Diyarbakir on the eve of the 
municipality elections, which are scheduled for March 29th.  During 
the return flight home to Ankara from Diyarbakir, Erdogan told 
journalists the state-owned TRT's multi-language broadcasts, which 
now include Kurdish, "will be expanded to include broadcasts in 
Farsi and Arabic as well."  Erdogan noted his government was 
preparing "to bring the tomb of popular Kurdish singer Ahmet Kaya 
back to Turkey."  Kaya was forced to flee from Turkey to France in 
June 1999 due to his political views; he died in Paris one year 
later, and is buried in the Pere Lachaise cemetery.  Erdogan also 
told supporters at election rallies that the Ergenekon arrests were 
"cleansing Turkey," and he stressed that his government should 
continue the investigation "at any cost."  He compared the Ergenekon 
probe to the "Clean Hands" operation in Italy, and added "Turkey, in 
fact, should have carried this out years ago, so we will not stop 
(prematurely) this time." 
 
Papers report analysts say Erdogan's messages during the Diyarbakir 
rally stopped short of offering concrete solutions to the Kurdish 
issue, which will make it harder for the ruling AKP to beat the 
pro-Kurdish DTP in the Diyarbakir municipality's elections. 
 
"An Axis of Genocide Formed between Sudan and Turkey" says ANCA. 
(CNN Turk) 
Media report that the Armenian National Committee of America (ANCA) 
has launched a new campaign by sending a letter to the U.S. Congress 
that accuses Turkey of actively supporting the Sudanese 
administration's genocide against their own citizens in Darfur. 
Mainstream CNN Turk reports, "ANCA's website features a photograph 
of Turkish President Gul hand-in-hand with Sudanese President 
al-Bashir."  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "According to ANCA, Turkey 
and Sudan cooperate in three major areas - Turkey sells weapons to 
Sudan, Turkish diplomats actively deny that a genocide is taking 
place in Sudan, and Turkey plans to use their seat on the UN 
Security Council to postpone (the ICC's ability to) press charges of 
genocide in Darfur" against President al-Bashir.  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports "The Armenian lobby is charging Ankara with playing a 
role in the genocide in Darfur by engaging in close relations with 
the regime leaders in Sudan."  Today's Zaman, which is an English 
language daily owned by Islamist-oriented Zaman, reports, "The 
'genocide axis' claims spread by ANCA are likely to upset Ankara, 
but the Turkish government may find a recent speech by a 
pro-Armenian congressman even more appalling. Republican Rep. Frank 
Pallone Jr., co-chairman of the Armenian Caucus, said in a Feb. 13 
speech on the House floor that Turkey was guilty of 'hypocrisy' as 
it levels human rights charges against Israel for its Gaza operation 
in January while it continues to deny the 'Armenian genocide.'" 
Mainstream NTV reports in "A Sudan Attack Against Turkey from the 
Armenian Diaspora," that "ANCA has accused Turkey of supporting 
efforts by Sudan to deny the genocide and of using Turkey's seat on 
the UNSC to protect Sudan" from the ICC's charges of genocide. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The Armenian Lobby in the 
U.S. is now using Sudan in its efforts to make Washington recognize 
its 'genocide' claims."  The English language version of mainstream 
Hurriyet reports in "Armenians Use Turkey-Sudan Ties for 
Recognition," that "The largest U.S. Armenian group has launched a 
campaign to urge the administration in Washington and Congress to 
formally recognize Armenians' claims of "genocide", by using 
Ankara's developing ties with Sudan." 
 
 
Today, no Turkish newspaper dares to publish this photo of Turkish 
President Gul and Sudanese President al-Bashir, but they all mention 
the photo on ANCA's website as part of the ANCA press release 
accusing Turkey and Sudan of forming, "An Axis of Genocide." 
 
ANKARA 00000286  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
President Gul Visits Kenya, Tanzania 
Media outlets report that on Sunday, President Abdullah Gul wrapped 
up his tours of Kenya and Tanzania, during which Gul signed several 
agreements aimed at increasing cooperation and bilateral trade. 
"Turkey has a responsibility toward Africa," Gul said, and 
underlined the fact that Turkey's election to the UN Security 
Council was possible with the support it received from African 
countries.  President Gul traveled to Tanzania yesterday, where he 
was welcomed by Tanzanian President Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete.  Gul 
attended the Turkey-Tanzania Business Forum and participated in a 
banquet hosted in his honor.  Gul also met with 37 young Tanzanians 
who graduated from universities in Turkey.  President Kikwete 
thanked Gul for providing Tanzanian citizens with educational 
opportunities in Turkey.  "Thanks to Turkey, today we have many 
doctors, engineers and other specialists in our country," said 
Kikwete. 
 
A Hopeful Survey for the MHP 
Mainstream Vatan reports that the opposition political party MHP 
initiated a political survey that was conducted by a group of 
academics led by Gazi University Professor Kemal Gormez.  The survey 
was conducted in Ankara on February 17th and 18th among 2649 likely 
voters.  According to the survey results, AKP support dropped to 
33.3 percent from last October's 49.5 percent, support for the CHP 
increased from 27.3 percent to 28.7 percent and support for MHP 
increased to 25.2 percent in February 2009 from October 2008's 10.4 
percent.  Another interesting development in the survey was the 
change in the vote for potential candidates.  Support for the AKP's 
unpopular Ankara Mayor Melih Gokcek dropped to 32.5 percent and 
support for the CHP's Candidate for Mayor Karayalcin's remains at 
29.8 percent.  However, the MHP's Ankara Mayor Candidate Mansur 
Yavas increased his support from 9.6 in October 2008 to 27.7 percent 
this month. 
 
Obama Won't Say "Genocide" 
Mainstream Sabah, liberal Radikal, leftist Taraf, Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet all quote Ruben 
Safrastyan, Director of the Armenian National Science Academy's 
Institute of Eastern Studies, who said in a statement to the 
Armenian press over the weekend, "Because Obama will need Ankara as 
a supply route for operations in Afghanistan, he will not use the 
word 'genocide' in his statement on April 24th." Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet headlines, "Obama Will Not Say 'Armenian Genocide,'" 
while leftist Taraf, Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak, and liberal 
Radikal headline, "Obama Will Not Say 'Genocide.'" 
 
U.S. Will Need Turkey During Withdrawal from Iraq 
Liberal Radikal reports today, "The U.S. is preparing to ask Turkey 
for logistical support for the withdrawal of U.S. soldiers from 
Iraq."  Radikal bases this story on a GAO report submitted to the 
U.S. House of Representatives which suggests Turkey "as one of the 
exit routes for a withdrawal from Iraq."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
says "The U.S. Is On the Way to a Withdrawal from Iraq" and notes, 
"Turkey, Jordan and Kuwait are among the countries to be used during 
the withdrawal." 
 
'The House of Transparency' (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet has renamed the White House "The House of 
Transparency" due to the Obama administration's use of "new media" 
in order to communicate with the public.  Milliyet's Washington 
correspondent praises the new White House website for is vast 
collection of statements, proclamations, transcripts, and videos 
that painstakingly document the works of the White House since 
President Obama took office last month. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey's Foreign Policies; Turkey-KRG in 
Iraq 
 
Emre Akoz wrote in mainstream Sabah: "After talking to Prime 
 
ANKARA 00000286  003 OF 003 
 
 
Minister Erdogan, he seems very hopeful that Turkey will play a 
facilitative role for dialogue between Middle Eastern countries and 
the Western world.  He also hopes for a chance to discuss this with 
President Obama during the upcoming G-20 summit." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "There is a growing 
perception that Turkey has started moving away from the West.  Some 
analysts say that pro-Turkey demonstrations in the streets of the 
Middle East boost the AKP's domestic propaganda, but the 
demonstrations do not constitute a good reason to believe that 
Turkey remains committed to Western values.  Dominique Moisi from 
the French group IFRI and David Phillips of the Atlantic Council in 
America are making some noteworthy remarks on that." 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The U.S. and Turkey are 
enjoying good bilateral relations, especially since the U.S. began 
to actively coordinate with Turkey against the PKK.  With this 
confidence, Turkey has initiated new economic and political efforts 
in relations with the Kurdish Regional Government in northern Iraq. 
Regarding the future of Iraq, the status of Kirkuk remains the most 
important problem to address.  In that regard, it is expected that 
Washington will come up with some creative formulas." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP's Deputy Chair Emine Ayna told the press in 
Diyarbakir yesterday that fighting between Turkish armed forces and 
the PKK should be ended and the PKK must be allowed to join 
democratic politics before the organization can lay down its arms. 
 
 
- Joost Lagendijk, the co-chair of the Turkey-EU joint parliamentary 
committee, says the tensions between PM Erdogan and Israeli 
President Peres in Davos will have no impact on EU-Turkey ties. 
 
- Over the last six years, the European Court of Human Rights 
received 262 complaints for torture and abuse against Turkey; the 
court ruled that 123 cases of the 262 constituted human rights 
abuses. 
 
- Yalcin Akcan (22), head of the opposition CHP's youth branch in 
Bodrum, was hospitalized with brain trauma and several fractures in 
his body after being severely beaten by a group of assailants early 
this morning.  Akcan was attacked while he was keeping watch over a 
CHP tent that was set up to recruit new voters in the coastal Aegean 
town. 
 
World 
 
- Insurgents in Somalia attack a military base in Mogadishu used by 
African Union peacekeepers, killing at least 11 soldiers from 
Burundi. 
 
- Pirates hijack a Greek-owned cargo vessel in the Gulf of Aden, off 
the coast of Somalia. 
 
- The Turkish-German Economy Fair "EXPO Turkey 2009" will be opened 
in Essen, Germany on May 22-24. 
 
JEFFREY