09ANKARA158
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0741
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0158/01 0331256
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021256Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8645
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9445
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5321
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3576
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7091
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6949
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3535
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Q Erdogan Rocks the World by Storming Out of Gaza Panel 
Q Domestic Reactions to Erdogan's Actions in Davos 
Q ADL Reacts to Davos Panel 
Q Armenians Issue Apology Campaign 
Q Turkey Atlantic Council Meeting in Antalya 
 
 
 
"Erdogan Rocks The World by Storming Out of The Gaza Panel" (Aksam) 
 
Media continue to digest the impact of PM Erdogan's row with Israeli 
President Peres in Davos last week.  The camp that is in favor of 
the PM's actions include Islamists and extreme nationalists who 
contend the PM stood up for the Turkish people's opposition to 
Israel's unpopular military operations into Gaza.  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports, "Prime Minister Erdogan is given strong support for 
his reactions in Davos."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports in, 
"Lonely Man Out," that "After pouring bombs on women and children in 
Gaza for weeks, Israel is left alone after the strong reactions 
voiced by Turkey in Davos." Yeni Safak also notes a Metropoll survey 
concluded that 78 percent of Turkish voters approved of the PM's 
actions in Davos.  Conservative-nationalist Bugun reports, "Erdogan 
receives international support after putting Peres in his place." 
Far right Tercuman reports Erdogan "sent a harsh warning to the EU" 
when he said upon his return to Turkey, "Think what others would do 
without Turkey." 
 
Meanwhile, criticism of the PM's actions in Davos stems from the 
potential impact on Turkey's role as a regional mediator, damage to 
Turkish-Israeli bilateral relations, and the potential loss of the 
American Jewish lobby's opposition to the Armenian genocide 
resolution, which is likely to the floor of the U.S. Congress this 
spring.  Mainstream Milliyet writes, "There are continuing 
aftershocks after the tremor in Gaza" and "The strongest response 
comes from the Jewish lobby" in the U.S."  Milliyet reports the 
American Jewish Committee said, "We cannot remain indifferent to 
these developments" Milliyet also notes, "Turkish diplomats were 
infuriated by Erdogan's comments," which "caused damage that will 
require hard work in order to repair."  Mainstream Vatan reports 
Erdogan was "welcomed as a hero" after the crisis in Davos, but the 
paper warned, "tensions with the Jewish lobby could harm Turkey's 
interests," and "Erdogan's support for Hamas could empower concerns 
that Turkey is turning away from the West." Economic Daily Referans 
reports the Davos crisis "could harm Turkey's role as a Mid East 
mediator."  Mainstream Aksam echoes this view when they quote an 
anonymous Israeli diplomat who says, "Turkey has lost its 
credibility as a Middle East mediator," and "is no longer seen as a 
reliable partner."  Mainstream Hurriyet Editor-in-Chief Ertugrul 
Ozkok commented, "Erdogan's defense of Gaza will cost Turkey its 
long-standing interests," unless Erdogan "moves fast to call on 
Hamas reject terror, recognize Israel's existence, and come to the 
table for peace talks." 
 
Domestic Reactions to Erdogan's Actions in Davos 
Saturday's mainstream Milliyet reports retired Turkish Ambassadors 
criticized the PM for his criticism of Foreign Ministry officials 
upon his return from Davos.  Retired ambassadors and diplomats 
expressed concern on Friday that Erdogan's actions in Davos could 
cost Turkey its impartiality and its role as a regional moderator. 
Former President Suleyman Demirel also commented on the issue by 
saying "Ihese kinds of incidents are not very common at 
international meetings.  I regret that such an incident happened. 
Because of this incident, Turkey, as well as the world, is now 
divided in two.  Diplomacy doesn't like fights.  If one wants to 
resolve international issues through dialogue and diplomacy, one 
must exercise patience.  Otherwise, before you understand what is 
happening, you'll be asked to pay the bill.  I hope that Turkey will 
not be asked to pay the bill for this latest incident." 
 
ANKARA 00000158  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
On the other hand, a survey commissioned by the pro-government Star 
daily and conducted by MetroPoll company concludes 78.3 percent of 
Turkish people feel Erdogan's storming out of the panel meeting in 
Davos is a "positive" development.  Only 13.7 percent have a 
negative view of Erdogan's behavior.  55.7 percent believe Erdogan's 
behavior has been for the good of Turkey while 21 percent disagree. 
 
 
Sunday's mainstream Vatan reports that DTP Leader Emine Ayna echoed 
Erdogan's criticism against Peres ("You know well how to kill 
children") against Erdogan's AKP government.  Ayna told a gathering 
in Elazig, "PM Erdogan criticized Peres for killing children.  11 
people, including 4 children, died during the government's crackdown 
during Nevruz celebrations in Diyarbakir in 2006.  Now we say to the 
government: 'you too know well how to kill children.' The Kurds' 
suffering is the same as the Palestinians' suffering.  Kurds in 
Turkey are dying under same kind of conditions as those in Gaza. 
Instead of advising others, you must first clean the filth from your 
own home." 
 
Far right opposition party MHP threw their support behind Erdogan 
and Sunday's mainstream Sabah reports that MHP leader Bahceli urged 
Erdogan to stand against the EU and the US on issues such as Cyprus, 
Iraq and terrorism.  Main opposition party CHP leader Baykal also 
extended support to Erdogan saying "They were unfair to the PM at 
that panel.  Unjust acts like this always offends us.  It is natural 
to show a reaction against such acts."  Baykal added that the AKP 
government should not exploit this issue in domestic politics. 
 
Meanwhile, today's Vatan reports the "Friends of Palestine Platform" 
in Ankara hosted a panel discussion over the weekend.  During the 
panel a member of  Hamas' political office, Ziyad Abu Zeyd, said "We 
gave 1400 martyrs during 23 days but at the same time we had 
miracles during that period.  3500 babies were born during that 
period and most mothers gave birth to twins and triplets.  None of 
the Hamas missile bases were hit.  The tunnels are still in action, 
and moreover, we have managed to bring in more powerful and 
effective weapons into Gaza." 
 
ADL Reaction to the Davos Panel 
Media outlets report that in interviews with Newsweek magazine and 
the Washington Post, Prime Minister Erdogan criticized Israel for 
its offensive in Gaza.  Liberal Radikal headlines, "Erdogan Tells 
the World of Hamas' Legitimacy," and the paper notes the PM 
"criticizee the world for not respecting the political will of the 
Palestinian people."  In "American Jews Are Pleased with Erdogan's 
Statements," Islamist-oriented Zaman says today on its front page 
the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) welcomed Erdogan's clarification 
that his criticism of the state of Israel did not target the Israeli 
people or those of the Jewish faith.  However, ADL National Director 
Abraham Foxman said, "We believe that a more moderate tone in the 
prime minister's criticism of Israel would help to tamp down the 
recent outpouring of anti-Semitism in Turkey."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet, however, says in "The Jewish Lobby Praises Peres, 
Criticizes Erdogan" that Foxman lauded the attitude of Peres, saying 
he gave a "reasoned and principled response" to Erdogan's criticism 
of Israel. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Erdogan-Peres at Davos 
 
Ertugrul Ozkok wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (1/31): "What's done is 
done, and at this point we better think about turning this crisis 
into an opportunity.  PM Erdogan should work to convince Hamas to 
give up terrorism and recognize Israel." 
 
Yasin Aktay wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "As expressed by 
PM Erdogan, Turkey has nothing against Jews or the Jewish population 
of Turkey.  Jewish lobbies in the U.S. must realize the fact that 
most of the problems in the region will be settled once the state of 
 
ANKARA 00000158  003 OF 004 
 
 
Israel agrees on the 1967 borders." 
 
Mehmet Barlas wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The prime minister has 
gained influence and power vis-`-vis the Arab nations.  From now on 
he should pressure Hamas to stop the violence and recognize 
Israel." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Hamas was given a 
strategic opportunity by Turkey's Prime Minister and received direct 
support from a NATO county.  If Turkey cannot succeed on softening 
Hamas to abandon terror and reconciliation on its Israel policy, 
there will be serious consequences for Ankara in the long run." 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Since Turkey has become a 
symbol in the Islamic world, Ankara must use this as an opportunity. 
 Both Ankara and the Turkish Embassy in Washington should work 
toward a U.S. presidential visit to Istanbul for Obama's planned 
address to the Islamic world." 
 
Tarhan Erdem wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "There is a very 
basic fact that Turkish people hopefully will realize sooner or 
later: Most of the problems related to the Middle East, contrary to 
common belief, stem from undemocratic regimes who have no genuine 
contact with their people.  And that very well includes Palestinian 
Al Fatah and Hamas." 
 
Armenians Initiate 'Apology' Campaign for Turks 
Liberal Radikal said on its front page Sunday that in a positive 
response to a recent apology campaign launched by Turkish 
intellectuals for the Armenians, a draft declaration by Professor 
Armen Gakavian, an Armenian living in Sydney, expresses regret for 
crimes committed on behalf of Armenians against the Ottomans and the 
Turks.  Gakavian told Radikal their aim was to apologize for crimes 
committed by Armenian gangs and the nationalist Asala organization. 
"We reject violence from the past and violence that might come in 
the future.  I hope we will succeed," said Gakavian. 
 
Turkish Atlantic Council Meeting In Antalya 
Media outlets note Ambassador Jeffrey tackled tough issues ranging 
from efforts in Afghanistan to the postponement of George Mitchell's 
trip to Turkey, to Turkey's orientation to the West during the 
Turkish Atlantic Council meeting in Antalya Friday.   Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports, "U.S. Ambassador to Turkey James Jeffrey said 
military operations in Afghanistan will increase in importance, "Of 
course we need a comprehensive approach to Afghanistan, but the Iraq 
experience shows us that military security comes first. Before you 
can do anything, political, economic, diplomatic, you have to secure 
the population. Second, you have to deter, defeat and deny areas to 
your foe. No matter what you call this, war, peace operation, for 
the soldiers on the ground this is a combat operation. We need to do 
more. We have already decided to send another combat brigade to 
Afghanistan to increase the force population ratio," he said. 
"Turkey has made a large contribution to Afghanistan" and "Turkey's 
participation inspires other nations, too." Islamist Zaman reports 
Ambassador Jeffrey clarified Friday that the postponement of a 
scheduled visit to Turkey by the new US envoy for the Middle East, 
George Mitchell, had nothing to do with Erdogan's and Peres' row in 
Davos.   Zaman notes that, when asked if he shares opinions that 
Turkey is moving away from the West, Ambassador Jeffrey replied, "I 
do not share them." 
 
TV News: CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Two pilots died when a Health Ministry helicopter crashed in Bolu 
Mountains over the weekend. 
 
- IMF's John Lipsky says the IMF and Turkey achieved "significant 
progress" in talks for sealing a deal. 
 
ANKARA 00000158  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
- Energy Minister Hilmi Guler says curbs in the price of natural gas 
would continue over the coming months. 
 
International News 
 
- Gaza militants launch two rockets and several mortar shells into 
southern Israel, wounding three people. 
 
- In a letter to the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) 
Secretary-General  Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, President Obama expresses 
confidence that the U.S. can work together with the OIC. 
 
- A group of unidentified assailants vandalize a synagogue in 
Venezuela. 
 
 
JEFFREY