09BAGHDAD367
RRT ERBIL: LAYING THE GROUNDWORK FOR RULE OF LAW
Thu Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0168
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0367/01 0431335
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121335Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1669
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000367 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM IZ
SUBJECT: RRT ERBIL: LAYING THE GROUNDWORK FOR RULE OF LAW 
PROGRAMMING 
 
REF:  Tamlyn/Brencick email November 11, 2008 
 
This is an Erbil Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) cable. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) Erbil has 
launched a QRF-funded project to survey RoL institutions in the 
Region and develop a strategic plan for improving the administration 
of justice in the region over the next five-ten years.  The project 
is supported by Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani who has requested 
USG support in strengthening all aspects of Rule of Law in the 
region.  Strengthening Rule of Law is the RRT's highest priority in 
the Kurdistan Region; improved administration of justice has 
important implications for private sector development, combating 
violence against women, and strengthening democratic institutions. 
Current RRT programming combines advisory services and QRF funding 
to plug some of the most obvious needs.  The strategic plan is a 
first step in what we hope will be long-term U.S. engagement in 
support of RoL in the Kurdistan Region.  This cable identifies 
ensuring continuity in RRT Rol staffing as the most important first 
step in ensuring the success of this project.  Please see action 
request in paragraph 5. End summary. 
 
RRT Launches RoL Strategic Plan 
------------------------------- 
¶2.  (U) On January 11, the RRT kicked off an eight-month, QRF-funded 
project to survey Rule of Law institutions in the Kurdistan Region 
and develop a strategic plan for improving the administration of 
justice in the region over the next five-ten years.  The survey will 
be organized by a local NGO, the Regional Legislative Observatory 
(RLO) with oversight by RRT RoL staff and "off-shore" guidance from 
University of Hawaii Professor James Pietsch (who spoke at the 
kick-off).  Participants at the kick-off included representatives of 
local and international NGOs (including women's advocacy groups), 
Kurdistan Region law schools, Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) 
Ministries, including Human Rights, Higher Education, 
representatives from the Kurdistan National Assembly and the Prime 
Minister's Office.  Representatives from the UK Embassy Office and 
UNDP also attended.  (EU representatives based in Baghdad who are 
working with RRT on law-school curriculum were invited but unable to 
attend).  All of these stakeholders will be involved in the 
development of the strategy. 
 
¶3. (U) The January 11 meeting was the first of six formal meetings 
planned over the next eight months.  Work between sessions will be 
done by three-four working groups which will include academic, 
government and non-governmental representatives and address 
different areas of Rule of Law. 
 
Follow-up on Prime Minister's Request 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The project has garnered support and buy-in from the 
leading RoL actors in the Kurdistan Region and - most importantly - 
from the Prime Minister's office.  In a November 20 meeting with RRT 
staff, Prime Minister Barzani asked for a three-four year 
comprehensive program which would ensure - in his words - that all 
aspects of the Kurdistan region legal and judicial system were 
firmly "on track," providing access to and administration of justice 
for all and creating the best possible environment for domestic and 
international businesses (ref email).  President Barzani explained 
that the KRG had its own resources to put to this project; what was 
needed was the best advice on how to proceed.  At that meeting RRT 
RoL Adviser and RRT Team Leader explained that the upcoming RoL 
Strategy would provide an excellent basis for launching such a 
program by identifying steps that needed to be taken and areas where 
Qprogram by identifying steps that needed to be taken and areas where 
assistance was needed. 
 
Comment: 
------- 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The RoL strategy which will emerge from the QRF project 
should be an important first step in responding to the Prime 
Minister's request.  If it meets expectations, it will be a credible 
basis on which the KRG will be able to proceed - both to take steps 
internally as well as in seeking support from international donors - 
to include the UN and the EU, as well as the United States. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The project is being implemented by a local NGO, and is 
designed to be a Kurdish-drafted/Kurdish-driven project, but it will 
nonetheless need considerable coaching/oversight to ensure that the 
final product is a   strategy which links together the different 
actors (academic, judicial, executive) with clearly articulated 
goals and benchmarks.  Current RRT Rule of Law programming has been 
limited to a single INL-funded staff position at the RRT with ad hoc 
QRF funding helping with some of the immediate needs.  We understand 
that this INL position will not be extended past September 2009.  At 
a minimum, the RRT must have an American ROL staff position, either 
provided by DoJ or as a 3161 direct hire, in order to ensure that 
the QRF-funded Strategy/Road map project achieves its desired end. 
Post requests NEA/EX/I review staffing possibilities and begin 
 
BAGHDAD 00000367  002 OF 002 
 
 
recruitment for this position to ensure continuity of this important 
effort. 
 
Crocker