09BAGHDAD289
IRAQ-IRAN DIPLOMACY A SIGN OF IRANIAN INFLUENCE OR
Wed Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO2693
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0289/01 0351242
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 041242Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1560
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVES E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000289 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/I AND NEA/IR 
NSC STAFF FOR OLLIVANT AND MAGSAMEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/25/2019 
TAGS: PREL PTER PINR ECON EAIR IR IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ-IRAN DIPLOMACY A SIGN OF IRANIAN INFLUENCE OR 
IRAQI RESOLVE? 
 
REF: A. BAGHDAD 197 
     ¶B. BAGHDAD 133 
     ¶C. BAGHDAD 91 
     ¶D. BAGHDAD 129 
     ¶E. BAGHDAD 152 
     ¶F. BAGHDAD 196 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Robert Ford for reasons 1.4 (b-d). 
 
¶1. (S) Summary: Recent Iraqi-Iranian visits (most notably PM 
Maliki and National Security Advisor al-Rubaie's visits to 
Tehran) indicate that Iraq is being increasingly assertive 
toward its ambitious neighbor, and that Iran is showing  Iraq 
overdue respect, although the relationship might be 
characterized as "scratchy" at best.  (GoI has failed to get 
any Iranian movement on water or border issues.) Al-Rubaie 
claimed that he pressed Iran on border issues including 
smuggling, and PM Maliki's team says he was warmly received 
there (despite Iran's apparent stalling on Maliki's planned 
December visit).  While it is hard to gauge the truth of 
these claims, it is notable that -- for now, at least -- PM 
Maliki has displayed backbone in the face of Iranian pressure 
on the US-Iraq Security Agreement and the Mujahedin-e Khalq 
(MeK).  However, the Iraqis are getting no satisfaction on 
their concerns about water flows from Iran and the Shatt 
al-Arab.  Diplomatic accreditation is also an irritant.  The 
lingering threat of violence by Iranian-backed insurgents and 
Iran's full-court press by trade delegations heading across 
the  country from Basra to Erbil indicate that Iraq will 
continue to face a spectrum of challenges in the 
relationship.  End summary. 
 
------------------------- 
Frequent political visits 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. (S) National Security Advisor Mowafaq al-Rubaie carried 
the message of a more confident Iraq to Tehran in meetings 
with senior Iranian officials January 19-22, according to 
readouts of the visit Rubaie gave to the Embassy (ref A). 
Rubaie said his Iranian interlocutors did not react harshly 
to the USG-GoI Security Agreement or the GOI's approach to 
the MEK at Camp Ashraf, while Rubaie said he demanded an end 
to smuggling from Iran to Iraq (and sent a paper to the 
Ambassador listing stopping Iranian arms smuggling as one of 
his main objectives).  In contrast to Rubaie's tough-talking 
descriptions of the Tehran meetings, press accounts portrayed 
the visit as a warm affirmation of Iraqi-Iranian relations. 
But regardless of what Rubaie actually told the Iranians 
about Iraqi policy toward Camp Ashraf, the GoI continues to 
take a measured approach to the issue (ref B). 
 
¶3. (S) Iranian officials received Maliki much more warmly on 
his visit January 3-5 than they did during his last trip  in 
June 2008, a visit that was soured by belligerent Iranian 
opposition to the Security Agreement negotiations, 
according to MFA Director for Neighboring Countries 
Ambassador Taha al-Abassi, who accompanied Maliki to Tehran 
in January (ref B).  This assessment does not reflect all the 
likely tension involved in arranging the visit and the 
topics discussed, including the unexplained rescheduling of 
the planned December 25 visit by the Iranian side.  Saad 
al-Muttalibi, a confidant of Rubaie and international affairs 
director of the Ministry of Dialogue and Reconciliation, told 
Iran watchers that despite media  reports of Maliki's cozy 
statements toward Iran, he approached his meetings with 
confidence and determination.  Al-Muttalibi pointed to a 
small but telling detail as evidence: for his June 2008 
meeting with Khamanei, Maliki removed his necktie out of 
deference to Khamanei's association of ties with Western 
Qdeference to Khamanei's association of ties with Western 
influence, but for the January 2009 visit, Maliki left his 
tie on. 
 
¶4.  (S) The GoI may be adopting a more confident posture 
toward the Iranians, but negotiating success remains elusive. 
 Economic ministers accompanied Maliki to discuss  issues 
including Shatt al-Arab navigation, riparian rights and an 
Iranian offer for $1 billion in loans and economic 
assistance.  In an apparent reference to the visits on Jan. 
5, Deputy Prime minister al-Essawi told the Deputy Secretary 
that recent missions to Iran had failed to  convince the 
Iranians to release water from new dams into 
drought-stricken agricultural areas in Diwaniyah (ref D). 
The GoI has also failed recently to convince the Iranian 
government to reconsider the 1975 Algiers accord demarcating 
the Iran-Iraq border, under which Iraqis  believe that Saddam 
Hussein compromised national interests  for a politically 
expedient agreement. 
 
¶5. (C) Meanwhile, an Iranian media delegation headed by MFA 
spokesman Hassan Qashqavi received glowing coverage in Iran 
of its January 16 meeting in Baghdad with Iraqi President 
Jalal Talabani, who has long-standing ties to Iran.  Iranian 
media quoted Talabani describing the Iraqi-Iranian 
relationship as "flourishing," calling for more economic and 
cultural cooperation.  The media delegation appeared to be a 
prelude to higher-level Iranian visitors in coming weeks. 
Among Iraqi visits to Iran was a trip to Tehran on  December 
28 by Mohammed Heidari, the Chairman of the Iraqi Council of 
Representative's Human Rights Committee, who discussed 
parliamentary cooperation with Iranian Parliament Speaker Ali 
Larijani. 
 
-------------- 
Nest of spies? 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (S/NF)  Amid the high-level diplomacy, the GoI continues 
to restrict the activities of Islamic Revolutionary Guards 
Corps Quds Force (IRGC-QF) officers operating  under 
diplomatic cover in Iraq.  For several months, the Iraqi MFA 
has passed to the USG the names of proposed Iranian diplomats 
to Iraq, refusing to accredit those who we find have ties to 
the IRGC or Ministry of Intelligence and National Security 
(MOIS). In addition, on January 19, the MFA passed Iran 
watchers copies of the passport pages of 35 Iranian diplomats 
currently posted to  Iraq to seek USG assistance in vetting 
them for IRGC and MOIS ties.  (Note: The namechecks are still 
pending, but we believe a significant percentage are 
intelligence officers. End  note.) 
 
¶7. (S/NF) In November, Iranian Ambassador to Baghdad Hasan 
Kazemi Qomi called on MFA Undersecretary Labeed Abbawi to 
complain about GoI visa refusals and processing delays for 
proposed Iranian diplomats, according to Abbawi's assistant 
Sama Salim.  Qomi threatened to withhold visas for Iraqis 
posted to Iran until all the Iranian visas were approved. 
Abbawi responded that if Iran intends to apply reciprocity to 
Iraq, Iran should take into account the fact that there  are 
65 accredited Iranian diplomats in Iraq but only 34 
accredited Iraqi diplomats in Iran, Salim said.  She added 
that the Iranian MFA has since approved all pending Iraqi 
applications.  Meanwhile, the Iranians tried to avoid MFA 
scrutiny by obtaining a one-month visa for an administrative 
employee and applying for a one-year diplomatic visa once the 
 employee arrived.  Salim said on January 26 that the Iraqi 
MFA refused the extension and established a policy 
preventing all such extensions in the future.  However, FM 
Zebari told Ambassador Satterfield on January 17 that he  was 
very concerned about the Iranian diplomatic issues as he 
didn't believe he could resist intense Iranian personal 
pressure unless the Prime Minister stepped in and stood up to 
the Iranians on this issue also. 
 
------------------------------ 
'Aggressive' Iranian investors 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (S) For economic and political reasons, the Iranian 
government is aggressively pursuing expanded economic ties 
with Iraq.  On January 11, a delegation of Iranian  investors 
came to Muthanna province to continue negotiations for an $81 
million iron plant.  PRT Muthanna  believes the Iranian 
delegation was largely comprised of former, and possibly 
current, representatives from the Iranian Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.  It is not yet clear if the GoI will issue a license 
for the plant. Minister of  Industry and Minerals (MIM) Fawzi 
Hariri said in a meeting  January 14 that Iranian firms are 
QHariri said in a meeting  January 14 that Iranian firms are 
very interested in  investing in the state-owned Iraqi 
petrochemical sector, particularly the State Company for 
Petrochemical Industries in Basra (ref E). Describing the 
Iranian bidders as "very aggressive," Hariri said he was 
"literally having to fend them off." 
 
¶9. (C) Other notable economic initiatives include, on January 
13, the first commercial Iran-Iraq flight to land in Najaf in 
three decades.  Iranian officials projected that up to three 
million Iranian pilgrims will fly this route in 2009.  In the 
North, senior Iranian diplomats  visited Erbil on January 24 
and met with Iraqi Kurdistan leader Massoud Barzani in an 
effort to expand the market for Iranian goods, according to 
Tehran's Fars News Agency  (ref F). Despite Iran's full-court 
economic press in Iraq  and the Iraqi need for trade and 
investment, polling and anecdotal reports continue to 
indicate that Iraqis from Basra to the Kurdistan Regional 
Government (KRG) harbor  deep distrust of Iran.  KRG Minister 
of State for the Interior Karim Sinjari claimed to us two 
days before the Iranian trade visit, "We don't want them or 
their money." 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. (S) While GoI officials' claims that they talk tough to 
the Iranians are hard to take at face value, and the 
relationship can best be described as "scratchy," their 
recent demonstrations of resolve do indicate that they are 
gradually developing the capacity to defend their interests 
against Iran.  As the Iranians continue their ambitious 
outreach to Iraq, Iraq's capacity to promote its own 
interests on issues like water rights and the Shatt al- 
Arab will continue to be sorely tested. 
CROCKER