09BEIJING248
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. POLICY, NORTH KOREA, CHINA'S MILITARY
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0604
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0248/01 0330949
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020949Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2050
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000248 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. POLICY, NORTH KOREA, CHINA'S MILITARY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S. POLICY 
 
a. "Obama's stance that China has manipulated their exchange rate 
has changed from his forefront stance to his behind-the-scenes 
stance" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(02/02): "Geithner 
has once again brought people's attention to the RMB exchange rate 
issue. The changing attitude by American officials concerning this 
issue is thought-provoking. Considering Obama's earlier statements 
on this issue, Geithner's stance has in fact neutralized Obama's 
stance. Chinese analysts indicate that Geithner has shifted 
Americans' attention and tried to move America's responsibilities 
onto China's shoulders, therefore avoiding their responsibilities. 
However, American politicians indicated the possibilities of a trade 
war due to the Americas making an issue of the RMB exchange rate. 
Thus the U.S. has been adjusting its stance. Later, Obama spoke with 
Chinese leaders and mentioned that the U.S. is expecting to have 
more cooperation with China in order to help stabilize the World 
economy and deal with the financial crisis. This shows that the U.S. 
realizes that their irresponsible response to this issue is not good 
for global economic recovery." 
 
b. "Crisis should make U.S. do some soul-searching" 
 
The official English-language newspaper China Daily commented 
(02/02): "China once again becomes the scapegoat for the ongoing 
global financial crisis, at a time when the U.S. economic crisis 
continues to deteriorate. Their groundless argument, however, was 
used by some politicians in Washington as a tool with which to shirk 
their own responsibilities. ...It is completely a ridiculous 
conclusion both in time order and in causal relationship. It is 
known that the U.S. has suffered a deposit shortage for a long time. 
...the nation had long suffered a foreign reserve insufficiency. 
China's foreign reserve growth has been mainly pushed by its trade 
surplus and investment from other countries. ...China's foreign 
reserve investment has also provided the U.S. economy with similarly 
needed fund resources. ...This is the responsibility the U.S. 
administration should undertake. ...After the 1997 Asian financial 
crisis, some emerging Asian economies, including China, began to 
reinforce their foreign reserves and domestic bank deposits. ...The 
increased international and domestic savings by Asian nations after 
the 1997 crisis greatly helped raise their ability to fend off a 
financial crisis. 
Politicians in Washington are clearly taking an unwise step. 
...Washington's policy of eluding responsibility will dampen Asian 
nations' enthusiasm to continue to buy U.S. national debt." 
 
¶2. North Korea 
 
"North Korea warns South Korea and makes the world nervous" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/01): "North Korea has recently, 
unilaterally announced that it is abolishing all agreements with 
South Korea concerning the avoidance of political and military 
confrontations. If there is to be a conflict between these two 
countries, eastern Asia and the rest of the world are likely to feel 
unprepared. All the large powers influence the peninsula and 
therefore their policies can be vague. The situation on the 
peninsula will hardly endure any change. Analysts point out that the 
tough stance of North Korea is related with major measures by the 
Lee Myung Bak's government to adjust the mild policies of North 
Korea. What's more, the U.S. and Japan are unwilling to admit North 
Korea and officially announce the end of North Korean war, which has 
made North Korea feel very unsafe. Any changes on the peninsula will 
greatly matter to their neighboring countries. The U.S. association 
on foreign relations has suggested that the Obama administration 
closely cooperates with the neighboring countries of the peninsula 
should any incidents happened." 
 
¶3. CHINA'S MILITARY 
 
"The West exaggerates the first year of the Chinese Military" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/01): "A British think-tank has issued a 
sensational report stating that 2009 will be the first year of 
China's global military might. At the same time, Secretary Gates has 
mentioned that the U.S. military is making full efforts to deal with 
China's military threat. In fact, China's development of military 
power is moving forward on pace with its financial development. 
China's new developments do not seek to distinguish it as a newly 
rising military power. Some Western scholars have mentioned that 
 
BEIJING 00000248  002 OF 002 
 
 
China's ability to send war ships to the Somali coast indicate that 
it is very militarily powerful. Chinese military experts indicate 
that China's introduction to the international stage is aimed at 
playing a role in fulfilling peace-keeping missions. This report by 
the Western think-tank is very subjective and exaggerative. China's 
military power is still under development; it does not possess any 
aircraft carriers and therefore its navy is unable to reach out to 
the world. If the 'first year of China's military might' refers to 
China starting a 'canon-fleet diplomacy', it is a wrong statement. 
China will never have such a 'first year.' China will insist on 
appropriate development in military strength, but its principle of 
not taking a hegemonic position will never be shaken." 
 
PICCUTA