09GUANGZHOU72
CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS -- A GROWING FORCE IN GUANGDONG
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO4315
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGZ #0072/01 0370137
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060137Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0173
INFO RUEHGZ/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE 0087
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0097
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0060
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0043
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0043
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 0043
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0033
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC 0084
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC 0084UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000072 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI PGOV CH
SUBJECT: CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS -- A GROWING FORCE IN GUANGDONG 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Volunteerism is gaining strength in South China, 
with the government-sponsored Guangdong Volunteer Federation (GVF) 
database of four million mostly young volunteers supposedly ready to 
heed the call when and where needed.  Last year's three highly 
visible events -- the central China snowstorms, Sichuan earthquake 
and Beijing Olympics -- raised awareness of the need to mobilize 
volunteers quickly and in large numbers.  Although the GVF dedicates 
most of its resources to staffing venues for government-sponsored 
events, it also directs volunteers to a growing range of social 
service activities, including year-long teaching stints in remote 
provinces.  The Federation attributes the rise in volunteerism in 
part to increasing amounts of discretionary time and resources 
available to urban Chinese youth.  The Federation's priority for 
2009 is assisting unemployed migrant workers, although it is unclear 
how it will meet this need.    End Summary. 
 
National Events a Catalyst for Involvement 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) A new attitude toward volunteerism is growing in south 
China, according to Xiang Xin, GVF Vice-President and 
Secretary-General.  Three events in 2008 dramatically expanded the 
number of volunteers and brought a new sense of urgency and 
dedication to volunteer service.  First, the snowstorm in central 
China during the 2008 Lunar New Year holiday stranded hundreds of 
thousands of migrant workers at Guangzhou's train stations, 
requiring a massive coordinated effort that included many volunteers 
to help manage the crowds and provide for basic needs.  Second, the 
Sichuan earthquake in May 2008 dramatically raised the level of 
charitable concern across China, with the GVF coordinating the 
efforts of 10,000 volunteers in Guangdong, many of whom traveled to 
the earthquake site to assist government relief.  Some have stayed 
on to help with longer term support.  Finally, the Federation 
selected 100 volunteers out of thousands of applicants to staff 
venues during the Beijing Olympics in August. 
 
Youth Oriented, Lots of Choices 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The GVF originated as a part of the Communist Youth League 
several decades ago, but did not become a distinct organization 
until 1987.  Today, it retains its youth-oriented character with 
over four million registered volunteers, ninety percent of whom are 
students or young people.  Xiang told us the greatest need for 
volunteers is in staffing government-sponsored events, such as the 
biannual Canton import-export trade fair, the world's largest. 
However, GVF also directs volunteers to an expanding range of other 
types of service, including assisting the elderly and disabled in 
their home, teaching in remote rural schools, and providing 
counseling services by phone.  The Federation is already gearing up 
for the Asian Games which will be held in Guangzhou in November 
¶2010.  This will be the largest international event in Guangzhou's 
history and require an estimated 60,000 volunteers. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In 2003, the GVF launched an entirely new program to place 
recent university graduates to teach for one or two years in poor 
communities in remote western provinces.  Although salaries are 
extremely low, the competition for these 100 positions each year is 
relatively intense, according to Xiang, because training and 
experience through the GVF is highly valued.  In 2009, the 
Federation's priority is assisting migrant workers left jobless by 
the economic slowdown.  However, Xiang provided few details on how 
volunteers would actually assist migrants. 
 
Getting the Message Out 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The GVF uses different media to sell its message of the 
benefits of volunteerism.  Last year, they produced a television 
documentary after the Sichuan earthquake, focusing in part on 
cooperation between Guangdong volunteers and a Japanese relief team. 
 They use public service advertisements in official publications, 
spots on radio and television, and even posters scattered around 
area university campuses. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Xiang acknowledged that volunteering had also become "a 
trend or fashion", particularly among youth, but pointed out that it 
would ultimately have an important influence on their lives 
regardless of motivation.  She also believes volunteerism is on the 
rise because people have more discretionary time and resources to 
volunteer than in the past.  This is particularly true among 
students with free time during school breaks.  In addition, some 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000072  002 OF 002 
 
 
younger volunteers want to build their resumes.  Others come with a 
group of friends for a social experience.  Xiang believes the new 
volunteerism at its heart reflects a growing concern for helping 
others or to cite an often-repeated phrase, she said, young people 
wanted to create a more "harmonious society." 
 
GOLDBERG