09HONGKONG202
MEDIA REACTION: US-CHINA RELATIONS; US ECONOMY;
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
P 020908Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6806
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
USDOC WASHDC
AMEMBASSY BEIJING 
AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 
AIT TAIPEI 0187
CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS HONG KONG 000202 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, INR/IC/CD, I/FW 
DEPT FOR EAP/PD, EAP/CM, EAP/P 
DEPT FOR VOA/BRF, TV-WPA 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
PRC POSTS FOR PA 
AIT 
USPACOM FOR FOR CIS PD ADVISER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: US-CHINA RELATIONS; US ECONOMY; 
US-RUSSIA RELATIONS; CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
TOPICS: 
¶1. U.S.-China relations 
¶2. U.S. economy 
¶3. U.S.-Russia relations 
¶4. Climate change 
 
HEADLINES AND EXCERPTS: 
 
¶1. U.S.-China relations 
 
"Premier Wen says no to U.S. bonds" 
 
The independent Chinese-language Hong Kong Economic Times said in an 
editorial (2/2):  "Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visited Europe.  In 
contrast to his sober and modest attitude in the past, Premier Wen's 
remarks displayed his straightforwardness.  Yesterday, he revealed 
that U.S. President Obama was concerned about whether China would 
buy more U.S. bonds, but he said that China might not necessarily 
buy more.  His remarks have not only highlighted the rise of Chinese 
international influence, but it also showed that Premier Wen wanted 
to stress the importance of equal diplomatic relations.  Europe and 
the U.S. should not bully Beijing....  Premier Wen's remarks during 
his 'trip of confidence' is incisive.  On the one hand, he has to 
protect Chinese interests and to strive for a better international 
environment; on the other hand, he has to avoid adding to China's 
trouble in dealing with the financial tsunami.  It also shows that 
China's international influence and its right to speak have been 
increasing and it will not allow Europe and the U.S. to bully it. 
The financial tsunami has redistributed national power worldwide. 
How will the Chinese government make friends with the west in a 
manner neither haughty nor humble, and how to safeguard national 
interests, secure equality, mutual benefit, and mutual respect? 
Premier Wen's Europe trip has provided a signal." 
 
"U.S. puts pressure on China, Premier Wen skillfully deflects the 
question" 
 
The working-class Chinese-language Hong Kong Daily News wrote in an 
editorial (1/15):  "Premier Wen Jiabao, who is visiting Britain, 
said that whether China will buy more U.S. bonds will depend on its 
nation's needs and the need to safeguard the value of its foreign 
reserves.  Under the influence of the financial tsunami, the global 
economic situation is shaky. Europe and the U.S. all covet China's 
foreign reserves.  They use both soft and tough measures to try and 
force China to 'pay the bill' for the financial crisis caused by 
Europe and the U.S.  Premier Wen's remarks on the purchase of U.S. 
bonds conveys two messages: first, China has the right to use 
foreign reserves.  The decision whether to buy U.S. bonds will be 
made according to its actual needs.  Secondly, the U.S. has the 
responsibility to maintain the stability of the exchange rate of the 
U.S. dollar.  It should reduce the fluctuation of the U.S. dollar to 
cast off uncertainty in the world economy.  It will then attract 
China to buy U.S. bonds....  The global economic system has changed. 
 The U.S. needs to face the fact of Sino-U.S. economic interaction. 
The U.S. should adopt an equal and mutually beneficial approach to 
promote economic cooperation.  Only in this way can an environment 
of healthy economic development be created." 
 
"Broader focus to Sino-U.S. ties will be welcome" 
 
The independent English-language South China Morning Post said in an 
editorial (2/1):  "When two new partners find themselves locked in a 
complex dance, missteps are inevitable.  It takes time for both 
sides to find their footing.  This appears to be the case with 
Beijing and the new White House under Barack Obama.  Sino-U.S. 
relations are among the most complex and important bilateral ties in 
the world today.  The new U.S. president has gotten off to a rocky 
start.  But he has now made an overture to mend fences with his 
counterpart Hu Jintao in their first telephone conversation on 
Friday....  Despite their pledge to cooperate, it is significant 
that the two sides presented different versions of what was actually 
said on Friday.  Mr. Hu, according to the official news agency, 
Xinhua, cited the importance of mutual respect, especially in 
relation to core national interests.  He also repeated his 
opposition to trade protectionism.  However, the White House said 
Mr. Obama focused, during the conversation, on trade and economic 
imbalances that need to be addressed to solve the global financial 
crisis.  The difference in their statements reflects the two 
countries' conflicting views of what caused the financial 
meltdown....  The rise of China presents challenges and 
opportunities for the nation and the world.  As its wealth grows, 
its global influence will necessarily increase.  This has caused 
alarm in many capitals, but it need not be a threat.  Sino-U.S. ties 
will be key to managing China's rise.  But they involve many parts; 
problems in one area, such as trade, should not be allowed to 
undermine the whole.  Successful relations with the U.S. will help 
China play a more positive and productive role in world affairs." 
 
"There are reasons for the up and down of Sino-U.S. relations" 
 
The independent Chinese-language Ming Pao Daily News had an 
editorial (2/1):  "...U.S. Treasury Secretary Geithner made remarks 
about 'China manipulating the exchange rate of the yuan'.  And 
almost at the same time, Defense Secretary Gates said the U.S. 'has 
the capability to deal with China's threat'.  Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton also complained about the Bush administration only 
having economic dialogue with China.  She hopes to start a 
'comprehensive dialogue' with China.  Tough remarks on China 
policies by three heads of Obama's cabinet have triggered people's 
concern over the direction Sino-U.S. relations are taking in light 
of a second wave of financial tsunami....  China should handle the 
remarks by the Obama team in the following way: deal with the 
remarks calmly and observe the situation with a cool head.'  Judging 
from the telephone conversation between Chinese President Hu Jintao 
and President Obama last Friday, present Sino-U.S. relations are 
still good.  Although they may have small arguments from time to 
time, big confrontation is unlikely." 
 
¶2. U.S. economy 
 
"Obama has to guard against protectionism" 
 
The independent English-language South China Morning Post said in an 
editorial (2/2):  "World leaders have agreed that turning inwards 
does not offer nations a way out of severe economic difficulties. 
One of the biggest mistakes in the 1930s Depression was the U.S.' 
adoption of trade-protection policies.  The summit of the Group of 
20 largest economies in November underscored 'the critical 
importance of rejecting protectionism' in dealing with the present 
crisis.  It is worrying therefore, and worthy of condemnation, that 
such a discredited, 'beggar thy neighbor' approach should have been 
supported in the U.S. Congress....  The world awaits the Obama 
administration's response to all this.  The U.S. president needs to 
get his stimulus package approved quickly. Hopes of global economic 
recovery hinge on it.  But this should not stop him making an 
unambiguous reaffirmation of America's support for free trade, and 
using all his powers of persuasion and the prestige of his office to 
rest the 'buy American' provisions.  We hope that when the Senate 
considers them, common sense and the lessons of the past will 
prevail.  History shows that global prosperity depends on 
international co-operation, not economic isolationism." 
"Obama has to be courageous and quick in rescuing the economy" 
 
The independent Chinese-language Hong Kong Economic Times commented 
in an editorial (1/31):  "...The rapid worsening of unemployment has 
heavily hit consumption and the economy.  The increasing loss of 
financial institutions may trigger a second wave of the financial 
tsunami.  Both of the above may push the U.S. economy from recession 
to depression.  The situation is critical and it does not allow 
Obama, who took office just 10 days ago, to have any time for 
hesitation.  He must take tough measures to rescue the economy.... 
The U.S. economy and market confidence, obviously, plunge more 
quickly than the U.S. administration can act.  If Obama is to turn 
the tide and avoid a second round of the financial tsunami, as well 
as keep the recession from worsening, he must be courageous enough 
to act quickly." 
 
"The bad health of the U.S. economy is revealed in the 'shameful' 
behavior of Wall Street" 
 
The working-class Chinese-language Hong Kong Daily News wrote in an 
editorial (1/31):  "...[Looking at] the differences in the consumer 
models between eastern and western societies, the world economic 
development models can be briefly divided into two major types: the 
first one is the high consumption and widely expanding economy, as 
in the case of the U.S.; the second one is the huge savings and 
domestic demand-led economy as in China.  Which of these development 
models is better?  It is difficult to find the answer on a quiet 
day.  However, when the world economy takes an unfavorable turn, it 
is much easier to tell which is better....  As a lesson from the 
failure, should the future world economic development model follow 
the Asian example, moving towards the direction of more savings by 
keeping expenditures below income, or should they follow the old 
economic development model of the west and let the world economy 
panic from time to time?  The answer is pretty obvious." 
 
"Obama should stop greedy Wall Street" 
 
The pro-PRC Chinese-language Wen Wei Po had this editorial (1/31): 
"While the U.S. administration is using taxpayer money to save the 
finance industry, Wall Street executives, surprisingly, earned 
USD18.4 billion in bonuses last year.  President Obama is outraged 
and described the payouts as 'shameful' and having reached the 
height of irresponsibility.  Obama rebuked the bank executives for 
receiving bonuses while their banks lost money because he is, on one 
hand, angry, and on the other hand, he has to secure the 
understanding of the U.S. public and the international community to 
continue supporting Washington's bailout plan.  However, Obama 
should not stop short at condemning bank executives, he should also 
adopt effective and forceful measures to stop the greediness of Wall 
Street.  He should stop Wall Street executives from getting bonuses 
when banks are losing money.  Only in this way can he restore the 
confidence of the public and the international community in 
Washington's bailout plan." 
 
¶3. U.S.-Russia relations 
 
"Russia tests Obama's attitude on anti-missile again" 
 
The pro-PRC Chinese-language Macau Daily News remarked in an 
editorial (1/31):  "A Russian military official said recently that 
since Russia feels that the new Obama administration is not rushing 
ahead with the plan to set up an anti-missile system in Poland and 
the Czech Republic, Russia will temporarily shelve its missile plan 
in Kaliningrad.  This is Russia's goodwill gesture towards the new 
U.S. administration....  Any favorable turn in the anti-missile 
dispute will depend on a clear stance from the U.S. side.  Russian 
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov revealed that Obama and Medvedev may 
hold their first talks at the G20 summit in London on April 4.  A 
Russian Foreign Ministry spokesperson also said that Russia has 
great expectations for the meeting of the two presidents.  It seems 
that it will still take a while to see if the anti-missile dispute 
between Russia and the U.S. can be resolved." 
 
¶4. Climate change 
 
"Hope the U.S. will do something on the climate" 
 
The pro-PRC Chinese-language Macau Daily News remarked in an 
editorial (2/1):  "...Obama took several actions over the climate 
issue immediately after he took office.  It shows that Obama will 
adopt a relatively more pragmatic attitude than the Bush 
administration toward climate policy....  Obama will face many 
obstacles when he implements his policies:  the weak domestic 
economy; differences of opinion in the Congress and inside the 
Democratic Party; an American public less focused on the climate 
change issue than the financial crisis, etc.  These are all 
stumbling blocks that will hinder the implementation of Obama's 
policies.  Under the prerequisite of safeguarding U.S. interests and 
coordinating the domestic interests of all sides, we have to wait 
and see how the Obama administration will make any progress in 
dealing with climate change." 
 
DONOVAN