09ISTANBUL73
TURKEY: SENATOR DURBIN PUSHES FOR HALKI OPENING
Mon Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO9912
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHIT #0073/01 0541357
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 231357Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8779
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUFOADA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UK PRIORITY
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU PRIORITY
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 000073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL OSCE GR CY TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: SENATOR DURBIN PUSHES FOR HALKI OPENING 
 
Classified By: Consul General Sharon A. Wiener for reasons 1.4 (b) and 
(d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Senator Richard Durbin called on the 
Ecumenical Patriarch during his February 20 trip to 
Istanbul following official meetings in Nicosia, Athens, 
and Ankara.  Durbin and the Patriarch discussed solutions 
to Cyprus and the importance of Halki Seminary and a 
potential re-energizing of talks on opening the Seminary. 
While Durbin would like to include the Greek government in 
meetings on the topic in light of GOT comments on 
reciprocity on issues in Western Thrace, the Patriarch 
responded strongly and negatively to this suggestion - 
emphasizing that Halki is a Turkish institution. End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Patriarch thanked Senator Durbin for his visit 
and conveyed his best wishes for the new Administration, 
noting his confidence that the new President would have a 
fruitful tenure.  Peace and stability are greatly needed in 
the world, he said, and some refer to President Obama as 
the "new Messiah."  The Patriarch will be coming to the 
United States in October for an environmental symposium in 
Mississippi and would like to meet President Obama at that 
time. 
 
¶3. (C) The Patriarch emphasized the importance of the Halki 
Seminary for the continuation of the Greek Orthodox Church 
in Turkey. If the Ecumenical Patriarchate were to leave its 
traditional home in Istanbul, he argued, the Russian 
Orthodox Church would pursue its ambition to take over the 
administration of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, making them 
leaders of the Orthodox Church.  The Patriarchate "needs 
protection from being humiliated by Ankara and the 
ambitions of the Russians." 
 
¶4. (C) Senator Durbin explained that he came to Turkey at 
the urging of his Greek American constituents.  While in 
Ankara, he said he brought up the issue of the Halki 
Seminary in his meetings with President Gul, Deputy PM 
Cicek, and senior MFA officials, who all expressed an 
interest in resolving the issue, despite legal requirements 
that have impeded resolution to date. Durbin noted that 
these GOT officials explained that the rights of the Muslim 
minority in Greece are not being respected, pointing, as an 
example, to inequitable funding of minority schools in 
western Thrace and a cut-back in the number of 
Turkish-speaking teachers allowed to enter Greece to teach 
at these schools. While not expressly demanding a quid pro 
quo, GOT officials made clear that reciprocal action by 
Athens would go far in helping resolve this issue. 
 
Engaging Civil Society on Cyprus 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Durbin expressed his hope about a Cyprus solution to 
the Patriarch, noting that it will take "God, luck, and 
hard work" for it to be successful.  He commented on the 
positive responses he received from the Turkish-Cypriot 
leaders on Cyprus during his meetings, as well as from GOT 
officials, but the paradoxical gloomy perspective he heard 
from journalists and MPs in Ankara on the topic. The 
Patriarch responded that the Ecumenical Patriarchate's 
problems are directly related to Turkey's conflict with 
Cyprus. 
 
¶6. (C) Durbin said he was surprised by the silence of civil 
society in Cyprus and elsewhere. Political figures made 
statements, he said, but there was a distinct silence from 
ordinary people.  Durbin said he wanted to engage civil 
society to push for a solution, and suggested a religious 
reconciliation program in Cyprus.  Endy Zemenides, staff 
aide to the Illinois State Treasurer, supported Durbin's 
statement, saying that more people-to-people contact would 
be worthwhile. 
 
Patriarch Discourages GOG Presence at Halki Talks 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7. (C) While the Patriarch posited that the GOT does not 
want to sit down to a discussion of problems with the 
Patriarchate, Durbin responded that the GOT officials with 
whom he had met in Ankara said that they would like to do 
just that. He explained his plan to have someone from the 
Government of Greece (GOG) at the table as well, to start 
the conversation.  The Patriarch emphatically stated that 
 
ISTANBUL 00000073  002 OF 002 
 
 
it would not be logical to connect the issues of the Muslim 
minority in Western Thrace and a mosque in Athens with the 
issues of the Patriarchate, nor involve the GOG with a 
discussion on Halki. "Even Erdogan called Halki a Turkish 
institution, and the Patriarchate is not a representative 
of the Greek government." 
 
¶8. (C) Durbin said that, nonetheless, he wanted to explore 
all avenues in an effort to resolve the Halki issue and 
asked if the Patriarch would be able to recommend an 
appropriate GOG contact to meet with GOT MFA Deputy 
Undersecretary Haydar Berk. The Patriarch reiterated that 
he believed the GOT should meet solely with representatives 
of the Patriarchate on these issues. 
 
¶9. (C) Comment:  Immediately following his meeting with the 
Ecumenical Patriarch, Durbin called GOG FM Dora Bakoyannis 
to discuss the Halki Seminary.  He reported that GOT 
officials had hinted at a willingness to do more on Halki, 
but said that this would be facilitated by progress on 
"Turkish teachers in Thrace," and asked what she could do. 
According to Durbin's staff, Bakoyannis said she was 
willing to meet at any time with GOT interlocutors on the 
issue.  Durbin's staff also noted that the Turkish 
community in Thrace would like more daily Turkish language 
instruction in schools, and more local control over the 
hiring of teachers (who are employees of the Ministry of 
Education).  Durbin called Berk following his discussion 
with the Patriarch and his call to Bakoyannis. Berk told 
Durbin he was pleased with the notion of energizing 
dialogue both with the Ecumenical Patriarch and with the 
GOG on these issues and would be willing to meet with the 
Patriarch himself on Halki and others issues of concern to 
the Church here in Turkey.  As noted above, the Ecumenical 
Patriarch emphasized to Durbin that he is a Turkish citizen 
and that the issues of the Patriarchate and Halki Seminary 
should be resolved without regard to activities in 
neighboring countries.  Thus, the question at hand is 
whether the GOT would view any development with the GOG in 
western Thrace as sufficient to move forward with opening 
Halki Seminary, subject to identifying a legal avenue that 
would comply with legislation on provision of religious 
education in Turkey.  End Comment. 
Wiener