09KABUL367
Paktika Province Gets a New Governor
Thu Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO6393
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0367/01 0500736
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190736Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7430
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000367 
 
KABUL FOR USFOR-A COS 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
NSC FOR WOOD 
OSD FOR WILKES 
CG CJTF-101 POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM AF
 
SUBJECT:  Paktika Province Gets a New Governor 
 
Ref:  Kabul 101 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Paktika province's new governor, Abdul Qayum Katawazay, 
arrived in Sharana February 14 against the backdrop of a suicide 
attack in the provincial capital two days earlier.  Provincial, 
district, and central government officials; former governor 
Khpalwak; as well as tribal and religious leaders from the province 
attended a ceremony for the new governor's welcome.  Katawazay sees 
improving security as his top priority and a prerequisite for 
greater progress in economic development and reconstruction. 
Katawazay, a native of Paktika, assumes his position after having 
served as National Security Directorate commander in Kandahar 
province, where, according to press reporting, Afghanistan's 
Independent Human Rights Commission may have found evidence of his 
involvement in human rights abuses.  He will need to engage 
effectively with all the Pashtun tribes of Paktika, overcoming 
concerns that he may favor his own tribe or region, if he is to 
succeed as governor of this isolated and challenged province.  End 
summary. 
 
Governor Stresses Security; Leaders call for Education 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The new governor of Paktika province, Abdul Qayum Katawazay, 
arrived in the provincial capital Sharana on February 14. 
Provincial and district government officials, tribal and religious 
leaders, ANSF, PRT, and U.S. maneuver battalion members welcomed him 
in a ceremony on the governor's compound.  Former governor Mohammad 
Akram Khpalwak, Paktika Wolesi Jirga member Nadir Khan Katawazay, 
parliamentary Kuchi representative for Paktika Abdullah Jan, and 
IDLG official Qutbudin accompanied Katawazay to Sharana for the 
ceremony. 
 
¶3.  (U) After a brief introduction by the IDLG representative that 
emphasized the constitutional nature of the appointment of 
governors, Katawazay gave short remarks stressing his experience in 
security matters and identifying bringing security to Paktika as his 
top priority.  Former governor Khpalwak gave a longer speech 
emphasizing President Karzai's support to Paktika during Khpalwak's 
time as governor and ANSF and CF cooperation for the benefit of the 
province.  Several of the speakers stressed the need for education 
in Paktika, noting that large numbers of schools in the province 
have been destroyed or closed.  Paktika NDS commander Yasin pointed 
out that the people themselves must choose to support the 
educational opportunities that GIRoA is providing.  MP Nadir Khan 
called on the people to help reduce civilian casualties by denying 
refuge to Taliban in their communities.  Provincial Council Chairman 
Nawab Waziri and others pledged the cooperation of the leaders and 
people of Paktika with the new governor. 
 
Suicide Attack Asserts Taliban Presence in Sharana 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (U) Katawazay arrived against the backdrop of a suicide bombing 
on February 13 at an ANP checkpoint at the side entrance to the 
governor's compound that killed one ANP and injured eight others. 
The local national most seriously injured in the incident is a 
bodyguard and cousin of former governor Khpalwak and Paktika 
Director for Administration Hazrat Mohammad.  The injured were 
brought to the Sharana Forward Operating Base (FOB), where the four 
most seriously injured were stabilized and later flown to Bagram Air 
Field for advanced treatment. 
 
¶5.  (U) This attack, carried out by an elderly man on foot wearing a 
suicide vest, took place the day after tribal leaders from around 
the province first assembled in Sharana to welcome Katawazay, who, 
for reasons described as technical, did not reach Sharana that day. 
PRT members, who had also come to the governor's compound to greet 
Katawazay, used the opportunity to talk with the tribal leaders. 
The tribal leaders said irrigation and agricultural projects are the 
people's greatest needs, followed by women's health facilities. 
(Note: There are no female doctors in Paktika.  End note.)  These 
are high priority areas for the Provincial Development Committee and 
the PRT's project planning. 
 
Tribal Leaders Dubious but Ready to Cooperate 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Asked their thoughts about the new governor, the Omna 
district administrator said Katawazay is "one of us" so he won't be 
so inclined to use the job "to fill his pockets."  (Note: This 
 
KABUL 00000367  002 OF 002 
 
 
district administrator, Nader Khan, was reappointed to Omna district 
in January after having been fired from the same job for corruption; 
he has recently departed the district again under new allegations of 
corruption.  Contacts in Governor Khpalwak's office told PRT that no 
one else would take the job following the destruction of the 
district center and clinic by Taliban in late November.  End note.) 
Some of the other tribal leaders made audible comments indicating 
they felt less optimistic about Katawazay; some appeared concerned 
that, being a native of Paktika, he might favor his own tribe and 
region over others.  All the leaders agreed, however, that they 
would cooperate with the new governor. 
 
Governor Ready to Cooperate with PRT and CF 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) On February 16 PRT Commander and State Department 
representative held a brief introductory meeting with Katawazay at 
his office.  Katawazay expressed his readiness to cooperate closely 
with PRT and CF and repeated that his top priority for Paktika is to 
improve security, given that greater progress in development will be 
impossible without this.  He agreed with PRT's suggestion to travel 
with the PRT to the province's districts to establish strong 
relationships with the district leaders and the tribes. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) As reported reftel, there was opposition within Paktika 
and among its MPs to Katawazay's nomination.  According to press 
reports, Katawazay's appointment also faced opposition from 
Afghanistan's Independent Human Rights Commission, which raised 
allegations of prisoner abuse from Katawazay's NDS tenure in 
Kandahar.  If Katawazay engages energetically with all of Paktika's 
five major tribes in his first days in office and takes their 
concerns into account, we believe he can overcome the doubts that 
have been raised and become an effective governor.  PRT will 
cooperate closely with him to that end and will monitor his 
progress.  End comment. 
 
Biographical Note 
----------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Katawazay was born in 1965 in Paktika Province.  He is a 
native of Seygana village in Paktika's Khair Kot district.  He 
belongs to the Mahmudkhel sub-tribe of the Suleimankhel (Pashtun) 
tribe.  He graduated from the military college in Kabul in 1986 and 
then worked for a time with the National Directorate of Security 
(NDS) before working for the Ministry of Defense.  Since 2001 he has 
served as the NDS chief in five different provinces:  Paktika 
(2001-2002); Zabul (2002-2003); Wardak (2003-2004); Ghazni 
(2004-2005); and Kandahar (2005-2008).  He speaks both Pashto and 
Dari and is fluent in Arabic and Urdu.  His English is limited. 
 
WOOD