09KABUL404
JUNBESH SEEKS COMPROMISE ON PRESIDENTIAL CONTINUITY
Wed Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO1565
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0404 0560411
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 250411Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7486
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS KABUL 000404 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV AF
SUBJECT: JUNBESH SEEKS COMPROMISE ON PRESIDENTIAL CONTINUITY 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Junbesh-e-Milli leaders say the 
majority-Uzbek party is willing to play a constructive role 
in negotiations with President Karzai and other political 
leaders over post-5/22 executive authority.   Most Junbesh 
leaders insist Karzai must step aside after the 
constitutional expiration of his term, but are encouraging 
the United Front and other opposition groups to be more open 
to compromise with the president on the details of a 
caretaker government.  Junbesh fully supports the 8/20 
election date and promises to discourage supporters from 
organizing protests if Karzai remains in office though the 
inauguration. 
 
Looking to Play a Constructive Role 
----------- 
 
¶2.    (SBU) Junbesh executive committee member and Jowzjan MP 
Faizullah Zaki told PolOff on 2/24 that the party decided 
this month to support and prepare for the 8/20 election date. 
 The party opposes moving the election to an earlier date to 
comply with the Constitution.  "It's too late to go back 
now," Zaki said.  Zaki has pushed the party to focus on the 
issue of post-5/22 executive authority, asking colleagues to 
put off a decision on its presidential endorsement until 
"this more important issue" is solved.   Like other 
opposition groups, most Junbesh leaders believe Karzai should 
either step aside in favor of a caretaker government after 
5/22 or not stand for re-election if he decides to stay in 
office through the conclusion of the election.  The suspicion 
that Karzai will use government agencies to aid his campaign 
underlies this position. 
 
¶3.    (SBU) Junbesh Chairman Sayed Noorullah earlier told 
PolOff the government must focus on improving the security 
situation to hold an election, but needed a legal rationale 
if it wanted to remain in power after 5/22.  Unlike other 
Junbesh leaders, Noorullah has held out the option of 
supporting Karzai, though he understands the bulk of his 
party prefers the president leave office.  Noorullah would 
also support Upper House Speaker Mojaddedi serving as 
caretaker president.  Despite their willingness to find a 
compromise solution, both Noorullah and Zaki have expressed 
frustration that Karzai has ignored Junbesh after party 
founder Gen. Dostum departed for Turkey in December. 
 
Downplaying Crisis 
---------- 
 
¶4.    (SBU) Zaki is exploring incentives to draw Karzai into 
negotiations with the opposition and downplay the potential 
for a crisis that could weaken the government at a time of 
increased Taliban attacks.  Zaki suggests an argument whereby 
Karzai steps down before 5/22, a non-partisan figure assumes 
the presidency, and the current Cabinet remains in office. 
Zaki and Noorullah have agreed to push their allies in other 
political parties to be open to compromise, Zaki targeting 
the United Front and Noorullah appealing to his contacts in 
Hazara leader Mohaqqeq's Hezb-e-Wahdat faction. 
 
¶5.    (SBU) PolOff outlined the U.S. position: resolution of 
the executive authority issue required Afghan political 
leaders (including Karzai and key opposition leaders) to work 
together to find an agreed-to political solution. The U.S. 
would advocate no specific outcome, but would insist the 
eventual solution preserve the 8/20 election, maintain a 
strong government during the peak fighting season, and 
support the authority and goals of the Constitution.  Those 
who resisted a sensible solution to the problem could face 
repercussions from voters in the election or in their future 
relations with the United States.  Zaki appreciated the U.S. 
focus on providing security and its neutrality in political 
matters. 
 
¶6.    (SBU) Zaki said Junbesh will promote a rational 
dialogue in all of its discussions with other parties, 
including Karzai.  Junbesh has no interest in organizing 
protests to oppose the government if Karzai remains in office 
after 5/22.  "The Taliban will take advantage (of protests)," 
Zaki said.  "We're not going to be responsible for opening up 
a target for their attacks." 
DELL