09KHARTOUM185
GOVERNMENT OF SOUTHERN SUDAN FACES UNPRECEDENTED ECONOMIC
Mon Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6406
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0185/01 0401509
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091509Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2940
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 000185 
 
DEPT FOR D, AF A A/S CARTER, AF/SPG, AF/E, EEB/IFD 
NSC FOR CHUDSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
DEPT PLS PASS TREASURY FOR OIA, USED IMF, AND USED WORLD BANK 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS ECON EFIN EAID SOCI SU
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT OF SOUTHERN SUDAN FACES UNPRECEDENTED ECONOMIC 
CRISIS 
 
REF: A. 08 Khartoum 1034 
¶B. 08 Khartoum 1765 
¶C. Khartoum 129 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: The Government of Southern Sudan (GOSS) is on the 
cusp of a major economic crisis, hobbled by the absence of a strong 
fiscal policy and hostage to plummeting oil prices. After two years 
of seemingly limitless oil revenues and a burst in spending, the 
GOSS is making widespread budget cuts, has warned the SPLA that for 
the months of February and March troops would be paid food in lieu 
of salary, and is seeking a USD$100 million loan from the Kenya 
Commercial Bank.  The crisis lends increasing urgency to the 
North-South dispute over foreign exchange reserves, which is a 
separate but contributing factor to the sense of financial crisis. 
The fledgling sub-national government, shell-shocked by the economic 
tumult, has no real strategy to deal with the situation.  While 
officials conceded that a crisis is at hand, their proffered 
solutions serve only to highlight the GOSS's naivete with respect to 
economic-policy planning.  The SPLM sees the malevolent hand of the 
NCP in the current crisis, but the GNU is facing a similar crisis 
(though not quite as bad because the North is not as dependent on 
oil revenue) and while the NCP can be blamed for many things, it 
cannot be blamed for a fall in oil prices nor the lack of proper 
fiscal planning by the GOSS since 2005.  However, the GNU's failure 
to transfer money to Abyei only exacerbates the problem.  END 
SUMMARY. 
2009 GOSS BUDGET: "DEFICIT BY DESIGN" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶2. (SBU) On January 27, the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly 
(SSLA) approved the GOSS's US$1.8 billion budget. The GOSS budget 
relies on oil-sale proceeds for 93 percent of its revenue.  (In 
contrast, the Government of National Unity (GNU) in Khartoum depends 
on oil for 43 percent of its revenues.)  GOSS Finance Minister Kuol 
Athian Mawien conceded to Acting CG Juba that, barring an uptick in 
oil prices, the 2009 budget is one of "deficit-by-design."  Based on 
oil-revenue projections pegged to a baseline price of US$50 per 
barrel, there is "no space to compensate" for the fact that Sudanese 
Dar crude oil currently sells at less than US$15 per barrel. 
Projected February oil revenues (an estimated US$16.2 million for 
the South) cover only eight percent of GOSS expenditures.  The GNU 
informed Juba in mid-January that it could expect to receive only 
US$76 million in revenues for the first quarter of 2009.  Monthly 
GOSS salary and operating expenses alone average US$75.6 million and 
US$73.9 million respectively.  GOSS capital expenditures -- the 
peace dividend on which the SPLM bases its credibility -- average 
US$49.5 million per month. (NOTE: Non-oil revenue sharing between 
Khartoum and Juba for the first-half of 2008 yielded the South a 
scant US$3.05 million, US$1.9 million of which still had not been 
transferred to the GOSS by July 2008.  END NOTE.) 
 
FINGER-POINTING AMIDST MOUNTING FISCAL MIS-STEPS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶3. (SBU) World Bank officials noted to Acting CG that the budget's 
approval some twenty-seven days into the GoSS fiscal year "will have 
a tsunami-like impact on the government's ability to control 
first-quarter spending and debt accrual."  Not only must ministries 
grapple with the task of pushing delayed appropriations through an 
ill-equipped, limited-capacity procurement system, but they are 
scrambling to scale back expenditure choices that were based on 
dated projections of a 15 percent across-the-board budget increase. 
The decline in oil revenue - and Sudan's ability to find only one 
purchaser (China) for the majority of its crude for the months of 
November, December, and January -- forced the South's executive 
branch to abandon its earlier commitment of a "2009 budget top-up" 
in late December 2008, sacrificing not only hefty development 
initiatives in health, agriculture, and education in the South, but 
gutting the entirety of the "Abyei shadow budget." (NOTE: Although 
GNU is responsible for funding the Abyei Administration, GOSS 
ministries had initially designated US$63 million their coffers to 
fund projects in the region which is still technically part of 
"North Sudan" but an area of key SPLM concern. END NOTE.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Ex-Finance Minister (current Information/Broadcasting 
Minister) Gabriel Changson Chang, Agriculture Minister Samson Kwaje, 
Legal Affairs Minister Michael Makuei, and Minister for Presidential 
Affairs Luka Biong Deng have all complained that Finance Minister 
Kuol Athian Mawien failed to explain to state governments and 
regional ministries in a "timely fashion" the degree and severity of 
the South's budget contractions.  Finance Minister Athian rejects 
charges that he has been insufficiently transparent on the budget. 
 
 
FINANCIAL FALLOUT SPREADING 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
KHARTOUM 00000185  002 OF 004 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Regardless of who is to blame, fallout can already be seen 
throughout the South.  Juba Teaching Hospital staff learned January 
19 that they would be placed on a one-week unpaid furlough.  After 
two days of strikes, the Health Ministry reinstated pay and replaced 
the GOSS Health Undersecretary.  Southern teachers, already owed a 
collective US$10 million in back-pay, have been informed that they 
will suffer a 20 percent pay-cut in 2009. First Vice President of 
Sudan and GOSS President Salva Kiir Mayardit is seven-months behind 
in delivering on a series of "one-off commitments" to build schools, 
health clinics, and drill boreholes promised during his visits to 
Warrap, Unity, Upper Nile, and Northern Bahr el Ghazal states.  As 
First Vice President of the GNU, Kiir is entitled to a US$15 million 
"donations allowance."  However, the GNU Finance Ministry is 
allegedly refusing to disburse donations for travel conducting in 
the South, even though this was initially authorized by the GNU 
Presidency.  The GOSS Ministry of Finance has been tasked to "find" 
monies within the GOSS budget to preserve Kiir's public standing. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Long-planned initiatives to support state-level 
decentralization, and efforts curb disproportionate government 
spending on salaries (which now amount for 61 percent of all GOSS 
expenditures), have been indefinitely delayed.  Government 
"right-sizing" initiatives targeting ghost-workers and a bloated 
SPLA and "Organized Security Forces" (police, prisons service, 
wildlife services, and fire brigades) also have been impacted. Plans 
to transfer approximately 35,000 soldiers from the SPLA's ranks to 
the auspices of the "War Disabled, War Widows, and Orphans 
Commission" by the end of January have been delayed until April. 
GOSS pledges to the UN DDR Program for the South have been placed on 
an indefinite hold, further stalling "reintegration" of 25,021 
ex-combatants into their original communities. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The impact of the budget crisis is especially acute within 
the security sector, and places a disproportionate burden on state 
governments. The SPLA's 2009 budget remains at untenable 2008 
funding levels, although that level provided insufficient payroll 
coverage last year and now also must cover six-months of food and 
fuel carry-over costs.  Juba requires US$15.6 million on hand each 
month to transfer to each of the South's ten states so that state 
governors can pay the Organized Security Forces.  The Inspector 
General of the Southern Sudan Police Service (SSPS) told Acting CG 
January 23 that not only does he not have a solution to the fact 
that the GOSS will not have enough funds to pay approximately 60,000 
police in February, but he also bitterly complained that he never 
saw the Ministry of Internal Affairs budget until after it was 
tabled at the Assembly. 
 
ARREARS IMPEDE GOSS FINANCIAL AUTONOMY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶8. (SBU) The South's first-time accrual of arrears imperils Juba's 
attempts to secure external financing or development loans 
independent of Khartoum.  Frustrated by the pace of Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund disbursals, the GOSS spent months researching the 
possibility of securing development loans from the IMF, the World 
Bank, and commercial entities.  GOSS Finance Minister Mawien 
fast-tracked the initiative in March 2008 after Beijing reneged on a 
June 2007 pledge to provide direct credit to Juba, citing the lack 
of collateral.  (NOTE: This reportedly marked the eighth time the 
GOSS had suffered a bilateral loan commitment breach.  To date, only 
India has fulfilled such a pledge with a US$50 million agro-loan. 
END NOTE.) 
 
¶9. (SBU) Seeking to improve Juba's credit-worthiness, Mawien claimed 
that he invoked the terms of a December 2007 Memorandum of Agreement 
between the GNU and the GOSS regarding Central Bank of Sudan 
(CBOS)/Bank of Southern Sudan (BOSS) relations to justify the 
transfer of foreign-currency reserves in the BOSS into a GOSS 
off-shore account in Bahrain, and then again to Stanbic Commercial 
Bank in Kenya in 2008 (ref. B).  Juba's strategic reserve holdings 
in Stanbic now total over US$500 million, earning a US$9 million 
five-month investment-return.  (Note: The SPLM State Minister of 
Finance in the GNU has told us that this action was against the 
terms of the CPA and that the money should be returned to the CBOS. 
This issue looms as yet another factor that could contribute to a 
simmering crisis between the CPA parties. End note.) 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Although Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB), Stanbic Bank, and 
Citibank all have expressed interest in issuing commercial loans to 
the GOSS, only Citibank has committed to issuance of financial 
guarantees for the GOSS to overseas parties - pending issuance of an 
OFAC license by the U.S. Treasury.  Moreover, upcoming GOSS 
negotiations with KCB regarding Juba's first-ever receipt of a 
US$100 million loan will, if granted, only cover GOSS salary and 
 
KHARTOUM 00000185  003 OF 004 
 
 
operating expenses for one month. 
 
FOREIGN EXCHANGE DROUGHT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶11. (SBU) Mawien complained that Khartoum's refusal to transfer 
additional foreign-currency to Juba not only undermines GOSS efforts 
to secure external financing, but it necessitates tapping into the 
strategic reserve for certain purchases and payments (food imports, 
purchase of weaponry, maintenance of GOSS Liaison Offices overseas). 
 The Finance Minister repeatedly pledged to SSLA members during 
budget debates that the GOSS learned valuable lessons from the 
2005-2007 period, when Mawien's predecessors (one of whom was sacked 
on corruption charges) blew US$465.5 million from the South's 
strategic reserves. (NOTE:  Mawien himself authorized 
over-expenditures of approximately US$23 million following his July 
2007 appointment.  END NOTE.)  2008 marked the first time that the 
Southern Government was able to make consistently contribute to its 
reserve holdings, because of the oil bonanza - and the Finance 
Minister cautioned the SSLA against forcing Juba to abandon that 
legacy.  "By the end of 2007 the GOSS had almost no savings at all - 
we have made every effort that the 2009 budget is balanced, so that 
we do not go into deficit and use up the money we have saved this 
year and we can protect our reserves," he said. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The CBOS withholding of additional hard-currency from 
Southern Sudan has placed an additional weight on the BOSS.  BOSS 
President Elijah Malok told Acting CG January 2 that insufficient 
dollar-reserves forced the Bank to transfer US$20 million from the 
2008 budget back to the South's strategic reserve at the end of the 
Sudanese fiscal year.  Alok noted that the Bank was unable to 
process all of the GOSS's financial obligations for the month of 
December despite the BOSS calling-in the totality of its 
hard-currency commitments to Juba's four commercial banks.  CBOS 
Assistant Governor Kornelio Koriom Mayik told Acting CG on January 
16 that the BOSS had exhausted the totality of its hard-currency 
stock.  "The only dollars in the South are those at KCB," he 
claimed. 
 
FOREX CRISIS: SPLM - CARPE DIEM 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶13. (SBU) In Juba January 27, Charge Fernandez urged the SPLM to 
seize the opportunity provided by increasing ICC pressure on Bashir 
and the NCP to resolve North/South foreign exchange crisis.  "We 
worry that the GOSS will be placed in a dangerous situation, one 
that eventually places you at the mercy of the National Congress 
Party," he cautioned.  The SPLM's strength and the ability of the 
GOSS and the CPA to avoid the fate of the systemic dismantling of 
both the ESPA and DPA rests in Wealth Sharing Agreement, and the 
South's ability to collect oil proceeds (plus the South having its 
own standing army).  The financial crisis is the South's Achilles 
Heel, which Charge predicted the NCP could aggressively take 
advantage of as pressure on Khartoum intensifies.  Minister for 
Regional Cooperation Benjamin agreed, asserting that the NCP's 
repeated claims that the BOSS is a subordinate entity of the Central 
Bank are without merit.  "The NCP has played a card that is very 
transparent - it is a direct and dangerous threat to the CPA to 
undermine the South's economic stability." (Note: Benjamin failed to 
note that the major elements of the problem, collapsing oil prices 
and poor financial management in Juba, are not caused by the 
malevolent regime in Khartoum. End note.) 
 
¶14. (SBU) Presidential Affairs Minister Luka Biong Deng noted 
similar concerns.  Deng reviewed GOSS discussions with World Bank 
President Robert Zoellick in Washington, DC in January 2009 that led 
the GOSS to believe that, with the lobbying assistance of key donor 
allies, the World Bank would be inclined to consider Heavily 
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) assistance for Southern Sudan. (NOTE: 
  World Bank Country Representative Laurence Clarke told Deng on 
February 3 that he believed that securing HIPC for a sub-national 
entity like the GOSS would be a lengthy and ultimately fruitless 
process, and counseled the GOSS to look to more viable short-term 
solutions. END NOTE.)  While the CDA was non-committal about U.S. 
support for GOSS HIPC-efforts, he did stress that the USG already 
had warned the NCP informally that should Khartoum attempt to use 
its budget crisis to squeeze an already strapped Juba, "we would 
view it as an act of subterfuge - and sabotage - to the CPA." 
 
¶15. (SBU) Both Deng and Benjamin noted that the foreign exchange 
crisis, which has remained under the Sudanese political radar for 
the last nine months as a "technical matter," is now being elevated 
to the level of the joint SPLM/NPC Executive Committee Talks now 
that the fall in oil prices has begun to bite.  Helmed by GOSS Vice 
President Riek Machar and GNU Vice President Ali Osman Taha, the 
transfer of the forex debate will at least ensure that President 
 
KHARTOUM 00000185  004 OF 004 
 
 
Kiir will be kept better-informed of the parameters of that 
particular part of the crisis.  CBOS Assistant Governor Mayik 
privately complained to Acting CG that attempts by the BOSS to place 
the forex crisis on the agenda the GNU Presidency were repeatedly 
overtaken by "political events of a more-pressing nature" - namely 
elections and the 2011 Referendum issues still under debate within 
the Executive Committee. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
¶16. (SBU) While the severe economic impact of the drop in world oil 
prices is only now becoming clear, this crisis has been looming for 
months.  Although 2009 GOSS oil revenues are sharply below last 
year's, they are projected to be approximately the same as in 2007, 
so lack of budget discipline is in fact a greater problem than are 
falling oil prices.  The fact remains that, since 2005, the GOSS has 
gone through money like a sailor on shore leave. Neither of these 
problems has been a secret (Finance Minister Mawien highlighted both 
in his FY 2008 budget address to the SSLA), but the GOSS has proved 
unable or unwilling to correct either one.  The GOSS seriously 
overspent its budget in the early months of both 2007 and 2008, but 
was able to finish both years in the black, thanks to its oil 
revenue windfall.  The 2008 supplemental increased the budget by 
1,478 percent.  That luxury is no longer available, but based on 
past performance, there is little room for optimism that the GOSS 
will be able to restrain its profligate spending.  The dispute over 
CBOS/BOSS forex holdings is really a separate issue, although the 
GOSS' increasing desperation make it unlikely to give any ground on 
this issue in order to hold on to any foreign exchange it can.  The 
GOSS' failure to find other revenue sources, lack of fiscal 
discipline and poor budget management leave it at the mercy of the 
GNU and the NCP, which may be one of the reasons the SPLM has been 
relatively muted in its statements regarding the looming ICC 
indictment of President Bashir. Salva Kiir has been very successful 
in buying a level of progress and social peace in South Sudan 
unprecedented in the region's history and wealth sharing has been 
one of the major successes of the CPA. If there is no wealth now - 
because of the decline in oil revenues - and little savings, because 
of GOSS's lack of fiscal discipline, South Sudan, with its 
150,000-man army, begins to enter dangerous, uncharted waters in 
¶2009. 
 
FERNANDEZ