09MANAMA55
BAHRAIN INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT, 2009
Sun Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMK #0055/01 0320428
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010428Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8397
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS MANAMA 000055 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EB/IFD/OIA AND NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON OPIC KTDB USTR BA
SUBJECT: BAHRAIN INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT, 2009 
 
REF: 08 STATE 123907 
 
¶1. Summary: The following is Post's submission of its Investment 
Climate Statement for 2009. Each paragraph is keyed to the format 
provided reftel.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Bahrain Investment Climate Statement 2009 
 
A.1 Openness to Foreign Investment 
----------------------------------- 
The Government of Bahrain has a generally liberal approach to 
foreign investment and is eager to improve Bahrain's attractiveness 
to international investors and businesses.  Top government officials 
make frequent public statements citing growth of foreign investment 
as one of the government's main priorities.  According to GOB 
officials, Bahrain rates number 27 in attracting foreign direct 
investment and the average foreign direct investment into the local 
market reached USD 2.8 billion over the past three years. 
 
The government has focused its efforts on the entry of new private 
firms, particularly in the information and communications 
technology, education and training services, tourism, financial 
services, business services, healthcare services and downstream 
industries.  Bahrain's Crown Prince is also an outspoken proponent 
of privatization in Bahrain, and took over the chairmanship of the 
Economic Development Board (EDB), with a stated goal to provide a 
"one-stop-shop" for potential investors. 
 
In an economy largely dominated by parastatals (outside of the 
financial services sector), the Government of Bahrain seeks to 
foster a greater private sector role in economic growth.  Following 
the creation of a Supreme Privatization Council in the spring of 
2001, the King of Bahrain, Sheikh Hamad bin Isa Al-Khalifa, issued a 
decree on October 2002 laying out guidelines for privatizing 
tourism, telecommunications, transport, electricity and water, ports 
and airport services, oil and gas, and postal service sectors.  In 
June 2006, the government formed the Bahrain Mumtalakat Holding 
Company, to manage all of the government's investments.  Mumtalakat 
has an official objective to reduce their shares in any company to 
less than 50%.  At the end of 2008, Mumtalakat held a 100% share in 
the following companies: 
-Al-Awali Real Estate Company 
-Bahrain Airport Company 
-Bahrain Food Holding Co. 
-Bahrain International Circuit 
-Bahrain Real Estate Company (Edamah) 
-Gulf Air 
-Gulf Air Group Holding Company 
-Howar Island Development Company 
-Tourism Projects Company 
 
Mumtalakat also holds a 70% share in Aluminum Bahrain (ALBA); all 
its other holdings are below a 50% share.  At the end of 2008, 
Mumtalakat was in negotiations to sell its 37.6% of 
Telecomunications provider Batelco to a strategic partner. 
 
The telecommunications sector was the first key sector to be 
liberalized in Bahrain following the government's announced interest 
in opening traditionally government-controlled industries.  The 
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA), established in late 
2002, awarded a mobile telecommunications services license to 
MTC-Vodafone, thus ending the monopoly of Bahrain's telecom services 
provider, Batelco.  The license was awarded under the 
Telecommunications Law, which took effect January 2003. 
Telecommunications liberalization extended to paging services, very 
small aperture terminal (VSAT), public access mobile radio services, 
international telecommunications facilities, international 
telecommunications services, national fixed services, internet 
service provider (ISP) and value-added services license following 
the full liberalization of the sector on July 1, 2004.  By December 
2004, the TRA announced the provision of three International 
Telecommunications Facility licenses (IFLs), five International 
Telecommunications Services Licenses (ISLs), five VSAT licenses, 
fifteen value-added Services (VAS) "Class" licenses and eight 
Internet Service Provider (ISP) licenses.  Also under the new 
Telecommunication Law, mobile provider Zain International relocated 
their headquarters from Kuwait to Bahrain.  In January 2009, the TRA 
awarded a third mobile telecom license to Saudi Telecom Company 
(STC). 
 
The public transportation service was also privatized in 2003. CARS, 
a Bahraini-UAE joint venture, started operating in May 2003 with 41 
new, air-conditioned, 52-seat buses. The CARS company completed its 
plan to acquire 20 new buses by the end of 2003. The government 
renewed the contract with CARS until April 2012. Its total 
investment in the public transportation privatization project is 
approximately USD 18 million. 
 
The Kingdom's first independent power plant project (IPP) was also 
successfully tendered and awarded to Bahraini-based Al Ezzel 
Independent Power Producer (IPP), which is equally owned by a 
Belgian-Gulf consortium of Tractebel EGI and Gulf Investment 
Corporation. In 2006, the government sold their biggest electrical 
plant Al Hidd Power Station for USD 728 Million to the consortium. 
At the end of 2008, the Tender Board awarded a USD 2.2 billion 
contract to build a new electrical power plant in Bahrain-the Al Dur 
Water and Power Station-to Kuwait-based Gulf Investment 
Corporation(GIC) and France's GDF Suez. 
 
In 2008, the government moved the Directorate of Ports to a new 
General Organization of Ports that oversees all port activities, 
both marine and air. Four international operators have been 
short-listed to manage Mina Salman and the new Mina Khalifa ports. 
In 2006, the tender was awarded to the Danish company Muller. The 
new port will start operating in the first quarter of 2009. 
 
In 2006 the Bahrain Monetary Agency transformed into the Central 
Bank of Bahrain (CBB).  Seeking to maintain Bahrain's status as the 
Gulf region's preeminent financial center, the CBB changed its 
licensing practices in 2006 to give banks greater opportunities to 
invest domestically and regionally. The CBB has been active in 
developing regulations for the Islamic Banking sector, and has been 
instrumental in making Bahrain a recognized center of Islamic 
Banking. 
 
The Bahrain Stock Exchange (BSE) allows GCC firms and GCC persons to 
own up to 100 percent of listed Bahraini companies.  Non-GCC 
firms/persons may own up to 49 percent of listed Bahraini companies, 
and 100 percent of foreign companies.   The Minister of Industry and 
Commerce chairs the BSE Board of Directors, but it is operated as an 
independent corporate entity.    In August 2006, a Free Trade 
agreement between the U.S. and the Kingdom of Bahrain went into 
effect. 
 
In March 2004, as part of an effort to stimulate the insurance 
industry and reinforce Bahrain's position as a major insurance 
center in the Middle East, the Bahrain Monetary Authority (now CBB) 
lifted the requirement that foreign insurance brokers and loss 
adjusters have a local partner to operate.  These firms, which were 
previously required to have at least 51 percent Bahraini-ownership, 
are now permitted to operate with 100 percent foreign-ownership. 
The CBB is holding consultations on further reform in areas such as 
captive insurance, solvency, business conduct, risk management and 
financial crime, enforcement, BMA reporting and public disclosure, 
intermediaries, and Islamic insurance.  Taxation and import laws 
apply equally to Bahraini and foreign-owned companies, and foreign 
investors must comply with the same requirements and legislation, as 
do local firms. 
 
Bahrain requires that pharmaceutical products be imported directly 
from a manufacturer with a research department and that the products 
be licensed in at least two other GCC countries, one of which must 
be Saudi Arabia.   Drugs and medicines may be imported only by a 
drug store or pharmacy licensed by the Ministry of Commerce after 
approval by the Ministry of Health.  Bahrain prohibits the 
importation of weapons (except under special license), pornography, 
wild animals, radio-controlled model airplanes, foodstuffs 
containing cyclamates, and children's toys containing methyl 
chloride (and other articles declared harmful by the Ministry of 
Health).  Bahrain is also taking steps to ban the import of 129 
chemicals. 
 
Bahrain has phased out most subsidies for export industries, but 
permits duty-free importation of raw materials for export products 
and of equipment and machinery for newly established export 
industries.  All industries in Bahrain, including foreign-owned 
firms, benefit from government subsidized utilities. 
 
Periodically, foreign firms experience difficulty obtaining required 
work permits and residence visas for expatriate employees due to the 
Bahraini government's efforts to promote greater numbers of Bahraini 
citizens in the workforce. However, this does not appear to be a 
matter of high-level policy, and often can be resolved on a 
case-by-case basis.  Where problems occur, U.S. businesses are 
encouraged to apply to the highest levels of the concerned 
ministries, and to consult the U.S. Embassy. 
 
Bahrain offers several advantages to U.S. and other foreign 
investors, including a Bilateral Investment Treaty with the United 
States--in force as of May 2001--and a bilateral Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA) in force as of August 2006. 
The government actively seeks Bahraini and foreign private 
investments in large infrastructure projects.  Previously, most such 
activity (other than hotels) was funded by development agencies from 
other Gulf countries (particularly Kuwait, UAE, and Saudi Arabia). 
Foreign-owned companies are eligible for partial financing from the 
state-owned Bahraini Development Bank (BDB), if they meet certain 
criteria such as providing training and employment to a significant 
number of Bahrainis. 
 
A.2 Conversion and Transfer Policies 
------------------------------------- 
Bahrain has no restrictions on the repatriation of profits or 
capital and no exchange controls.  Bahrain's currency, the Bahraini 
Dinar (BD), is fully and freely convertible at the fixed rate of USD 
1.00 = BD 0.377 (1 BD = USD 2.659). There is no black market or 
parallel exchange rate. 
 
Foreign exchange is readily available and a devaluation of the 
Bahraini Dinar over the next year is unlikely. 
 
There are no restrictions on converting or transferring funds, 
whether or not associated with an investment. 
 
A.3 Expropriation and Compensation 
----------------------------------- 
There have been no expropriations in recent years, and no cases in 
contention. The U.S.-Bahrain Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) 
protects U.S. investments by banning all expropriations (including 
"creeping" and "measures tantamount to") except those for a public 
purpose. In which case, it must be carried out in a 
non-discriminatory manner, with due process, and prompt, adequate, 
effective compensation. 
 
A.4 Dispute Settlement 
----------------------- 
Bahrain has a long-established framework of commercial law.  English 
is widely used, and well-known international (including U.S.) law 
firms, working in association with local partners, provide expert 
legal services both nationally and regionally.  Fees are charged 
according to internationally accepted practices.  Although only a 
Bahraini lawyer can argue in a Bahraini court of law, lawyers of 
other nationalities can and do work on cases. In April, 2007, the 
government allowed the establishment of International Law Firms that 
provide services such as commercial and financial consultancy in 
legal matters. Moreover the Ministry of Justice is working to 
establish a Commercial and Financial specialized court to fast-track 
all the cases. 
 
From May 2001, the U.S.-Bahraini BIT provides for 3 dispute 
settlement options: 
 
Submitting the dispute to a local court; 
Invoking dispute-resolution procedures previously agreed upon by the 
national or company and the host country government; 
Submitting dispute for binding arbitration to ICSID (International 
Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes) or any arbitral 
institution agreed upon by both parties. 
 
The GCC Commercial Arbitration Center, established in 1995, serves 
as a regional specialized body providing arbitration services.  It 
assists in resolving disputes between GCC countries or between other 
parties and GCC countries.  The Center implements rules and 
regulations in line with accepted international practice.  Thus far, 
few cases have been brought to arbitration.  The Center conducts 
seminars, symposia, and workshops to help educate and update its 
members of any new arbitration related matters. 
 
The Center's contact details are as follows: 
 
GCC Commercial Arbitration Center 
P.O. Box 2338 
Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain 
Tel: + (973) 17-214-800 
Fax: + (973) 17-214-500 
Website: http://www.gccarbitration.com/ 
Email: arbit395@batelco.com.bh 
 
Arbitration procedures are largely a contractual matter. Disputes 
are historically referred to an arbitration body as specified in the 
contract, or to the local courts.  Increasingly, Bahraini companies, 
in dealings with both local and foreign firms, include arbitration 
procedures in their contracts.  Most commercial disputes are 
resolved privately without recourse to the courts or formal 
arbitration.  Bahraini law is generally specified in all contracts 
for the settlement of disputes that reach the stage of formal 
resolution.  Occasional lawsuits against individuals or companies 
for nonpayment of debts have been adequately handled by Bahrain's 
court system. 
 
The guidelines laid down by the International Chamber of Commerce 
(ICC) in Paris are generally respected, and disputes have been 
occasionally referred to arbitration at the ICC in Paris.  Bahrain 
is a signatory to the New York Convention of 1958 on the Recognition 
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitration Awards. 
 
A.5 Performance Requirements and Incentives 
--------------------------------------------- 
There are no special performance requirements imposed on foreign 
investors.  This is reinforced by the U.S. - Bahraini BIT, which 
forbids mandated performance requirements as a condition for the 
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct or 
operation of a covered investment.  Foreign and Bahraini-owned 
companies must meet the same requirements and comply with the same 
environmental, safety, health, and other labor requirements. 
Officials at the Ministries of Labor, and Commerce and Industry 
supervise, on a non-discriminatory basis, companies operating in 
Bahrain. 
 
Industries must be set up in identified industrial areas.  An 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) must be filed by all 
manufacturing facilities.  After one complete year of operation, a 
manufacturing facility is eligible for relief from tariffs imposed 
by other GCC states on imported goods. 
 
A.6 Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
In principle, private entities may freely establish, acquire, and 
dispose of interests in business enterprises, subject to the 
limitations noted in this chapter. 
 
The U.S.-Bahrain FTA entered into force in August 2006.  The 
agreement significantly expanded the scope of economic, commercial, 
and trade relations between the two countries.  The FTA does not 
have a separate investment chapter. 
 
The U.S.-Bahrain Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) provides benefits 
and protection to U.S. investors in Bahrain, such as 
most-favored-nation treatment and national treatment, the right to 
make financial transfers freely and without delay, international law 
standards for expropriation and compensation cases, and access to 
international arbitration.  The BIT guarantees national treatment 
for U.S. investments across all sectors, with exceptions for 
ownership of television, radio (or other media), fisheries, and 
privatization of oil dredging or exploration.  Bahrain also provides 
most favored-nation or national treatment status to U.S. investments 
in air transportation, the buying or ownership of land, and the 
buying or ownership of shares traded on the Bahrain Stock Exchange 
(BSE). 
 
Because of the national treatment offered American firms in the BIT, 
American firms interested in selling products exclusively in Bahrain 
are no longer required to appoint a commercial agent, though they 
may opt to do so anyway.  A commercial agent is any Bahraini party 
appointed by a foreign party to represent the foreign party's 
product or service in Bahrain. 
 
Bahrain permits 100 percent foreign-ownership of new industrial 
entities and the establishment of representative offices or branches 
of foreign companies without local sponsors.   Wholly foreign-owned 
companies may be set up for regional distribution services and may 
operate within the domestic market as long as they do not 
exclusively pursue domestic commercial sales. Private investment 
(foreign or Bahraini) in petroleum extraction is permitted only 
under a production-sharing agreement with BAPCO, the state-owned 
petroleum company. 
 
Since January 2001, foreign firms and GCC nationals may own land in 
Bahrain.  Non-GCC nationals may own high-rise commercial and 
residential properties, as well as property in tourism, banking, 
financial and health projects, and training centers, in specific 
geographic areas. 
 
A.7 Protection of Property Rights 
---------------------------------- 
The Bahraini legal system adequately protects and facilitates 
acquisition and disposition of property rights.  The concept of a 
mortgage exists, and there is a recognized and reliable system of 
recording such security interests.  However, there is currently no 
mortgage law that guarantees lenders the right to repossess property 
in case of mortgage non-repayment. In June 2008, the CBB began 
drafting a new mortgage law that remained in the consultation 
process at the end of the year. 
 
Under the U.S.-Bahrain FTA, Bahrain committed to enforce world-class 
IPR protection.  Bahrain signed the Berne Convention for the 
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works and the Paris Convention 
for the Protection of Industrial Property in 1996. Revised 
legislation to implement Bahrain's obligations under the TRIPS 
Agreement was ratified in May 2006. Bahrain joined the WIPO 
Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty. In 
May 2006, Bahrain passed laws related to intellectual property to 
bring Bahrain's local laws into compliance with its current Paris 
Convention commitment and to position it to join the Nice Agreement, 
Vienna Agreement, Patent Cooperation Treaty, Trademark Law Treaty, 
Madrid Agreement, Budapest Treaty, and the Rome Convention. 
 
The government has made dramatic progress in reducing copyright 
piracy, and there are no reports of significant violations of U.S. 
patents and trademarks in Bahrain. The government's copyright 
enforcement campaign began late 1997 and was based on inspections, 
closures, and improved public awareness. The campaign targeted the 
video, audio, and software industries with impressive results. The 
commercially pirated video and audio markets have been virtually 
eliminated. However, software piracy, which has shifted from retail 
to end-user violations, remains problematic. 
 
There are no technology transfer requirements that force firms to 
share or divulge technology through compulsory licensing to a 
domestic partner, nor are firms forced to commit to undertake 
research and development activities in Bahrain. 
 
A.8 Transparency of Regulatory System 
--------------------------------------- 
In October 2002, Bahrain implemented a new government procurement 
law that establishes the basic framework for a transparent, 
rules-based government procurement system.   It provides that 
certain procurements may be conducted as international public 
tenders open to foreign suppliers.  To implement this law, a tender 
board, chaired by a Minister of State, was established in January 
2003 to oversee all government tenders and purchases.  In the past, 
government-tendering procedures for large projects were not highly 
transparent. 
 
U.S. companies sometimes reported operating at a disadvantage 
compared with other international firms.  Contracts were not always 
decided solely based on price and technical merit, and selected, 
pre-qualified firms were occasionally invited to bid on major 
government tenders. 
 
Since January 2003, however, the Tenders Board has processed all 
tender decisions valued at USD 26,525 (BD 10,000) or higher. 
Individual ministries and departments may still process projects 
valued at less than USD 26,525 (BD 10,000).   U.S. firms report that 
the process is greatly improved over the previous system, though 
some challenges remain.  A local representative with strong 
connections may still be important in the bidding process. 
 
In the case of manufacturing enterprises, bureaucratic procedures 
and red tape created stumbling blocks mainly due to the lack of 
coordination between government ministries, which must sign off at 
one stage or another of the licensing procedure. 
 
In an attempt to streamline licensing and approval procedures, the 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce opened the Bahrain Investors 
Center (BIC) in October 2004 for both local and foreign companies 
seeking to register in Bahrain. Moreover the government decreased 
the fees of registrations in most of the commercial activities to 
promote growth in this sector. 
 
This high-tech, customer-friendly and easy to find facility, located 
in one of Bahrain's largest malls is part of a larger effort by the 
GOB to attract firms to use Bahrain as their "Gateway to the Gulf" 
by setting up regional operations here.  The BIC is designed as a 
"one-stop shop" providing all commercial licensing and registration 
services.  It houses representatives from all relevant ministries 
(over a dozen) and private sector representatives from the 
telecommunication, legal, banking, and consulting industries under 
one roof. 
 
Officials from the Ministry of Commerce note that the BIC can 
process and issue 80% of commercial registration applications within 
24 hours, and 10% of commercial registrations within five working 
days.  The remaining 10%, mostly those having to do with health, 
environment, and power and or other essential services, are 
processed separately according to sector specific regulations and 
licenses are issued on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Legislation Process: 
Draft legislation may be proposed by the Cabinet and by both the 
lower house (Council of Representatives) and upper house (Shura or 
Consultative Council) of the National Assembly. Once a draft law has 
been produced and submitted to the lower and upper houses of the 
National Assembly for approval, it is then passed to the Cabinet for 
the King's signature. After the King signs the law, the law is 
published in the Public Gazette and is promulgated. 
 
Entrenched local business interests with government influence can 
cause problems for potential competitors.  Interpretation and 
application of the law sometimes varies by ministry, and may be 
dependent on the stature and connections of an investor's local 
partner.  Departures such as these from the consistent, transparent 
application of regulations and the law remain rare, and investors 
are usually well pleased with government cooperation and support. 
 
A.9 Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Consistent with the government of Bahrain's liberal approach to 
foreign investment, government policies facilitate the free flow of 
financial resources.  Foreigners and Bahrainis alike have ready 
access to credit on market terms.  Generally, credit terms are 
variable, but often are limited to 10 years for loans under USD 50 
million.  For major infrastructure investments, banks will often 
offer to assume a part of the risk, and Bahrain's wholesale and 
retail banks have shown extensive cooperation in syndicating loans 
for larger risks. 
 
There is an effective regulatory system that encourages portfolio 
investment, and the Central Bank has fully implemented Basel II 
standards.  Bahrain has over 400 financial institutions with total 
assets exceeding USD 240 billion at the end of 2008. 
 
A.10 Political Violence 
------------------------ 
Bahrain has experienced intermittent civil unrest since the mid 
1990's.  These disturbances have been directed primarily against the 
regime, but in a few cases expatriate property, including homes, 
vehicles, and places of business were damaged or destroyed. 
Although the situation improved steadily after 1997, the 2002 
upsurge in violence between Israelis and Palestinians sparked 
anti-Israeli and anti-American demonstrations in Bahrain.  The 
protests peaked in April 2002 when a mob attacked the U.S. Embassy 
and set fire to U.S. Government vehicles. Since that incident, 
large-scale protest activity has subsided. 
 
Throughout 2007 and 2008 there were numerous protests directed at 
the government over issues such as housing, employment, and 
sectarian discrimination.  These protests were largely confined to 
specific neighborhoods and villages, and have not involved damage or 
injury to foreigners. 
 
A.11 Corruption 
---------------- 
According to U.S. firms, high-level corruption is sometimes an 
obstacle to foreign direct investment and contracting, particularly 
in the contract-bidding process and in operating notably successful 
investments.  In the case of some high-value contracts, 
government-tendering procedures have not always been transparent and 
contracts have not always been decided on the basis of price and 
technical merit.  However, petty corruption is relatively rare in 
Bahrain.  The bureaucracy is sometimes inefficient but it is 
generally honest.  Giving or accepting a bribe is illegal, although 
the relevant laws are rarely enforced.  Officials have been 
dismissed for blatant corruption, but it is never so stated 
officially; no one has been tried in court for corruption.  The King 
and Crown Prince have come out publicly in favor of reducing 
corruption and some Ministries have initiated clean-up efforts to 
reduce the problem.  The expatriate business community is cautiously 
optimistic that there is growing transparency in the government 
procurement process.  A new law to thoroughly revamp government 
procurement procedures went into effect in January 2003.  Bahrain is 
not a signatory to the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery. 
 
In September of 2007 the Crown Prince publicly launched an official 
campaign against corruption.  As a result, several executives in 
state-owned companies were removed from their positions.  In April 
2008, Bahraini government officials were accused of accepting bribes 
from the American firm Alcoa.  The case is still under investigation 
in the U.S. 
 
A.12 Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------------- 
Bahrain and the U.S. signed a bilateral investment treaty (BIT) in 
September 1999, the first BIT between the United States and a GCC 
state. The agreement entered into force in May 2001.  The 
U.S.-Bahrain FTA does not include a separate investment chapter. 
 
As of July 2003, Bahrain had bilateral investment protection 
agreements in place with Algeria, China, Egypt, Jordan, Malaysia, 
Morocco, Syria, Philippines and the UK.  Bahrain has economic and 
commercial cooperation agreements with Australia, Bangladesh, China, 
Egypt, France, Greece, India, (Iraq), Jordan, Morocco, the 
Netherlands, Russia, Singapore, South Korea, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey 
and the UK. 
 
Bahrain has air transportation tax agreements with China, France, 
Belgium, Luxembourg, Italy, Thailand Greece, Singapore, Turkey, UK, 
U.S. and Yemen, and two transportation agreements with Syria. 
Bahrain has concluded double taxation agreements with Egypt, France, 
India, Jordan, Malaysia, Belgium, Luxembourg, Algeria, Morocco, the 
Philippines, Thailand and Tunisia. 
 
A.13 OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
On April 25, 1987, Bahrain and the U.S. Government signed an 
agreement regarding activity in Bahrain by the Overseas Private 
Investment Corporation (OPIC).  The agreement opened the way for 
extension of such OPIC facilities as investment insurance, 
reinsurance, and investment guarantees to U.S. private investors 
interested in doing business in Bahrain. 
 
A.14 Labor 
---------- 
The Bahrain labor force is estimated at 410,000, nearly two-thirds 
of who are expatriates.  The GOB publicly states that unemployment, 
which official statistics put at 4.8 percent of Bahrainis in 
Bahrain's workforce, is the country's foremost domestic political 
problem.  The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) estimates 
real unemployment among Bahrainis to be 15 to 20 percent and as high 
as 30 percent in some Shi'ite villages.  On April 29, 2001 Bahrain's 
Cabinet approved a two-year project worth over USD 65 million to 
train and update professional skills of unemployed Bahrainis.  One 
of the government's primary initiatives for combating unemployment 
is "Bahrainization," or the replacement of expatriate workers by 
national ones. In 2002 the Government of Bahrain reserved certain 
professions, including heavy vehicle drivers, for Bahraini 
nationals. 
 
In January 2006, the King initiated that National Unemployment 
Project with a budget of USD 32 Million to combat unemployment by 
providing training and a guaranteed job from the Ministry of Labor's 
Job Bank.  The Labor Minister also introduced an unemployment 
allowance, to be paid from a general labor fund. The fund is 
financed by deducting one percent from the wages of all workers. The 
unemployment allowance program began in August of 2007, and is the 
first such program in the GCC. 
 
The Crown Prince launched a national debate in 2004 aimed at 
creating a new labor vision for the Kingdom.  This new reform effort 
seeks to promote employment and training of Bahraini workers. The 
initiative is likely to result in some legal changes in the labor 
field. The government seeks to establish Bahrain as a regional 
center for human resource development. Bahrain has over 50 training 
institutes that offer training in a variety of areas such as 
hospitality, information technology, business studies, English 
language studies, and banking.  Major training institutes include 
the Bahrain Institute for Banking and Finance (BIBF), Bahrain 
Training Institute (BTI), KPMG, and the British Council.  Both 
educational and vocational training curricula have been criticized 
recently for not adequately preparing Bahrainis for the workforce. 
The government is making concerted efforts to turn this situation 
around. 
 
In August of 2006 the King ratified the new Labor Reforms Law, 
establishing two entities: the Labor Market regulatory Authority 
(LMRA), and Labor Fund.  The law imposed a monthly fee of BD10 on 
each expatriate employed by a company.  The revenues collected under 
this program are earmarked to provide job training for Bahrainis. 
 
Another major step that the government of Bahrain has undertaken is 
the formation of trade unions.  Government officials developed a 
labor union law to allow trade unions and to establish a system that 
would ensure and protect workers' rights.  The labor union law went 
into effect in Fall 2002. 
 
A.15 Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
----------------------------------- 
Mina Salman, Bahrain's major sea port, provides a free transit zone 
to facilitate the duty-free import of equipment and machinery.  The 
North Sitra Industrial Estate is an industrial free zone and another 
one is planned for Hidd.  Foreign-owned firms have the same 
investment opportunities in these zones as Bahraini companies. 
 
A 1999 law requires that investors in industrial, or 
industry-related, zones launch a project within one year from the 
date of receiving the land, and development will have to conform to 
the specifications, terms and drawings submitted with the 
application.  Changes are not permitted without approval from the 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce. 
 
A.16 Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
------------------------------------------ 
Foreign investments in Bahrain range from partial foreign ownership 
of large parastatals in the oil and telecommunications sectors to 
small restaurant franchises.  Although the government does not 
maintain detailed statistics on foreign direct investment flows, the 
2007 U.N. World Investment Report indicates a 2006 FDI stock of USD 
11.4 billion, or 71% of GDP, for inward investment, and USD 6 
billion, or 37.6% of GDP, for outward investment.  These stocks 
include a 2006 outward flow of USD 2.9 million, and an inward flow 
of USD 980 million.  These flows represent 98.7% and 33.2% of gross 
capital formation respectively. 
 
By value, the largest foreign holdings in Bahrain include: 
 
-Aluminum Bahrain (ALBA) and the Gulf Petrochemical Industries 
Complex (GPIC), each of which are owned as joint investments by 
several Gulf states. 
 
-Bahrain National Gas Company (BANAGAS) is owned by Bahrain, a Saudi 
investment firm, and Caltex Bahrain. 
 
-Durrat Al Bahrain, a major real estate project valued at USD 3.4 
billion, being developed by Bahrain Kuwait Finance House. 
 
-Amwaj Islands, a tourism project is jointly owned by Bahraini, 
Kuwaiti and Saudi corporate and individual investors. 
 
-A USD 600 million tourism project of Al Areen Desert Spa and Resort 
is owned by the Government of Bahrain, various private investors and 
Gulf Finance House. 
 
-The development of the USD 1.3 billion Bahrain Financial Harbor 
project, owned by Gulf Finance House, personal and corporate G.C.C. 
investors. 
 
-A USD 398 million (BD 150) mall and USD 26.4 new Bahrain City 
Center cinema complex was opened in 2008 by Dubai, U.A.E.-based Al 
Futtaim Investments. The second phase will be completed in the 
second half of 2009. 
 
-Construction on a Saudi investment of a USD 199 million (BD 75 
million) tourism resort called Marina West. 
 
According to U.S. Embassy records, approximately 180 U.S. companies 
were operating, in one form or another, in Bahrain as of January 
¶2009.  Many of the U.S. firms are in the services sector and thus do 
not have a large capital investment in Bahrain despite a significant 
local presence.  Among the larger U.S. investments are the 
following: 
 
-Citibank's new regional headquarters building, opened in 2001, 
valued at nearly USD 30 million. 
 
-Shaw-Nass, a manufacturing plant owned by Shaw Industries, a U.S. 
pipeline manufacturer, in partnership with a Bahraini firm, A.A. 
Nass. 
 
-National Hotels Company, owners of the Diplomat Radisson SAS Hotel 
and Executive Apartments has injected USD 18 million for the 
expansion project. 
 
-U.S. operational headquartered Foster Wheel Energy Limited, a 
subsidiary of Foster Wheeler Limited, were awarded a front-end 
engineering design (FEED) contract to revamp Bahrain National Gas 
Company's (BANAGAS) liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) facilities. 
 
-Bentley College, Darden Graduate School of Business, and DePaul 
Graduate School of Business have ongoing educational programs with 
the Bahrain Institute of Banking and Finance (BIBF). 
 
-Microsoft signed a deal to co-market IT at the USD 1.3 billion 
Bahrain Financial Harbor development, and signed another contract 
with GOB to be part of the e-government project. 
 
-The CBB has granted a license to global insurance broking and 
consulting giant, Aon Corporation, to establish Aon/Re Middle East, 
an insurance brokerage firm in Bahrain. 
 
-Joint venture between Bahrain-based Ithmaar Bank, U.S.-based 
Overland Capital Group, Bahrain-based Gulf Finance House BSC, and 
Kuwait-based Gulf Investment House with an authorized capital of USD 
50 million and paid-up capital of USD 10 million establish First 
Leasing Bank. 
 
-Joslin Diabetes Center Affiliate - Bahrain (a partnership between 
the Joslin Diabetes Center and local businessmen) have invested a 
value of USD 9 million in the local economy. 
 
-Kraft Foods opened a USD 40 million production plant in 2008. 
 
American firms are also heavily involved in large-scale consulting 
and construction projects in Bahrain.  Below are examples of 
large-scale U.S. affiliated consulting and construction projects in 
Bahrain: 
 
-Bechtel was responsible for the Engineering Procurement 
Construction and Management (EPCM) of aluminum smelter ALBA's USD 
1.7 billion fifth pot line expansion project in 2006. 
 
-Parsons are the designers and supervising engineers for a USD 26 
million-flyover project in Bahrain's Seef area, and USD 13 million 
flyover near the U.S. Embassy.  Parsons were also one of the 
appointed consultants for the Riffa Golf Club Phase 2 Development 
Project, and Lona project in Amwaj 
 
-Great Lakes Dredge & Dock is performing dredging operations in 
conjunction with the USD 464 million Sheikh Khalifa Port in Hidd 
Industrial area.  A USD 105 million dredging contract has also been 
awarded to US-Bahraini joint venture Great Lakes - Nass (Great Lakes 
Dredge & Dock and Nass Group). 
 
-Cisco Systems have signed an agreement with Bahrain's Central 
Informatics Organization (CIO) establishing a regional Cisco 
networking academy. 
 
-Binnie, Black and Veatch International Limited are the consultants 
of Phase 3 of the Hidd (Power) and Desalination Complex.  The 
project was estimated to cost USD 400 million. 
 
-Kuljian Corporation, are consultants for Ras Abu Jarjur 
desalination plant expansion that is estimated to cost USD 26.5 
million. 
 
-General Electric Energy, Stone and Webster and Chicago Bridge and 
Iron Company were amongst the five companies that participated in 
the feasibility study of Kuwait Finance House's USD 1.3 
petrochemical plant project.