09MOSCOW295
RUSSIA'S RELIGIOUS LEADERS CONSIDER KIRILL A
Mon Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0041
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #0295/01 0400846
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY AD2AAC41 MSI5133-695)
R 090846Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1807
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MOSCOW 000295 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINR PREL RS SOCI
SUBJECT: RUSSIA'S RELIGIOUS LEADERS CONSIDER KIRILL A 
UNIFYING FORCE 
 
REF: MOSCOW 00250 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  At a February 4 ecumenical lunch hosted 
by Ambassador and Appeal of Conscience Foundation Director 
Rabbi Arthur Schneier, high level officials in Russia's 
Orthodox (ROC), Muslim, Protestant, and Jewish communities 
gathered to discuss religious freedom in Russia and honor 
Patriarch Kirill's enthronement.  Schneier called on Russia's 
religious community to accept (and not simply tolerate) one 
another and characterized Kirill as a leading advocate for 
acceptance.  Protestant leaders asserted that Kirill 
represented a unifying figure in Russia's religious 
community, as evidenced by a letter of Christian solidarity 
that Kirill circulated two days before his election.  In a 
private exchange with Ambassador Beyrle on February 2, 
Patriarch Kirill expressed his hope that a stronger, more 
unified ROC could play a key role in helping to improve 
U.S.-Russian relations.  End Summary. 
 
Religious Gathering Highly Attended 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador hosted an ecumenical lunch at Spaso 
House on February 4 in honor of the enthronement of Patriarch 
Kirill, head of the Russian Orthodox Church (ROC), and the 
related visit of Appeal of Conscience Foundation Director 
Rabbi Arthur Schneier.  Fifteen religious leaders and 
government officials attended the event, including Human 
Rights Ombudsman Vladimir Lukin, Grand Mufti of Russia Ravil 
Gaynutdin, ROC Acting Director for External Relations Bishop 
Mark, competing Chief Rabbis of Russia Beryl Lazar (Chabad 
Lubavitch) and Adolf Shayevich (Moscow Jewish Community), 
Archbishop of the Armenian Apostolic Church Yezras 
Nersissian, Chief Rabbi of Moscow and Shayevich ally Pinchas 
Goldschmidt, Russian Evangelical Union of Baptists' (REUB) 
Director of External Relations Vitaliy Vlasenko, and Public 
Chamber member, Pentecostal Reverend, and Chairman of the 
Russian Union of Evangelical Christians Sergey Ryakhovskiy. 
Two invited members of Russia's Catholic community, Vatican 
Nuncio Archbishop Antonio Mennini and Archbishop to Moscow 
Paolo Pezzi, did not attend.  Ambassador welcomed the 
community of religious leaders to discuss matters of 
religious freedom, after which Schneier called on Russia's 
religious leaders not to simply tolerate other religions, but 
to accept them as equals. 
 
Kirill's Positive Influence on Religious Acceptance 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Several religious leaders shared their thoughts on 
the importance of Patriarch Kirill's election as the new 
leader of the ROC.  Rabbi Schneier and Ambassador 
congratulated Bishop Mark on Kirill's ascension to the throne 
as the new Patriarch of the ROC, a moment of particular 
importance to Schneier because of his personal friendship 
with Kirill.  Reverend Ryakhovskiy pointed to Kirill's 
acceptance of all Christians in Russia, telling the group 
that Kirill circulated a letter of solidarity with Christians 
only two days before his election, a clear sign that Kirill 
would take chances and steadfastly support Christian groups 
despite deep-seated bias within the ROC and Russian 
government against them.  Bishop Mark stressed Kirill's 
support in the ROC, noting that Kirill received over 70% of 
the votes from all delegates, and two-thirds of the votes 
from the clergy.  Rabbi Shayevich praised Kirill for his 
charisma, and felt that Kirill could help restore a greater 
sense of national pride in Russia. 
 
Kirill Sees Stronger ROC as a Good Bilateral Partner 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Separately, at the February 2 Kremlin reception, 
the Ambassador spoke with Kirill to offer good wishes on 
taking up the responsibilities of Patriarch.  Kirill 
expressed his desire to make the ROC stronger and to 
intensify efforts to reach out to sister Orthodox churches. 
Kirill emphasized the importance of good U.S.-Russian 
relations, and said that he hoped the ROC could play its role 
in strengthening the bilateral partnership. 
 
Anti-American Sentiment Stronger Now Than in Soviet Times 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU)  In response to Rabbi Schneier's concerns about 
anti-Americanism in Russia, Lukin responded that Russians 
viewed the U.S. more negatively now than they did in Soviet 
times.  Lukin provided a list of issues that had complicated 
U.S.-Russia relations, including missile defense in Poland 
and the Czech Republic, NATO's courting of Ukraine and 
Georgia, and the August conflict over South Ossetia (reftel). 
 However, Lukin noted that to be fair, Russia must take a 
 
good look at itself before simply finding mistakes with other 
countries.  While many Russians are disappointed with the 
current state of bilateral relations, Lukin believed that 
President Obama's initial statements regarding missile 
defense are the first signs of a better relationship, 
potentially leading to a cooling of tempers. 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Several guests suggested increasing educational 
exchanges for religious leaders as a way to improve 
understanding of the American way of life.  Ryakhovskiy 
recalled the experience of his father as the head of the 
underground Pentecostal Church in Soviet times when 
Protestants were considered spies and the "fifth column" of 
the United States.  He claimed that Russians have moved past 
their Cold War stereotypes, while Americans still cling to 
beliefs that Russians are connected to the KGB, a hurdle to 
better mutual understanding.  Bishop Mark explained that most 
Russians see Americans as "very pragmatic," placing too much 
value in material possessions, money, and work as opposed to 
more spiritual issues.  He suggested that the U.S. should 
focus on making gestures to explain the ideals of the United 
States to ordinary people as a way to combat 
anti-Americanism. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Rabbi Schneier said that greater exposure of young 
religious scholars and practicing clergy from all faiths 
would give them a taste of life in the U.S.  Vitaliy Vlasenko 
from the REUB advocated for more journalist exchanges as a 
way to accentuate the positive aspects of the United States, 
and even proposed that Secretary of State Clinton could visit 
his Baptist church in Moscow as a sign of interest in 
promoting religious acceptance (Note: Vlasenko highlighted 
President Nixon's visit to a Baptist Church in Moscow during 
his presidential visit. End Note).  Ambassador agreed about 
the importance of visitor programs, and mentioned that U.S. 
embassies and consulates in Russia issued 170,000 visas in 
2008, an all-time high. 
 
GOR Acceptance of Religious Groups Improved Under Luzhkov 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) Rabbi Schneier lauded Mayor Luzhkov for his efforts 
to provide equal worship space to religious groups in Moscow. 
 Schneier singled out Luzhkov's assistance to the ROC in 
building cathedrals, his initiative to help the Moscow Choral 
Synagogue reclaim an adjoining building, and his current 
project to aid the Armenian Apostolic Church build a new 
house of worship.  Mufti Gaynutdin added that Luzhkov made 
arrangements for a new mosque near several other religious 
buildings by the Olympic Sports Complex, creating a kind of 
"holy quarter" in the city. 
 
Interfaith Council Civil, Even If Not Always in Agreement 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) The religious leaders agreed that Interfaith Council 
discussions have been constructive, despite differences of 
opinion between different leaders.  Gaynutdin responded to 
Schneier's inquiry about current Council initiatives, saying 
that discussions focused on tax legislation for religious 
groups, education regulations, and the defense of each 
organization's right to worship.  He also called the Council 
an important instrument for building mutual respect, trust, 
and cooperation between faiths as they tackled tough 
questions such as religious unity and terrorism.  Armenian 
Apostolic Church Archbishop Nersissian and Bishop Mark agreed 
that followers of all religions must live together in 
harmony, with Nersissian identifying unity of the Russian 
"Motherland" as important for Russian believers, despite 
Russia's multi-ethnic, multi-religious composition. 
Shayevich said that Council members are not afraid to express 
their opinions to one another, one example that a meaningful 
dialogue existed. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The religious community support for Kirill as a 
potentially unifying religious figure creates new 
opportunities for religious freedom in Russia, but only if 
religious leaders of varying faiths can put down old 
differences.  The Russian Orthodox Church's aim to teach 
Orthodox culture in government schools will continue to 
provoke non-Orthodox believers, with Kirill a proponent of 
standardized Orthodox education. 
BEYRLE