09PANAMA114
PANAMA: IMPROVED COOPERATION WITH COLOMBIA AS THE
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0114/01 0372016
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 062016Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2957
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 2762
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA 0776
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 3780
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 0952
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 1982
RHMFISS/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DIRJIATF SOUTH
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000114 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/02/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: IMPROVED COOPERATION WITH COLOMBIA AS THE 
GOP GETS TOUGH 
 
REF: A. A: PANAMA: 00084 
     ¶B. B: PANAMA 00725 
     ¶C. C: PANAMA 00789 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reasons 1.4 
(b) and  (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Colombia's implementation of a new security doctrine 
that emphasized improved governance on its border with Panama 
had facilitated cross-border cooperation, Panama's National 
Security Advisor Marcel Salamin told POLOFF on January 20. In 
a January 27 conversation, he told POLOFF that he had asked 
the Colombians to re-cast the confrontation with the FARC 
along the Panamanian-Colombian border into one against 
narco-terrorism and illegal trafficking, so as to avoid 
Panamanian sensibilities about getting involved in internal 
Colombian disputes. At the same time, he said that he wished 
Colombia would become a partner in defending the Canal by 
signing the Neutrality Treaty, citing Venezuela as a possible 
threat. In an attempt to decapitate the violent criminal 
networks in Panama, Salamin said that President Torrijos had 
ordered Panamanian security forces to start arresting all the 
gang leaders, capos and members of illegal logistical 
networks in Panama, adding that the operation would take 
several weeks. He said that the GOP intended to use the new 
National Frontier Service (SENAFRONT) to re-occupy the Darien 
to tie down the FARC, which was becoming a greater threat to 
Panama as it devolved into a criminal organization. He also 
asked for USG help with the Panamanian Customs Service's Risk 
Analysis Unit to help it become an effective law enforcement 
tool. He inquired whether the USG would approach the 
Government of Ecuador to protest its visa policy; Salamin was 
convinced that Ecuador's lax visa policy contributed to the 
recent phenomenon of Somalis and other East Africans turning 
up in Panama. Finally, Salamin defended last year's security 
reforms as an attempt to civilianize the security services, 
not militarize them. End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Panama and Colombian Meeting of the Minds 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S//NF)  Following the successful conclusion of the 
Colombian-Panama-Mexico-Guatemala quadrilateral security 
meeting on January 16 (see reftel A), Panamanian National 
Security Advisor Marcel Salamin told POLOFF on January 20 
that Panama's ability to cooperate with Colombia began to 
improve approximately one year ago, following a change in 
Colombian strategy in the border area. He said that 
previously, the GOC had a very military approach to the 
border with Panama and had pushed the GOP to adopt a similar 
strategy on their side of the border. Salamin asserted that 
Panama could not respond to this request because it did not 
have a military and its security forces did not have the 
manpower to carry out such a strategy effectively. As a 
result, Panama had limited cross-border cooperation. 
According to Salamin, about a year ago the GOC changed its 
tactics on the border, and began taking a more civilian 
approach, including deploying police into the border region 
and using civilian agencies to improve services and 
governance. Since then the GOC has reduced the military 
representation on the Colombian-Panamanian border commission 
(COMBIFRON) to military intelligence, while increasing the 
police and civilian representation. Salamin said it was much 
easier for Panama to cooperate with such a strategy, and that 
Panama would actually like to mirror the GOC campaign to 
improve governance on its side of the border as well. 
 
¶3.  (S//NF)   On January 27 Salamin told POLOFF of a 
conversation he had had with a high-level Colombian official 
during the previous week in which he, Salamin, had asked that 
the GOC stop trying to get the GOP to support the GOC,s 
aggressive FARC rhetoric. Salamin said he told the official 
that the Panamanian people were prepared to support actions 
against narco-terrorism, drug smuggling and gun running in 
Panama, and that the discourse on the FARC should be oriented 
in that direction where Panama was concerned in order to 
build up broad public support for tough measures against the 
FARC. He said the GOC official he spoke with accepted his 
argument. 
 
----------------------- 
Colombia and Neutrality 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S//NF)  Salamin said he considered it very important for 
Colombia to sign the Neutrality Treaty. He said up to now 
Colombia had refused because Colombia interpreted the treaty 
as meaning that Panama would be neutral on Colombia's 
internal conflict with the FARC. Salamin said this was a 
mistake, and that the treaty only committed Colombia to help 
protect the neutrality of the Canal. He said the Canal was 
very important for Colombia, as the quickest way to move 
goods and forces from Colombia's Caribbean coast to its 
Pacific coast. Salamin said Colombia should realize that 
Chavez,s boast of a few years ago that his Russian planes 
could "protect the Canal" was in fact a threat to the Canal, 
and that Colombia needed to stand with Panama in the face of 
Venezuelan threats to regional stability. 
 
------------------------- 
Law Enforcement Offensive 
------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S//NF)  Referring to the GOP's resolve to tackle the 
drug-trafficking networks in Panama, Salamin said President 
Torrijos had given orders to the security services to "arrest 
all the gang leaders, drug capos, and the members of logistic 
networks in Panama, whoever they may be." He specifically 
mentioned groups linked to Don Mario (Colombian 
ex-paramilitary leader) who he said had links to the FARC. He 
said this was a major operation that would go on for weeks. 
He cited the seizure the day before of 800 kilos of cocaine 
and "a lot of weapons" as the initial phase of the effort. 
Post will monitor progress of this effort and report septel. 
 
------------------------ 
SENAFRONT and the Darien 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (S//NF)  On the Darien, Salamin said that the GOP 
intended for the new independent National Frontier Service 
(SENAFRONT) to take a more aggressive posture than the 
Panamanian National Police (PNP) Frontier Directorate 
(DINAFRONT) had done. According to Salamin, the FARC had in 
the past maintained a gentlemen's agreement with Panama, 
whereby the FARC did not intervene in Panama, and Panama did 
not confront the FARC. This was based on strategic 
considerations, and it was the FARC's internal discipline 
that prevented FARC elements from committing serious criminal 
acts inside Panama for the most part, Salamin explained. 
According to Salamin, this agreement had broken down as the 
FARC lost command and control of its forces, that were now 
acting outside the control of the Secretariat. The GOP had to 
take a more aggressive stance in defense of its sovereignty. 
Salamin asserted that the FARC and their collaborators 
conducted criminal activities, including kidnapping, inside 
Panama. DINAFRONT had a largely passive presence in the 
Darien, with its men "hiding in Meteti and the larger towns", 
according to Salamin. He said SENAFRONT was created to be a 
quasi-military institution willing to make the "sacrifices" 
necessary for the security of the country. Asked if SENAFRONT 
would: 1) plan to react from their base in Meteti; 2) use 
mobile patrols to increase their presence; or 3) re-deploy 
closer to the border to physically reoccupy the border area, 
Salamin said that SENAFRONT could use all three tactics, but 
for the most part it would reoccupy territory. He said the 
key to this would be the use of helicopters and boats to give 
SENAFRONT the ability to quickly reinforce or evacuate posts, 
so they would not be left alone to face the FARC. He said 
that SENAFRONT now needed to be given the training and 
equipment to carry out its mission and be more assertive. He 
 
noted that Panama was now much more important to the FARC 
than before the recent resurgence of the Colombian military, 
and the FARC's loss of territory in Colombia. He said that if 
the FARC felt there was a real threat to their ability to 
operate in the Darien, they might strike back, including 
attempting to kidnap SENAFRONT troops. 
 
------------------------------- 
Help Requested for Customs Unit 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (S//NF)  Salamin said he was concerned about the 
Panamanian Customs Service's Risk Analysis Unit (UAR), and 
asked the Embassy for assistance. He said that the GOP was 
trying to get the Customs Service to focus more on its law 
enforcement mandate, to fight illegal trafficking in drugs, 
guns, money and people, and less on trying to stop 
traditional smuggling to avoid tariffs. He said a key part of 
this strategy was the UAR. This unit was set up to look for 
anomalies that might reveal criminal activities in 
international commerce. He said the director of the unit, 
Soreya Valdevilleso, had the government's full support, but 
that she was being undermined by the Deputy Director of 
Customs. He said the entire unit needed to be poligraphed on 
a continual basis, because the unit was penetrated by 
criminal organizations. He asked the Embassy for help, and 
said we should work through National Intelligence and 
Security Service (SENIS) Director Erik Espinosa. 
 
---------------------- 
The Somalis are Coming 
---------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Salamin said that Panama was very concerned with 
East African immigrants, especially Somalis, who are turning 
up in Panama. He said some of the Somalis had scars from 
bullet wounds, indicating they had been in combat. He blamed 
Ecuador's open visa system, that he said was causing major 
problems for Colombia and Panama. He said Ecuador was 
refusing to accept the illegal immigrants when caught by 
Colombia or Panama. Salamin said someone needed to talk to 
Ecuadorian President Correa about this, and suggested that 
this might be better done by Panama than either the U.S. or 
Colombia. He described Correa as a "tisico" (someone with 
tuberculosis) who coughs all over the place contaminating 
others. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
What Security Reform Was Supposed to Look Like 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶9.  (C)  Salamin, who was one of the major drivers behind the 
security reforms  approved in August (see reftel B), told 
POLOFF on January 20 that the security laws were actually an 
attempt to complete the civilianization of the security 
forces, rather than their militarization as opponents claimed 
(see reftel C). He explained that under Omar Torrijos, there 
had been a large police force, with a small military force in 
reserve. Later, Noriega reversed the percentages, building a 
large military force to take over the defense of the Canal 
after U.S. military forces withdrew. After Operation Just 
Cause, the Panamanian Defense Forces were disbanded, but most 
of the members were folded into the new police forces. Also, 
no new police doctrine was imposed. According to Salamin, 
ever since then the Panamanian security services had resisted 
the idea that they were really police services because their 
leadership was made up of former military officers. This had 
led to the use of military tactics in policing, such as 
maintaining a large force in reserve and staging large 
"operations" to sweep up criminals. At the beginning of the 
Torrijos Administration, Salamin said, the GOP decided to 
change the security doctrine to one of "Citizen Security." 
The idea was that Panama's security services would 
concentrate on internal security problems, while relying on 
the U.S. and the international community to defend the Canal 
from external threats. This became enshrined in the design of 
the Panamax exercises with their internal Panamanian Alpha 
phase, and their external and international Beta phase. 
Panama would then turn its security forces into pure 
law-enforcement organizations, and target criminal and 
terrorist threats to Panama and the Canal. The security 
reforms were designed to reinforce this change, especially 
the creation of the National Aero-Naval Service (SENAN), 
which was designed to end the pretensions of the National Air 
Service (SAN) to be an air force and of the National Maritime 
Service (SMN) to be a navy, and to force them both to take on 
their law enforcement roles that they had, according to 
Salamin, attempted to avoid to that point. He said it was 
very important as well that the National Police (PNP) adopt a 
community policing model to replace the current police model. 
He said he strongly supported the current NAS-funded 
community policing program, which will be funded from Merida 
Initiative funds next year. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (S//NF)  After disappearing from the political scene for 
some time, due to his wife's illness and a time in the 
private sector, Marcel Salamin is back as President Torrijos' 
National Security Advisor. It seems likely that his job in 
the last five months of the Torrijos Administration is to 
oversee an effort to turn around the story line that Torrijos 
lost control of the security situation in Panama. This 
narrative threatens Torrijos chances of being reelected 
president in 2014, as he hopes to do after a constitutional 
reform to be proposed shortly. Rather than blaming Colombians 
for all the crime in Panama and demanding the imposition of 
visas for Colombians, as the main presidential candidates 
have done, Salamin reached out to the GOC to launch an 
initiative, the quadrilateral meeting, that could have 
genuine results. Salamin's effort to get the GOC to modify 
its rhetoric so that Panama can more easily work with it is 
also a welcome change, brought on by a realization that while 
the increasing crime in Panama's streets threatens Torrijos' 
political future, the morphing of the FARC into a criminal 
band threatens to unleash a wave of kidnapping and violence 
that could threaten Panama's economic vibrancy - largely 
based on its image as a refuge of calm amidst the violence 
and uncertainty of its neighbors. 
 
¶11.  (S//NF)  As for the tough talk on gang leaders, drug 
traffickers and the FARC, Post is concerned that the GOP may 
be taking on more than it can chew at once. While we strongly 
encourage the GOP to recognize the real threats it faces and 
take action against them, such as the quadrilateral meeting, 
the GOP does not have a lot of high level security expertise 
beyond Salamin, who cannot possibly oversee all these 
initiatives. As the GOP forces more aggressive measures 
through its very limited security bureaucracy, the risk of a 
blunder grows. Post will attempt to leverage all USG 
resources at its disposal to assist the GOP and make sure 
that it does not lead with its chin. 
 
¶12.  (S//NF)  The issue of Colombia signing the Neutrality 
Treaty is an old hobby horse of Salamin's, and does not 
resonate widely within the GOP. 
STEPHENSON