09PRETORIA245
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Mon Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO6291
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #0245/01 0401351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091351Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7286
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 6535
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0658
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8879UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 PRETORIA 000245 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, JANUARY 2009 
 
PRETORIA 00000245  001.2 OF 005 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings Newsletter, January 2009, Volume 4, 
Number 1, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
 
-- NATIONAL SPACE AGENCY BILL PASSED INTO LAW 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICA CELEBRATES INTERNATIONLA YEAR OF ASTRONOMY 2009 
 
-- DWAF ACTS TO PREVENT WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGES 
 
-- CAPE TOWN MAKES PROGRESS IN RECYCLING 
 
-- GOVERNMENT DENIES LAND RIGHTS TO KRUGER COMMUNITIES 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICA UNLIKELY TO REACH GHG EMISSION TARGETS 
-- UNILEVER COMPANY ABANDONS THE HOODIA PLANT INITIATIVE 
-- RHINO POACHING SYNDICATE NABBED 
 
-- LOCAL COUNCIL DISPUTES NUMBER OF DEAD FISH FOUND IN RIVER 
 
-- KRUGER NATIONAL PARK RIVERS TEST POSITIVE FOR CHOLERA 
 
-- SHARK SPOTTING A HIT WITH TOURISTS 
 
-- CAPE WHALES FACE NEW THREAT 
 
-- GERMAN GOVERNMENT SUSPENDS SOUTHERN OCEAN EXPERIMENT 
-- NEW RADARS WILL HELP PREDICT STORM DANGERS 
 
-- MONTHLY FACTOID 
 
 
------------------------------------------ 
National Space Agency Bill Passed into Law 
------------------------------------------ 
¶2. (U) South African President Kgalema Motlanthe signed a law 
establishing the South African National Space Agency (NSA), which 
will regulate South African space-related activities.  Department of 
Science and Technology Minister Mosebudi Mangena emphasized that 
space activity plays a significant role in modern day economies, 
noting that satellite images are used for minerals prospecting, city 
planning, precision farming, and weather predictions.  Mangena said 
South Africa was already spending over R600 million ($60 million) 
per year on space-related operations.  The date for formal 
establishment of the NSA has not been specified; media reports 
speculate it would be before the end of the year.  South Africa 
operates two civilian satellites, the SunSat, which is already in 
orbit, and the Sumbandilasat, which is yet to be launched. 
Sumbandilasat is expected to be launched in March. 
 
------------------------------------- 
South Africa Celebrates International 
Year of Astronomy 2009 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Minister of Science and Technology Mosebudi Mangena launched 
the International Year of Astronomy (IYA) in January 2009.  IYA, a 
year-long celebration of astronomical studies and activities, 
coincides with the 400th anniversary of Galileo's first recorded 
astronomical observation, and Johannes Kepler's first publication of 
the fundamental laws of planetary motions in "The Astronomic Nova" 
in 1609.  "South Africa's involvement in classical western astronomy 
formally started in 1685, 76 years after Galileo made the first 
telescopic observation," remarked Mangena, when a  temporary 
observatory was established in Cape Town.  Observatories, 
planetariums, and science centers countrywide would have astronomy 
activities for young students as part of the year-long celebration. 
Cape Town Astronomical Observatory plans to assist African countries 
which did not have observatories or university astronomy 
departments. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
DWAF Acts to Prevent Water Supply Shortages 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) Lindiwe 
Hendricks announced in January the development of the R7.3 billion 
($730 million) Lesotho Highlands Water Project, a project that will 
augment the Vaal River System.  The Vaal River System is one of the 
Qaugment the Vaal River System.  The Vaal River System is one of the 
most important water resources of South Africa and supplies sixty 
percent of the country's economy and forty percent of the 
population, including the entire province of Gauteng.  Widespread 
media reports in 2008 raised concerns regarding water shortages in 
Gauteng by 2013.  Farmers, industries, municipalities and mines are 
 
PRETORIA 00000245  002.2 OF 005 
 
 
all accused of water theft and pollution.  Media reports indicate 
that about 180 million cubic meters of water is lost to theft from 
farmers per year.  The Minister said DWAF was taking action to deal 
with the water shortage, and had issued directives to the farmers to 
stop water theft.  Eighty cases have been brought to court. 
Hendricks also said that DWAF has set aside R550 million ($50.5 
million) to work with municipalities to improve sewage water 
treatment plants along the Vaal River. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Cape Town Makes Progress in Waste Recycling 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Cape Town Solid Waste Department Head of Waste Minimization 
Alison Davidson announced the success of a major recycling program. 
The city has conducted numerous waste recycling pilot programs in 
the past few years; most were not successful.  The new project has 
drop off points for glass, metal, paper and garden waste at 
strategic points of the city.  Davidson said companies are now 
buying back recyclable materials and have established their own 
strategic collection points to maximize collection efficiency.  The 
program targets high density areas and encourages residents and 
property managers to set up recycling programs.  The number of 
garbage bins carrying mixed waste in the areas has decreased under 
the program.  Cape Town plans to measure its success rate by the 
volumes of cubic meter space at the landfill site. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Government Denies Land Rights to 
Kruger Park Communities 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) The South African government decided not to restore land 
rights to claimant communities in the world-famous Kruger National 
Park (KNP) because the park is considered to be an international and 
national asset.  This action will settle long-standing land claims 
by communities in the area.  The Directors General of the 
Departments of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) and Land 
Affairs (DAL) told local communities that the government will 
provide them with equitable redress, which could include awarding 
alternative land and/or financial compensation.  Other benefits 
could include guaranteed access to ancestral/traditional sites and 
graves on agreed-upon calendar dates; preferential procurement; jobs 
and business opportunities; youth development; acknowledgement of 
local history in selecting names for facilities; and establishment 
of a visitor's levy and a Community Trust Fund.  Although some 
community leaders welcomed these proposals, others were unhappy 
about the loss of title to the land.  DEAT and DLA and the South 
African National Parks (SANParks) will continue to engage the 
claimant communities in discussions to try and resolve outstanding 
disagreements. 
 
------------------------------ 
South Africa Unlikely to Reach 
GHG Emission Reduction Target 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (U) Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) Air 
Quality Management and Climate Change Chief Peter Lukey emphasized 
that South Africa will not reach its greenhouse gas (GHG) emission 
targets unless South Africans change their attitudes towards energy 
use.  He cautioned that new technologies would be effective to lower 
carbon emissions only if coupled with people's change in energy 
usage.  Lukey provided details about South Africa's Long Term 
Mitigation Scenario (LTMS), a multi-stakeholder research process 
QMitigation Scenario (LTMS), a multi-stakeholder research process 
which examines GHG emission reduction scenarios for South Africa. 
The LTMS process documents all currently available interventions 
such as bio-fuels, renewable energies, solar power, and fuel 
efficiency models.  Continuing at current economic growth rates 
without energy use changes would increase the country's carbon 
emissions fourfold by 2050.  Lukey noted that the government request 
for a 15 percent reduction in energy use had been met with only a 
three percent reduction.  He also commented that the government's 
poor response to recent power shortages indicated a lack of 
commitment to be more energy efficient. 
 
----------------------------- 
Unilever Company Abandons the 
Hoodia Plant Initiative 
----------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Unilever has abandoned plans to develop weight-loss products 
based on South Africa's indigenous Hoodia Gordonii plant, dashing 
the local San community's hopes that it would profit from the 
succulent.  Unilever had invested over $29 million in research on 
the plant over four years, in partnership with British company 
 
PRETORIA 00000245  003.2 OF 005 
 
 
Phytopharm and South Africa's Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research (CSIR).  Unilever spokesperson Trevor Gorin said that 
although hoodia had been traditionally used by San and Khoi hunters 
to suppress hunger and thirst during extended hunting expeditions, 
it might not be safe or effective for dieters.  He noted that hoodia 
has potentially dangerous side effects, including increased blood 
pressure.  Unilever researchers also found that hoodia had little or 
no impact upon the calorie consumption of participants.  Unilever 
has returned the development rights to Phytopharm.  Phytopharm's 
Functional Foods Chief Simon MacWilliam is adamant that hoodia might 
still have potential as a commercial weight-management aide, and is 
seeking new partners to continue with the development and marketing 
of hoodia. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Local Council Disputes Number of Dead 
Fish Found in River 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Raw sewage seeping from malfunctioning Emfuleni Municipality 
sewage works began flowing into the Vaal River in November.  Save 
the Vaal Environment (SAVE) Chairperson Lotter Wepener said twenty 
tons of rotting dead fish had been removed from the river since the 
beginning of January.  Emfuleni Acting Chief Director of Water and 
Sanitation Cecil Schreuder disputed that amount and said the 
municipality would do its own tests.  Wepener believes that raw 
sewage continues to run into the Riet, Loch and Vaal rivers.  Rand 
Water has assured Johannesburg residents that their drinking water 
remains safe as it is sourced from the Vaal Dam.  There are also 
concerns that water at the Sasol One Unit in Sasolburg might contain 
low-level traces of e-coli. 
 
------------------------------- 
Rhino Poaching Syndicate Nabbed 
------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) Eleven people alleged to be part of a rhino poaching 
syndicate have been arrested following a joint operation by 
SANParks, the South African Police Service (SAPS), the Mpumalanga, 
Limpopo, and NorthWest provincial organized crime units, and the 
Gauteng Province Task Team.  Five Mozambicans, three Chinese based 
in South Africa, and two South Africans were arrested for poaching. 
The sporadic slaughter of rhinos in Mpumalanga, Limpopo and 
Northwest prompted the provincial crime units to combine their 
efforts. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Kruger National Park Rivers Test 
Positive for Cholera 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) SANParks Spokesman Raymond Travers reports that few Kruger 
Park rivers have tested positive for cholera.  He added that park 
visitors and workers need not worry about contracting cholera in the 
park because the park has adequate sanitation facilities.  The park 
straddles the provinces of Mpumalanga and Limpopo, which have 
treated the highest percentage of the 3,000 f people with the 
disease in the country.  Tests were being conducted on all rivers in 
the park to monitor the situation.  Travers added, "There is no need 
for visitors to worry or bring bottled water, the park's tap water 
is safe to drink."  He also noted that the animals are not affected 
by the contamination. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Shark Spotting a Hit with Tourists 
---------------------------------- 
¶12. (U) Cape Town shark spotters are becoming a tourist attraction 
in addition to keeping the beaches safe for swimmers.  Cape Town 
Qin addition to keeping the beaches safe for swimmers.  Cape Town 
Head of Environmental Policy and Strategy Gregg Oeofse says the 
shark-spotting program is the only one of its kind in the world. 
The program has prevented shark attacks by providing nearly 450 
early warnings in the past four years.  The program was begun in 
2004 after a shark bit off a swimmer's leg, and the number of 
spotters was increased a few months later when a great white shark 
killed a Fish Hoek beach swimmer.  There have been no shark attacks 
since 2004 at any beaches where shark spotters have been on duty. 
Shark spotter Eric Myeko says he is a celebrity now, noting "people 
go to our website and see our photographs.  When they arrive, some 
ask for us by name."  In peak season, there are spotters at Clovelly 
Corner, Glencairn, St. James, Fish Hoek, Muizenberg, Noordhoek, 
Strand Pavilion, Blue Water, Mnandi and Monwabisi beaches. 
 
--------------------------- 
Cape Whales Face New Threat 
--------------------------- 
 
 
PRETORIA 00000245  004.2 OF 005 
 
 
¶13. (U) Western Cape environmentalists have objected to PetroSA 
plans for a new liquid gas mooring facility in a known 
whale-breeding site near Mossel Bay.  Mossel Bay, a favorite 
stopping point for migrating whales, is one of the Cape's last 
pristine marine areas.  Rescue Vleesbai Chair Mareo Bekker said 
"PetroSA's facility is ill-conceived, short-sighted and 
environmentally damaging."  Coastal ecologist Allan Heydorn said 
noise and pollution from the plant will affect whales and dolphins, 
and possibly subject them to entanglement in underwater cables.  He 
added that a fire or explosion would have "catastrophic long-term 
consequences."  He noted that "either slow or insidious pollution 
and littering or a catastrophic event will place the entire 
inter-and sub-tidal ecosystem and near shore marine food webs at 
risk." 
¶14. (U) PetroSA spokesman Thabo Msabo said the project would bring 
in R428 million ($43.2 million) annually and insure 2,000 jobs.  He 
noted that that gas reserves off Mossel Bay are dwindling and that 
to prevent plant closures, PetroSA must bring in additional 
supplies.  Most of the gas will be used to power Eskom's Gourikwa 
power station which was expanded in 2008.  Critics complain that 
PetroSA has bypassed the Environmental Impact Assessment process and 
has already entered into contracts for the supply of gas and to 
construct the plant. 
 
----------------------------------- 
German Government Suspends Southern 
Ocean Experiment 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) The German government suspended all operations involving 
Lohafex, an Indo-German iron fertilization experiment scheduled to 
be conducted in the Southern Ocean.  The German icebreaker 
Polarstern left Cape Town in early January with forty-eight 
scientists who had planned to fertilize an ocean patch measuring 300 
square kilometers with twenty tons of dissolved iron sulphate to 
encourage algae bloom on the Scotia Sea near Antarctica.  Their 
theory was that the bloom would absorb carbon dioxide and reduce 
greenhouse gases.  CSIR Head of Ocean System and Climate Group Dr. 
Pedro Monterio said South Africa should continue to play a major 
role in ocean fertilization despite the suspension of this project. 
Monterio believes that these projects "remain essential" to 
understanding the risks involved.  He commented that, "Even though 
Polarstern is the largest experiment, it is still insignificantly 
small in terms of the carbon fluxes in the Southern Ocean." 
¶16. (U) Greenpeace Senior Scientist Dr. David Santillo said, "We're 
deeply concerned about this project because we don't feel that 
attempts to manipulate the ocean ecosystem on a massive scale will 
constitute a sustainable approach to mitigating climate change.  It 
would actually make matters worse."  Environmental groups noted that 
the expedition was contrary to the Convention on Biodiversity which 
restricts experiments to small scale projects in coastal waters. 
Santillo notes that this project "is neither small scale nor in 
coastal waters."  He added that the project could 'result in 
large-scale and long-term adverse impacts on ocean ecosystems - 
impacts which may be even harder to mitigate against." 
------------------------------------------ 
New Radars Will Help Predict Storm Dangers 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶17. (U) The South Africa Weather Service (SAWS) announced plans to 
install advanced equipment to predict thunderstorms and tornados 
Qinstall advanced equipment to predict thunderstorms and tornados 
across South Africa over the next three years.  Outdated equipment 
will be replaced with new Doppler radars, the type used in the U.S. 
Chief Forecaster Kevin Rae said SAWS plans to "completely redo radar 
systems across the country."  There will be staggered installation 
of Doppler radars in Joburg, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth and Durban. 
New Radar Network Project Manager Georgie George said that radars 
could determine how much water clouds contain and the direction they 
are moving which is important in pinpointing the location of 
tornados. 
The major challenge is how to get the information to people in time, 
especially in the rural areas.  George said there would be about a 
30-minute warning time before a tornado would strike.  Rae added 
that "one pilot project is working with a short-term insurer to 
relay short messages in specific areas where severe weather is 
predicted."  He said SAWS is also looking at "improved formal 
relationships" with cell phone providers to send messages to people 
in affected areas.  He added, "It is a matter of willpower to get 
these things off the ground; the commercial bottom line has to be 
overlooked to get warnings out for the good of the public." 
 
--------------- 
Monthly Factoid 
--------------- 
¶18. (U) The Republic of South Africa takes up an area of 1,221,037 
square kilometers - equal to the combined land mass of Germany, 
 
PRETORIA 00000245  005.2 OF 005 
 
 
Italy and France.  The coastline stretches for some 2.954 
kilometers, with many beautiful beaches and wonderful sea views. 
 
La Lime