09RPODUBAI58
IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - JANUARY 27,
Sun Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO5686
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHDIR #0058/01 0390538
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P R 080538Z FEB 09
FM RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0340
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0271
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA 0001
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDIR/RPO DUBAI 0338S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 RPO DUBAI 000058 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  2/8/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR IR
SUBJECT: IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - JANUARY 27, 
2009 
 
DUBAI 00000058  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Ramin Asgard, Director, Iran Regional Presence 
Office - Dubai, DOS. 
REASON: 1.4 (b), (d) 
¶1.  [U] This January 27, 2009 edition of Window on Iran was sent 
out on that date via classified e-mail. 
 
¶2. [S/NF] More on Russia-Iran Security Ties: In a follow up 
discussion with a former IRGC general regarding Russian security 
cooperation with Iran, he explained that Russia saw Iran as a 
"joint-venture" partner in extending its influence into the 
Middle East.  He noted that Iran's position was more advanced 
than simply that of an arms purchaser, however, citing the 
Russian acquiescence to an Iranian demand to provide a T-72 tank 
factory in the late 90s (while he was still in the IRGC).  For 
their part, the Russians wished to tie Iranian military 
procurement into Russian systems, making any move away difficult 
and increasing Russian influence on Iran.  IRPO officer asked 
specifically whether the S-300 system deliveries had gone 
forward.  The general replied that by now they were likely to 
have been delivered quietly, either through any number of ships 
at a Caspian port or on a Russian heavy transport aircraft with 
Ukrainian cooperation.  Russian-Iran security cooperation, he 
added, is not directly aimed at the US, but as Russia sees close 
ties with Iran as a means to project influence and gain access 
to warm water port facilities, they have strong incentives to 
prevent the US from improving its ties with Iran and probably 
displacing its influence.  For these reasons, he concluded, 
Russia continues to provide Iran a range of diplomatic and 
security favors - the S-300 and the Bushehr reactor being the 
most salient examples - to keep this important security 
relationship intact. 
 
¶3. [S/NF] Supreme Leader's South Africa Connection?: According 
to XXXXXXXXXXXX the Taleghani family (Ayatollah Mahmoud Taleghani was a key figure in Islamic opposition to the Shah), Supreme 
Leader Khamenei's sons Mojtaba and Mostafa have invested heavily 
(estimated in tens of billions USD) over the past year in 
various development projects in South Africa.  This point shed 
light on another well-placed IRPO contact's repeated references 
a few weeks ago to former South African President Nelson 
Mandela's possible role as a credible US-Iran intermediary. 
Comment: While our primary source suggested investment was in 
"heavy industry," IRPO has no further information on the type 
and amount of investment.  As noted earlier in WOI (01/13/09), 
Mojtaba Khamenei is a principal gatekeeper to the Supreme Leader 
and was recently appointed as the Supreme Leaders Office point 
person on US-Iran relations. 
 
¶4. [S/NF] A Different Khatami?: Later in the same discussion, as 
the topic turned to the upcoming presidential election, 
XXXXXXXXXXXX cautioned against mistaking today's Khatami 
with the Khatami of 1992 (when he resigned as Minister of 
Culture) or 1999 (first term as President starts) or 2005 
(second term concludes). He recounted a recent meeting with 
Khatami, where Khatami said that despite perceptions to the 
contrary, he struggled strenuously to support civil society and 
democratic freedoms inside Iran, but was unable to overcome the 
resistance of the Supreme Leader.  "Every time I left a meeting 
with Khamenei, I was soaked in sweat," Khatami reportedly said. 
Now, this source continued, Khatami was a "determined democrat." 
 In fact, he added softly after scanning the vicinity to see who 
might be listening, "he no longer supports the principle of 
velayat-e faqih." 
 
¶5. [S/NF] Pourmohammadi Considering a Run - Rafsanjani's Chips 
Across the Board: Former Interior Minister (2005-2008) Hojjat 
ol-Islam Mustafa Pourmohammadi has reportedly begun exploring a 
run for the presidency.  Pourmohammadi currently heads the State 
Inspectorate Office (SIO).  According to an Iranian businessman 
just returning from a visit to Iran, the "real power" behind 
Pourmohammadi is IRGC Brigadier General Mohammad Zolghadr, who 
is also the current head of the Basij and the "political brain 
of the IRGC."  Zolghadr was Pourmohammadi's deputy at the 
Ministry of Interior.  If Pourmohammadi runs, said this 
businessman, hardliners will likely shift their support to 
Pourmohammadi because of their hatred of AN.  Our contact 
described Pourmohammadi as Hashemi Rafsanjani's "servant." 
Meanwhile, AN fired Zolghadr after Zolghadr told a convention of 
governors that the U.S. threat to Iranian security should be 
taken seriously.  AN objected strongly and tried to cast the 
U.S. as too weakened to still pose a real danger to Iran. 
Pourmohammadi resigned after AN fired Zolghadr because firing 
his deputy was taken as a direct affront.  Comment: 
Pourmohammadi and Zolghadr together represent a blending of 
intelligence and IRGC forces; a very formidable combination, not 
just electorally, but also in terms of their ability to maintain 
stability.  If Rafsanjani makes his support available to 
Pourmohammadi, it will mean he has lent his considerable 
influence to powerful challengers to AN from the left (Mousavi), 
center (Khatami), and right (Pourmohammadi).  It also means that 
AN will almost certainly lose a core constituency - the IRGC and 
Basij - to rivals far more well-regarded by both the leadership 
and the rank and file of these organizations. 
 
¶6. [C] Rising Fears of Electoral Fraud in Advance of June 12 
Presidential Election: An Iranian political analyst reported 
that Tehran political elites are increasingly concerned about 
the regime's ability to manipulate votes, given that both bodies 
responsible for administering and supervising the electoral 
process, the Interior Ministry and the Guardian Council, are 
currently controlled by hardliners.  He noted that presidential 
elections in 2001 and 2005 were run by an Interior Ministry that 
was in the hands of reformists; during this period, voter 
manipulation was generally confined to the final stages of the 
vetting process overseen by the Guardian Council.  In the 
upcoming election, however, both institutions will be dominated 
by conservatives, leading to fears that not only will the 
Guardian Council severely limit the candidates able to run for 
president, but that the Ministry of Interior will permit (or 
possibly engineer) large-scale fraud if deemed necessary. 
Comment:  These concerns about the potential for electoral fraud 
track with the reformist idea to call for UN observers, as 
discussed in last week's WOI (01/20/09). 
 
¶7. [S/NF] Shirin Ebadi Departs Iran for Trip to the U.S.: 
According to a founding member of the One Million Signatures 
Campaign and close associate of Shirin Ebadi, the Nobel laureate 
left Tehran January 25 for Paris, where she will spend three 
days before continuing on to the United States. The source also 
said that in "the next few days" a group of Ebadi's supporters 
will publish a new website with more details of the January 1 
mob attack on her office, including photos of the vandalized 
wall that was spray painted with "Shirin Ebadi = America." 
According to the activist, the intended message of the 
IRIG-orchestrated harassment is clear: challenges to the order 
are unacceptable and no one in Iran is untouchable. 
 
¶8. [C] Getting Liquor Is Easier than Getting Credit: Iranian 
contacts have told us consistently that liquor, banned movies, 
and other contraband are easily obtainable in Iran.  One 
Iranian-American businessman who travels frequently to Iran told 
us that he has never had trouble getting alcohol delivered to 
his door with just a phone call, with deliveries usually made by 
a family with young children to throw off suspicion.  Iranians 
are finding that international credit is not so accessible, he 
told us. Our contact said that Iranian businessmen seeking 
letters of credit to import British goods were unable to obtain 
letters of credit from British banks because of sanctions.  With 
no where else to turn, they were reportedly paying a 30 percent 
fee to brokers in Dubai to arrange credit for Western imports. 
Comment: These increased costs were being passed on to consumers 
to the extent possible, but the lack of accessible credit is 
making it harder and harder for private businesses to stay 
afloat, while those with governmental connections continue to 
finance their operations with government loans. 
 
¶9. (U) Window on Iran is a classified, weekly product providing 
Washington policy community and Iran watcher highlights of key 
developments on Iran.  It is produced by the Iran Regional 
Presence Office - Dubai.  Please direct any questions/comments 
to: Kay McGowan XXXXXXXXXXXX or Charlie Pennypacker 
XXXXXXXXXXXX

). 
ASGARD