09TRIPOLI186
BASIC PEOPLE'S CONGRESSES DEBATE WEALTH DISTRIBUTION AND
Wed Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Tripoli
VZCZCXRO1861
PP RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDE RUEHDU RUEHKUK RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHTRO #0186/01 0561153
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 251153Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4541
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 5067C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TRIPOLI 000186 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/MAG 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  2/25/2019 
TAGS: PGOV ECON ENGR LY
SUBJECT: BASIC PEOPLE'S CONGRESSES DEBATE WEALTH DISTRIBUTION AND 
ABOLISHING MINISTRIES 

 REF: A. 08 TRIPOLI 699 B. 08 TRIPOLI 196 C. 08 TRIPOLI 106 D. 08 TRIPOLI 494 TRIPOLI 00000186 001.2 OF 002 CLASSIFIED BY: Gene A. Cretz, Ambassador, Embassy Tripoli, Department of State. REASON: 1.4 (b), (d)

1.(C) Summary: Libya's nearly 500 local level councils -- "Basic People's Congresses" -- concluded their deliberations February 23 over two radical proposals put forward by Colonel Muammar al-Qadhafi: a plan to distribute Libya's oil wealth directly to the people, and a massive government restructuring that would eliminate most ministries. The weight of opinion is reportedly against the wealth distribution plan, with fears of inflation cited as the primary reason for opposing it. The BPCs' recommendations will be considered by the regional and national-level congresses in the coming days. Saif al-Islam al-Qadhafi, Muammar al-Qadhafi's celebrated reform-minded son, has formed a committee of technocrats charged with formulating plans to implement any reforms that may be adopted by the national-level General People's Congress, which is expected to convene March 2. End summary. 

DESPITE EXHORTATION, ORDINARY LIBYANS UNDECIDED ON WEALTH DISTRIBUTION

2.(C) On the evening of February 14, Libyan TV broadcast a meeting between Muammar al-Qadhafi and Secretaries (Minister-equivalents) of the General People's Committees in which the Leader repeated his previous calls for Libya's oil wealth to be distributed directly to the people and for the dismantling of most government ministries (refs A and B). In his speech, delivered on the eve of the Basic People's Congresses' (BPC) annual week-long deliberations, al-Qadhafi lambasted the waste and corruption endemic in the government but offered little additional detail for his vision of a new structure. Acknowledging that direct distribution of 3,000 dinars per month (2400 USD) to Libyan families could create inflationary pressures and provide a disincentive for modestly-paid government workers to continue working, he called on the BPCs to debate the merits of eight basic schemes for implementing his vision, telling the cameras, "Libyans, this is your historic opportunity to take your oil wealth, power, and full freedom".

3.(C) The 468 BPCs then began their deliberations, which were played live on Libyan radio throughout the week. The GOL extended the BPCs one day to February 23 after the wealth distribution question proved so contentious that other agenda items, including the government restructuring initiative, were left no time for debate. Local observers say the Congresses have been largely inconclusive and are "in a muddle". Foreign journalists on a tightly controlled tour of the BPCs were surprised to see what they described as genuine opposition to al-Qadhafi's plan, and noted that many Libyans complained that they were being asked to decide on plans bereft of details and without knowledge of how the plans would impact the Libyan economy. Even basic questions such as how the funds would be dispersed in a country that remains a cash economy with little access to commercial banking have gone unanswered. The most commonly-heard objection was that distributing large payments directly to the entire population would cause serious inflation. Yusuf Sawani, Director of Saif al-Islam al-Qadhafi's Qadhafi Development Foundation, told the DCM his impression was that "the weight of opinion" was against supporting wealth distribution. The 468 BPCs represent the lowest level of a three-tiered direct representation scheme (ref C) and the recommendations of the BPCs will next pass to regional councils -- "Sha'abiyat" -- before being presented to the national-level General People's Congress (expected to meet March 2). 

LIBYAN EXPERTS ATTEMPT TO IMPLEMENT AL-QADHAFI'S VISION

4.(C//NF) Despite al-Qadhafi's public exhortations that "the people" own the oil wealth and should determine how to distribute it, high-ranking GOL officials have quietly begun to discuss how to implement the proposed reforms. Saif al-Islam al-Qadhafi and the Chairman of the Economic Development Board and National Planning Council Mahmoud Jibril (who is a respected, US-educated technocrat) have established a steering committee to that end xxxxxxxxxxxx. The committee reportedly enjoys the support of Secretary of the General People's Committee al-Baghdadi al-Mahmoudi (Prime Minister-equivalent). xxxxxxxxxxxx the steering committee, comprising several GPC secretaries, is still discussing plans for implementing both the wealth distribution plan and the government restructuring; xxxxxxxxxxxx the earliest they could put forward recommendations would be June - months after the GPC meetings have concluded. TRIPOLI 00000186 002.2 OF 002

5.(C) xxxxxxxxxxxx the limited capacity of the General People's Committee secretaries is the single biggest impediment to meaningful reform. Even reasonable interlocutors like Secretary for Economy and Trade Ali Essawi, who publicly questioned the wisdom of the proposed reforms in November 2008 (ref D), are not technocrats. Most elites owe their position to regime loyalty (vice expertise) and lack the education and savvy to fully understand the potential consequences of the proposed reforms and how to avoid adverse side effects. Conflict of interest is another problem, as several of the GPC secretaries charged with developing the plans stand to lose their ministries (and their jobs) if they are implemented. Saif al-Islam's role and his relative strength are xxxxxxxxxxxx key variables. Despite speculation from some quarters that his strength has been sapped by conservative regime elements - cynics cite the absence from the BPC agenda of the constitution that he has championed - xxxxxxxxxxxx Saif is still actively engaged in the political-economic reform effort.

6.(C) Comment: Muammar al-Qadhafi's calls for wealth distribution and government restructuring are a populist message intended to distance himself from the widely-criticized corruption and inefficiency in the government and place him squarely on the side of the people. His radical reform agenda has met strong opposition from prominent technocrats as well as self-interested officials who stand to lose influence if government ministries are abolished. According to many of our contacts, the debates in the local councils are genuine (allowing al-Qadhafi to showcase his "people power" democracy to foreign journalists). The national-level General People's Congress, on the other hand, is expected to be tightly scripted from above. Ordinary Libyans are apprehensive about their future. If al-Qadhafi's reforms are adopted, they may be embarking on yet another era of economic uncertainty and social instability. If they had a choice in the matter, most would probably forgo the oil money in exchange for a functioning, relatively honest government that provided decent salaries, education and health care. End comment. CRETZ