09USUNNEWYORK193
THE SECURITY COUNCIL'S QUARTERLY DEBATE ON
Fri Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0006
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0193/01 0581838
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY AD36EBC9 TOQ6670-695)
O 271838Z FEB 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5962
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
XMT AMEMBASSY ABIDJANUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000193 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ UNSC
SUBJECT: THE SECURITY COUNCIL'S QUARTERLY DEBATE ON 
UNAMI/IRAQ 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On February 26, the Security Council held 
its quarterly debate on UNAMI and Iraq, with the 
participation of SRSG Staffan de Mistura and Iraqi PR Bayati. 
 De Mistura reprised the major themes taken from the recent 
 
UN report on UNAMI/Iraq: successful Iraqi-led elections, 
increasing stability in Iraq, and a focus in the coming 
months on disputed internal boundaries as well as Iraq,s 
relations with the region and the world.  Bayati echoed de 
Mistura,s description of the elections, saying they were a 
"turning point in Iraq,s progress in building a new 
democracy."  Council members generally were optimistic as 
well, and congratulated both Iraq and the UN for their work 
in preparing for and holding the elections.  Many members 
specifically praised the establishment of the Iraqi 
Commission for Human Rights.  Russia and Libya were more 
reticent in their praise of the successes of the last few 
months; the Russian PR said "progress is indisputable but it 
is premature to give way to euphoria."  End summary. 
 
DE MISTURA,S INTERVENTION 
 
¶2. (SBU) De Mistura focused largely on the successful holding 
of provincial elections, saying that Iraq has emerged from 
this period "sovereign and rising to expectations."  He 
commended the Iraqi Electoral Commission and concluded that 
the elections and their results were widely seen as "credible 
and transparent."  Looking to the next few months, de Mistura 
said that lingering tensions between Arabs and Kurds must be 
addressed; they have had an outsized impact on the Iraqi 
political scene, impeding progress on the oil law, revenue 
sharing and constitutional review.  He said he detected 
momentum during a recent visit to Kirkuk "to explore locally 
generated options regarding the administrative future of 
Kirkuk."  He said UNAMI would continue to work closely with 
the Article 23 Committee and Iraqi political leaders to 
achieve progress on disputed internal boundaries.  UNAMI will 
present reports on the remaining 11 districts in the disputed 
northern areas in the coming weeks, in consultation with the 
Iraqi government and all concerned parties. 
 
¶3. (SBU) De Mistura said UNAMI would also address a number of 
regional issues related to Iraq: the Iraq Compact, a support 
mechanism for regional cooperation based in the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Iraq-Kuwait relations especially as related 
to outstanding Security Council resolutions, and Iraq-Iran 
efforts on demining and drug traffic control along their 
shared border.  He added that UNAMI would continue to address 
humanitarian issues such as the return of refugees and IDPs. 
De Mistura concluded by saying that there is ground for 
optimism in Iraq, especially given that Iraq has asserted its 
sovereignty and security has improved.  He thanked member 
states for their strong and encouraging statements of support 
for the UNAMI mission. 
 
IRAQ,S INTERVENTION 
 
¶4. (SBU) Bayati echoed de Mistura,s conclusion that the 
elections were a turning point in the building of Iraq,s 
democracy.  He also raised the expiration of the MNF-I 
mandate, thanked those who participated, and said it too was 
a turning point for Iraq.  Bayati noted the recent increase 
in the return of Iraqi refugees/IDPs, and said Iraq expects 
500,000 to return in 2009.  Turning to social/economic 
matters, Bayati outlined a number of improvements, such as a 
decrease in employment, the establishment of a social 
security network, and the increase of sanitation and 
electrical systems.  He specifically noted the visits to Iraq 
by French President Sarkozy and German FM Steinmeier, and 
noted his government,s strong support for the UN,s review 
of all Security Council resolutions pertaining to Iraq. 
 
INTERVENTIONS BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL 
 
¶5. (SBU) All members praised the recent Iraqi provincial 
elections and echoed the prevailing sentiment that they were 
a turning point in Iraqi democracy.  Russia provided a 
discordant note in stressing that voter turnout was low and 
the elections were only a first step towards national 
reconciliation.  Russian PR Churkin said progress was evident 
but this should not "give way to euphoria."  Many countries, 
especially Mexico, Costa Rica, Libya and Burkina Faso, 
praised the establishment of the Iraqi Commission on Human 
Rights, saying that this represented an important step in 
ensuring the Iraqi government,s respect for human rights of 
all Iraqis, including detainees. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Several members - Mexico, Russia and Libya - praised 
the expiration of the MNF-I mandate and urged that the Iraqi 
security forces continue to improve their capabilities. 
Croatia warned against a "security gap" between the 
capabilities of Iraqi forces and the withdrawal of former 
MNF-I contributors.  The UK said it would continue the 
withdrawal of its troops from the Basrah area, with the goal 
of full withdrawal by the summer.  Libya specifically praised 
Syria and Jordan for their efforts in rebuilding Iraq, and 
said foreign troops should withdraw as quickly as possible in 
order to "decrease instability" within Iraq. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Ambassador Rice joined the Council,s unanimous 
praise of the conduct of the Iraqi elections, as well as its 
praise of the efforts of the UN and SRSG de Mistura.  She 
looked forward to the upcoming national elections and noted 
that the U.S. will move "responsibly and safely" to reduce 
its military presence.  She outlined the larger regional 
context to U.S. engagement in Iraq: persuading Iran and Syria 
to become constructive regional actors, seeking to end 
Iran,s ambition to acquire an illicit nuclear capacity and 
its support for terrorism, addressing the security needs of 
Israel and the legitimate political and economic aspirations 
of the Palestinians.  (Note: Following the conclusion of the 
debate, Iran circulated a letter to the Security Council 
responding to Ambassador Rice,s statement, in which it 
denied any support to terrorism and said its nuclear program 
"has been, is, and will remain absolutely peaceful."  End 
note) 
Rice