09USUNNEWYORK159
UNSC MONTHLY MIDDLE EAST MEETING: SUPPORTIVE OF
Thu Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7346
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0159/01 0502242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192242Z FEB 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5889
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000159 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KPAL KWBG UNSC IS LE SY
SUBJECT: UNSC MONTHLY MIDDLE EAST MEETING: SUPPORTIVE OF 
PEACE PROCESS, CRITICAL OF HAMAS AND ISRAELI 
SETTLEMENTS/BORDER CLOSURES 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: During the monthly Security Council meeting 
on the Middle East, Robert Serry, UN Special Coordinator for 
the Middle East Peace Process and the Secretary General's 
Personal Representative to the PLO and the Palestinian 
Authority, briefed the Council on the situation in Gaza and 
the West Bank.  Serry emphasized the need to support Egypt's 
efforts at Palestinian reconciliation and the fragility of 
the cease-fire, and he highlighted the dire economic and 
social crisis in Gaza and Hamas' attacks and revenge 
killings.  Serry said the West Bank remained calm, but he 
criticized Israel's expanding "illegal" settlements as 
detrimental to final status negotiations as well as attacks 
by Israeli settlers on Palestinians, particularly children. 
Regarding Lebanon, Serry said divisions between the 
Palestinian Authority and Hamas were not evident there, and 
despite daunting setbacks, reconstruction was set to begin on 
the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in Lebanon. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In Council consultations following the briefing, 
support for Egypt's role as mediator between Palestinian 
factions, endorsement of the peace process, a reopening of 
border crossings to Gaza, and criticism of Israeli settlement 
expansion emerged as the primary themes from almost all 
delegations.  Russian Perm Rep Churkin said the international 
community must give Egypt its full support, and in light of 
the recent hostilities in Gaza, the upcoming Moscow 
Conference on the Middle East has taken on special 
importance.  Churkin said his government would like broaden 
the Moscow agenda.  Most delegations welcomed the appointment 
of George Mitchell as Special Envoy for Middle East Peace as 
well as the creation of a UN Board of Inquiry into the 
bombing of UN entities in Gaza. End Summary. 
 
 
Robert Serry Briefs the Council 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) During the monthly Security Council meeting on the 
Middle East on February 18, Robert Serry, the Secretary 
General's Personal Representative to the PLO and the 
Palestinian Authority, assessed the situation in Gaza and the 
West Bank, as well as inter-Palestinian negotiations and the 
status of the peace talks.  Serry said that one month since 
the unilateral cease-fires were declared, a proper cease-fire 
still had not been implemented, making the return to 
hostilities a real possibility.  He said the cease-fire would 
only be durable when an exchange of prisoners took place, 
including the return of IDF soldier Gilad Shalit, smuggling 
ceased, and Palestinian unity became a reality.  However, 
Serry was pessimistic that the Palestinians could achieve a 
semblance of unity, particularly in the absence of a proper 
ceasefire.  Serry said "irresponsible" and "unacceptable" 
attacks have continued by both sides, including the firing of 
rockets by Palestinian militants and Israeli airstrikes into 
Gaza.  Serry also condemned Hamas' carrying out of "revenge 
killings" against what they considered collaborators, and he 
noted Hamas' theft of humanitarian goods from UNRWA 
facilities, which led to UNRWA's temporary ceasing of 
operations. 
 
¶4. (SBU) With regard to reconstruction, Serry said the people 
of Gaza were experiencing severe political, economic and 
social crises.  Serry highlighted that in the past few weeks, 
a daily average of 146 truckloads entered Gaza--four times 
what entered Gaza in December 2008, but only a third of what 
entered in May 2007.  Consequently, Gaza's 1.4 million 
residents remain "desperately" short of vital supplies. 
Serry said Israel's ban on fuel imports into Gaza has meant 
that only 52 percent of industrial fuel requirements and 23 
percent of cooking gas requirements were being met. 
Moreover, he said the shortages were leading to inflation, 
which combined with banks' lack of cash on hand, meant that 
Gaza's residents were finding it difficult to purchase basic 
goods.  Serry said he appreciated Israel's promises to open 
border crossings but lamented that so far this had not 
happened.  He welcomed the creation of the UN's Board of 
Inquiry into the destruction of UN facilities in Gaza. 
 
¶5. (SBU) On the West Bank, Serry judged that it remained 
calm, but he criticized Israel's expanding "illegal" 
settlements as detrimental to final status negotiations.  He 
said in 2008 there was a 68 percent increase in settlements 
over the previous year and noted that international calls to 
cease settlement expansion have not worked.  He cited Israeli 
settler attacks against Palestinians in the West Bank, 
including against children. 
 
¶6. (SBU) On Lebanon, Serry praised the beginning work of 
reconstructing the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp, which he said 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000159  002 OF 003 
 
 
was taking place under difficult circumstances such as 
unexploded ordinance.  He said the Doha Agreement, agreed to 
in May 2008 among the rival Lebanese factions, was moving 
according to schedule, but he noted that signs of instability 
are still present. 
 
Strong Backing for Egypt and Palestinian Unity 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7. (SBU) In consultations following Serry's briefing, Council 
members echoed Serry's statements that Egypt could not 
succeed in mediating between the Palestinian Authority and 
Hamas without backing from the international community. 
Ambassador Rice said the U.S. strongly supports Egyptian 
President Mubarak's efforts at Palestinian reconciliation. 
Russian Perm Rep Vitaly Churkin said countries "must redouble 
efforts" in the Middle East and give Egypt their full 
support.  He said reconstruction in Gaza is impossible 
without Palestinian unity and without engaging Hamas, but he 
cautioned that Hamas' idea of structure separate from a unity 
structure was "highly dangerous."  Austrian Perm Rep 
Mayr-Harting said, "We are disturbed by reports by NGOs that 
Hamas is killing alleged collaborators."  Turkish Perm Rep 
Ilkin said that Hamas "must realize disunity is hurting its 
people." He commended Egypt's efforts and said Turkey wants 
to help Egypt.  Ilkin said he was "afraid that Syrian and 
Israeli talks had been suspended," but Turkey will 
participate in the Sharm Al-Sheikh on March 2, nonetheless. 
Croatian Perm Rep Jurica welcomed Egypt's work and "deplored" 
Hamas' rocket fire, which threatened an already fragile 
ceasefire.  Japanese Perm Rep Takasu said every effort must 
be made to ensure success of Sharm Al Sheikh, and France's 
Perm Rep Ripert said his country is co-sponsoring the 
Conference.  France and Croatia called for the release of IDF 
soldier Gilad Shalit 
 
 
Moving Forward with Peace Negotiations 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) One of the strongest endorsements for continuing 
peace negotiations came from the Russian Perm Rep, who 
offered more detail on how his government was approaching the 
upcoming Moscow Conference than had previously been seen. 
Churkin said the Moscow Conference had taken on special 
significance now in light of the crisis in Gaza, and he said 
his government would like to make the conference agenda 
broader and not limit topics.  He added that he hoped a broad 
discussion could produce a "universal document" where both 
sides could voice their concerns.  Libyan Charge Dabbashi, 
who gave the most derogatory statement, said Libya looked 
forward to the Moscow Conference.  Ripert said there was no 
alternative to relaunching the peace process, which would 
include a halting of Israeli settlement activity.  Burkinabe 
Perm Rep Kafando said he "hoped the forthcoming Moscow 
Conference will bear fruit."  Ugandan Perm Rep Rugunda said 
he was "happy" the U.S. had appointed George Mitchell as 
Special Envoy because he has a "good record."  During his 
statement, he said he was optimistic that "most powerful 
countries"--a phrase he repeated often--were now focusing on 
the Middle East.  Ambassador Rice said "vigorous, resolute 
American engagement can help support the parties," and that 
the Quartet remains the most effective instrument to bring 
lasting peace to the Middle East. 
 
Opening of Border Crossings a Common Theme 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) Security Council members voiced concern that 
Israel's border closures with Gaza were contributing to the 
economic and social distress among the population.  However, 
most delegations also said that smuggling of weapons by Hamas 
into Gaza was undermining the ceasefire.  The Austrian Perm 
Rep stated the humanitarian situation in Gaza was of "grave 
concern.  He said he understood Israel's security concerns 
regarding smuggling, but he judged that one of the reasons 
the smuggling tunnels into Gaza came into existence was 
because of Israel's tight border controls.  The Chinese, 
Croatian, French, Japanese, and UK Ambassadors urged Israel 
to reopen borders immediately to allow in goods.  The 
Burkinabe, Costa Rican, Mexican, and Turkish Perm Reps 
specifically noted the urgent need for building materials, 
such as cement, to enter Gaza.  Turkish Perm Rep Ilkin said 
talk of reconstruction was pointless without construction 
materials.  Russian Perm Rep Churkin said ending the 
smuggling is critical, noting that "it is better to deal with 
smuggling in the Security Council as we did with Somali 
pirates."  The UK's Political Counselor said he understands 
Israel's security concerns but said the UK might provide 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000159  003 OF 003 
 
 
naval support for monitoring of the Gazan littoral. 
 
Israel Criticized for Settlements 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Most delegations echoed Serry's assessment that 
expanding Israeli settlements in the West Bank and the Golan 
were undermining final status negotiations.  Austrian Perm 
Rep Mayr Harting emphasized that Austria and other European 
countries were concerned about new settlement construction, 
which he called illegal under international law, and called 
for a freeze on new construction and natural growth of 
existing settlements.  He said Israel's policy compromises 
the viability of a negotiated settlement.  China said 
settlement expansion violates international law, and the 
Libyan Charge quoted George Mitchell from 2001 that 
"settlements are the reason for the conflict."  Costan Rican 
Perm Rep Urbina said settlements in the West Bank and the 
Golan are "not helpful." 
 
Endorsement of UN Board of Inquiry 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU)  Most Council members voiced support for the 
Secretary General's creation of a UN Board of Inquiry to 
investigate the shelling of the UNRWA compound and other UN 
entities.  The UK said it "fully supports" the Secretary 
General's investigation into the shelling of UN facilities, 
and the Chinese and Croatian said they awaited the results of 
the investigation.  Burkina Faso urged all parties to 
cooperate with the Board of Inquiry. 
Rice