09VANCOUVER40
VIOLENT SHOOTINGS SPUR BRITISH COLUMBIA CRACKDOWN ON GANGS,
Thu Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vancouver
R 192342Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL VANCOUVER
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5119
INFO ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
DEA WASHINGTON DC
FBI WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
AMCONSUL VANCOUVERUNCLAS VANCOUVER 000040 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CA PGOV KCRM
SUBJECT: VIOLENT SHOOTINGS SPUR BRITISH COLUMBIA CRACKDOWN ON GANGS, 
GUNS 
 
¶1. A series of violent shootings has spurred intense action by 
British Columbia and Vancouver area city governments to address 
gangs and the tools they use.  The actions reflect community 
outrage at gang warfare that has left 14 dead so far this year 
and has turned shopping mall parking lots and suburban 
residential neighborhoods into battle grounds.  BC Premier 
Gordon Campbell announced an additional 168 police officers and 
10 special prosecutors will be committed to work on gang 
activities at a cost of C$69 million over three years.  BC also 
announced new steps to deal with gang tools: the establishment 
of a new weapons unit, Provincial administration of Canadian 
firearms regulations, the regulation of body armor, and the 
outlawing of vehicle armoring. 
 
¶2. Other measures proposed by the province include requiring 
health facilities to report treatment of any patients with 
gunshot wounds and shutting down weapons retailers who fail to 
secure their facilities against break-ins or are unable to 
account for lost or stolen firearms.  BC Solicitor General Van 
Dongen told reporters his office would be releasing a report 
within the next week outlining an action plan for removing 
illegal guns from criminals.  In addition to provincial and city 
measures, the BC Premier, Solicitor General and Attorney General 
called for Canadian federal action on widening the wiretap 
provisions for the Criminal Code, a measure already in the works 
in Ottawa.  Federal Public Safety Minister Peter Van Loan was in 
Vancouver on February 16 and referred to the region as Canada's 
Gang Capital because of the large concentration of gangs and 
sophisticated gang activity. 
 
¶3. The crackdown took place just one day after gunfire erupted 
in a suburban Burnaby neighborhood.  The RCMP arrested four men 
and was looking for a fifth, possibly injured, assailant.  Two 
days after the announcement, a woman was shot to death while 
driving in a Surrey neighborhood with her 4-year old son in the 
back seat.  Police have yet to determine if she was a gang 
target, but the killing has all the marks of recent shootings. 
The week of February 2 two men were killed in separate attacks, 
both taking place in popular mall parking lots in Langley and 
Surrey near large crowds of shoppers.  The police have taken the 
highly unusual step of indentifying gang members who are 
potential targets and warning the public to steer clear of these 
individuals.  The Red Scorpion gang has been targeted in several 
of the recent shootings and its key members, including three 
brothers, have had their pictures plastered in newspapers and on 
television for days.  The Bacon brothers, who live in the town 
of Abbotsford near the Washington state border, have criminal 
histories involving drug trafficking and weapons and assault 
charges.  The police have put open tails on these individuals as 
a means of deterrence. 
 
¶4.  The Vancouver area experienced a spate of gang killings in 
¶2008.  The 2008 homicide number for the entire metro Vancouver 
area was 59 dead, with 30 attributed directly to gang violence. 
By comparison, Portland, which is slightly larger than 
Vancouver, had 27 homicides. The current violence appears to be 
a continuation of the 2008 mayhem.  Experts speculate that a 
shortage of heroin, and its consequent increase in price, plus 
turf battles are the main drivers of the gang violence.  News 
reports are linking the most recent killings to a turf battle 
between the Red Scorpions and another lower mainland group, the 
UN gang. 
 
¶5. Comment: The Premier's actions come amidst growing criticism 
over a perceived lack of coordinated action to combat the lower 
mainland's gang problem.  Vancouver Mayor Gregor Robertson has 
renewed calls for the creation of one regional police force that 
would be better able to handle the cross-jurisdictional nature 
of gang activities.   The recent violence will also play into 
the hands of the Harper government as it readies to release new 
legislation on wiretaps, particularly as it pertains to the 
internet, most likely a key impetus to Van Loan's recent visit 
to the region.  End comment. 
 
CHICOLA